Turning to the immediate decision regarding the level of the cash rate, members noted that GDP growth had been stronger than expected in a number of major economies in the September quarter and that the outlook for global economic conditions had continued to improve.
Accordingly, the staff had revised their growth forecasts upwards.
Indeed, the strength of deposit growth and the decline in the yield curve saw a reduction in some deposit rates as well as some fixed-term lending rates.
In Australia, economic conditions continued to vary significantly across sectors, which was complicating the task of assessing the strength of the overall economy.
It was still expected to be above 3 per cent by mid 2010.
Translating estimates of the neutral rate to a nominal interest rate involves adding inflation expectations.
Members noted that the exchange rate had remained above most estimates of its fundamental value, given the decline in commodity prices over the past year, and that future exchange rate movements would be affected by market expectations for monetary policy, both domestically and abroad.
Members noted that the data released since the December meeting suggested that the domestic economy had continued to grow at a below-trend pace over the second half of 2014.
Wages growth was expected to pick up as remaining wage freezes and cuts implemented in 2020 were unwound and the labour market tightened.
The improved outlook for steel demand and stockpiling ahead of the Chinese New Year had supported prices for iron ore at the end of 2018, and earlier increases in oil prices had boosted liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices.
Many of these economies are highly integrated into global production chains, which had recently been evident in a sharp pick-up in their exports of electronic items.
Resource exports had grown strongly in the December quarter and there were early indications of strength in resource exports in the first few months of 2015.
Members noted that the strength of recent labour market data had removed some of the downside risk in the Bank's forecast of wage growth.
Labour demand was strong and unemployment rates were near or below pre-pandemic levels.
Headline CPI inflation had increased to 3.5 per cent over the year to the December quarter, largely reflecting higher fuel prices, higher prices for newly constructed homes and disruptions to supply chains (including for imported durable goods).
The domestic economy had grown strongly over the first half of 2022, showing resilience to disruptions caused by the Omicron outbreak and the floods on the east coast.
Together with a small fall in the participation rate, this had left the unemployment rate at around 5¼ per cent.
Over the previous five years, most of the growth in business investment had occurred in Victoria and New South Wales.
Members concluded on balance that the global economy was most likely on a sustained, if modest, recovery path, though it was still too soon to be confident of this assessment.
In Japan, the expansion appeared to be continuing, though growth in exports and production had slowed over the past couple of months.
The current yield curve implied that the market was expecting stabilisation in the economy with the possibility of rising inflation down the track.
Although headline inflation had continued to decline as energy prices fell and food price inflation eased, members noted that core inflation had remained sticky and shown little sign of easing.
Members noted that exposures of Australian banks to the fiscally stretched euro area economies were very small.
The latest set of indicators suggested that GDP was likely to have fallen again in the March quarter.
Members noted that, over the same period, banks’ lending rates had increased slightly, driven by increases in housing lending rates for investors and on interest-only loans.
Inflation was significantly higher in the United Kingdom, partly reflecting the increase in the VAT rate and the depreciation of the pound sterling.
Most of the increase in longer term yields reflected higher real yields.
Despite wages growth having generally trended higher over the preceding few years, inflation had remained below target in a range of economies.
Members began their discussion on financial markets by noting that markets had been relatively stable over the past month.
Notwithstanding the slower growth in output, labour markets in the major advanced economies had remained tight and there had been ongoing signs of upward pressure on wages.
Liaison with retailers suggested that household spending had softened somewhat in July but had been better in August.
Labour markets in the advanced economies had continued to tighten and wages growth had picked up.
The Board's decision to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points at the October meeting had been largely anticipated by the market and did not have a large effect on the yield curve.
While no explicit target was set, the ECB's intention appears to be to expand its balance sheet back to its crisis peak, which would be around 1 trillion euros larger than at present, through a combination of targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and asset purchases.
Growth of Australia's major trading partners remained consistent with the earlier outlook, with growth early in 2014 around its long-run average.
Members noted that the extent of spare capacity in the economy at the end of the forecast period was uncertain, which meant that the gradual increase in inflation could be slower or faster than envisaged in the baseline scenario.
Members noted that investor demand for recent AGS issuance had been strong and that spreads of semi-government yields to AGS had remained narrow.
In light of these considerations and turning to the policy decision, members agreed that a further increase in interest rates was warranted.
One important pre-condition was a restructuring of private-sector holdings of Greek debt with a haircut of effectively more than 70 per cent, which was to occur later in the week.
Activity in the rest of east Asia continued to recover from the natural disasters in 2011, which had disrupted supply chains throughout the region.
Members granted leave of absence to Alison Watkins AM in accordance with section 18A of the Reserve Bank Act 1959.
Members also noted that the current price growth was somewhat at odds with the falls in housing loan approvals over recent months.
This meant that average outstanding mortgage rates had declined by around 65 basis points since the middle of the year.
Banks' longer-term funding costs had declined a little over recent months, consistent with lower long-term government bond yields, even though spreads on bank bonds had increased over the preceding year.
A sharp increase in fertiliser prices had raised concerns about rationing by farmers, which could depress agricultural output and sustain upward pressure on some food prices in the period ahead.
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members noted that recent data had provided more confidence that global growth was rising and that the pick-up was broadly based across both developed and emerging economies.
They noted the staff estimate of growth in Australia's trading partners in the June quarter of around ½ per cent, and about 4 per cent over the year.
Growth in consumption was expected to increase over the forecast period, supported by some recovery in growth in household income and the turnaround in prices in the established housing market.
Nonetheless, members acknowledged that inflation remained high and broadly based.
The monthly CPI indicator for headline inflation had moderated to 7.4 per cent over the year (from 8.4 per cent in December).
Members noted that housing prices had increased noticeably across all major capital cities in June, based on preliminary data.
On the second option, the Board agreed that market participants could question the longevity of the yield target it if were raised or its tenor shortened.
Issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) had been strong in 2017.
The question to be addressed at that time would be whether the interest rates faced by borrowers as a result of the combination of policy action and market developments would exert sufficient restraint to contain inflation over the medium term.
Members commenced their discussion of the domestic economy by noting that domestic demand had grown by around 3 per cent over the year to the December quarter.
The unemployment rate had also increased noticeably in Ireland.
Accounting for household offset accounts, the household credit-to-GDP ratio was at its lowest since the early 2000s, as was the ratio of business credit to GDP.
Accommodative monetary policy, strong public demand, a renewed expansion in the resources sector and growth in exports were also expected to support a return of GDP growth to trend over coming years.
Members noted that economic activity in the first half of 2020 would be significantly affected by the global response to the COVID-19 outbreak.
Auction clearance rates and the number of auctions increased in May, but remained lower than a year earlier.
Growth had been boosted by exports, following the substantial depreciation of the US dollar.
Similar trends had been seen, though to a lesser extent, in the US and Canada, which also had puzzling strength in employment in the context of apparently weak productivity growth.
They discussed the extent to which this should be interpreted as a signal that demand was weaker than previously assumed.
Members observed that the forecasts were predicated on there being an additional one to two increases in the cash rate over coming quarters and an assumption that productivity growth would recover over the year ahead.
The fall in the Chinese share market could not be traced to any particular event, though it may have reflected concerns about measures, such as a capital gains tax, the authorities were contemplating to curb speculative excesses in asset markets.
Members observed that the forces underpinning developments in the domestic economy were much as they had been for some time.
Members noted that the adjustment in the retail sector had been protracted and had put downward pressure on inflation for some years.
Members noted that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase in all major markets.
But total provision of credit to the business sector had nevertheless accelerated.
Some surveyed firms were reporting a lack of available labour as a constraint on output.
This slowing had been broad-based across states and industries, and was particularly pronounced in the household services and retail sectors.
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members noted that the available data suggested that the global economy continued to record moderate growth.
As a result, the exchange rate was offering less assistance than would normally be expected in achieving balanced growth in the economy.
Recent data suggested that the US economy had grown at a moderate pace over recent months, after contracting in the first quarter.
Growth was then expected to slow to around 1¾ per cent over both 2023 and 2024.
Members observed that some resource firms may have been able to increase their exports to take advantage of higher commodity prices by running down inventories.
June quarter GDP outcomes for other countries in the region were generally soft, although domestic demand had continued to grow solidly.
The Japanese labour market remained very tight and unit labour costs growth had increased relative to long-term averages, yet both headline and core inflation in year-ended terms had fallen over the past six months or so.
Once they take effect, these increases would imply a small rise in the average outstanding variable housing loan rate, unwinding about half of the decline observed in the average housing loan rate over the preceding year.
These factors supported an argument for taking more pre-emptive action.
Overall, data on the domestic economy appeared to be broadly consistent with the Bank's most recent forecasts.
Although job vacancy rates had declined, they remained unusually high.
With growth expected to be close to trend and inflation consistent with the target, the Board considered that this setting was appropriate for the overall macroeconomic outlook.
In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Bank of England, the expectation of further easing had followed guidance from these central banks that they were preparing for the possibility of negative policy rates.
Members also discussed the staff’s assessment of spare capacity in the economy.
Although there was considerable uncertainty about the size of the net effect on GDP, it was expected to be small based on the available evidence.
The Bank had injected substantial liquidity into the financial system through its daily open market operations to support credit and maintain low funding costs in the economy.
The prices of tradable items (excluding volatile items and tobacco) had declined modestly in the June quarter and over the preceding year.
Persistent inflationary pressures related to rising energy prices and labour shortages had brought forward the timing of the Bank of England's first policy rate increase implied by market pricing to early 2022.
Members noted that when total returns – which include dividend payments – were taken into account, Australian equities had performed similarly to equity markets in most other advanced economies, apart from the United States, where equity markets had outperformed.
While growth was forecast to slow to 4¾ per cent in 2007, if realised this would be the fifth consecutive year of growth above the 30-year average; these forecasts did not yet incorporate the higher-than-expected US December quarter GDP figures.
Members observed that the average growth rate for the world economy had been drifting up in recent years as the share of the world economy represented by the advanced economies declined and that of emerging economies, such as China and India, grew.
The strength in Chinese crude steel production had supported imports of high-quality iron ore and coking coal.
Ultimately, if upside risks to inflation were to materialise, or the credibility of the path to reduce inflation came into question, it would be costly to re-establish low inflation.
Overall growth was expected to be moderate in the period ahead.
Strength in sales appeared to be concentrated among large retailers, whose sales were rising rapidly.
Members noted that this had contributed to a depreciation of the Australian dollar, which had declined to around its lowest level in 2021 in US dollar and TWI terms, notwithstanding a rise in commodity prices and interest rates in Australia relative to other large advanced economies over the year to date.
Fertiliser prices had also risen sharply, which could reduce crop yields internationally if farmers respond by curtailing the use of fertiliser.
Among these, an appreciation of the Australian dollar would be expected to result in a slower pick-up in economic activity and inflation than otherwise.
Housing credit growth had continued to pick up, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially first-home buyers.
Growth in crude steel production had been modest and steel prices had fallen noticeably over the past month.
The rapid growth in house prices in Perth over the past several years was quite different from that seen in the other capitals, where prices had been flat between the end of 2003 and the end of 2005 and risen mildly since then.
The main exception was rural exports, which had been revised a little higher because of favourable weather.
Conditions in the Sydney and Melbourne housing markets had continued to ease, following significant growth over preceding years.
Members noted that Australian banks continued to raise funds relatively cheaply, with a recent issue of residential mortgage-backed securities being of record size in the domestic market and occurring at the tightest pricing since the financial crisis.
However, members observed that there was considerable uncertainty about the resilience of household consumption and that the squeeze on many households’ finances could result in consumption slowing more sharply than implied by the current forecasts.
Members noted that the recent banking system problems in the United States and Switzerland had created stress and volatility in financial markets, especially bond markets.
Longer term government bond yields had declined in most economies over the prior month, driven by the decline in longer term policy rate expectations amid signs that inflation may have peaked and the weakening economic outlook.
Wage growth had picked up in the September quarter, following a relatively weak outcome in June, to be around rates of recent years in year-ended terms.
There had been little change in the outlook for the world economy since the previous Board meeting.
An appreciating exchange rate would complicate this adjustment.
Overall, recent data and information from liaison were consistent with further recovery in the established housing market and moderate growth in dwelling investment.
This effect alone was expected to lower Australian GDP growth by around ½ percentage point in the March quarter.
Members agreed that the fiscal problems in Europe, if not resolved satisfactorily, could result in renewed turmoil in markets and fresh weakness in the global economy, which could have implications for Australia.
Market participants expected the cash rate to be around 15 basis points for an extended period, a little above the 10 basis point deposit rate on Exchange Settlement balances.
Members noted that this appeared to have been mainly due to softening demand from investors in an environment of declining housing prices in some markets, although it was likely that there had also been some reduction in the supply of credit associated with tighter lending standards.
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 2.85 per cent.
As in the financial crises of 2008 and 1998, the renminbi had remained stable, with foreign exchange reserves having declined a little from high levels.
The stock of non-residential building work yet to be done had fallen further in the June quarter but was still around its decade-average as a share of GDP, and approvals for new work remained low.
Chinese equity prices had declined further over September, reflecting concerns about growth prospects in China.
In the established housing market, new listings in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up and prices had levelled off in recent months.
The exchange rate had depreciated by more than 20 per cent over the past year and was now about 5 per cent below its post-float average.
Finally, the arguments for no change in the cash rate placed further emphasis on the lagged effects of the large policy adjustment to date, and the value in proceeding cautiously in an uncertain environment.
Overall, the market was pricing in two 25 basis point increases in the cash rate over the remainder of 2023, an expectation shared by around half of market economists.
Members noted that the expectation within financial markets remained that forthcoming changes to the Bank of Japan's executive would usher in a more aggressive policy stance.
Financial strains had continued during September but lessened noticeably following the reduction in the federal funds rate of 50 basis points announced by the Federal Reserve on 18 September.
Nevertheless, there were ongoing reports of firms using bonuses and other non-wage incentives to attract and retain labour, within a general environment of subdued wages growth.
Members observed that outcomes for the nominal side of the economy had not been as positive.
Members noted that this combination of factors posed downside risks.
In foreign exchange markets, the US dollar had depreciated a little further in trade-weighted terms over the preceding month to be lower than before the US election.
The tensions in European financial markets had seen a further pushing back in the expectations of when central banks in the three largest advanced economies would begin tightening policy.
Wage growth in the public sector over 2013 was around its slowest pace since 2000, consistent with ongoing fiscal restraint.
A similar development had occurred in countries where resource stocks carried a high weighting in the share market, e.g.
Higher iron ore prices had supported overall export values and the trade surplus had increased to almost 3 per cent of GDP in the March quarter.
Firms in the Bank’s liaison program reported that the demand for labour had remained strong, but had eased over preceding months in line with the job advertisements data.
However, it was clear that investment spending plans for the year ahead were now being scaled back.
Compared with some earlier cyclical growth slowdowns, measures of confidence and household spending looked weaker, but the slowdown in the labour market and survey-based measures of business conditions had, so far at least, been relatively mild by past standards.
The latest IMF and private-sector forecasts were suggesting that growth in both the developed and emerging economies in 2009 would be significantly lower than thought only a few months earlier.
The euro area was experiencing significant economic weakness.
However, central banks had also emphasised that policy rates were unlikely to decline over coming months, in contrast to market-implied expectations.
In any event, the data indicated that some divergence in growth among the states was not uncommon, though it was noteworthy that NSW had underperformed the national average for five consecutive years.
Members also noted that, consistent with reports of deposit outflows, Greek banks' use of emergency liquidity assistance had increased further during April and May.
Meanwhile, net service exports had risen further in response to the earlier depreciation of the exchange rate and were expected to continue supporting GDP growth over the forecast period.
The Australian dollar had also traded in a relatively wide range in the recent period and closely tracked the changing sentiment in global financial markets.
Developments in credit and asset markets, on the other hand, had remained subdued.
Tradables inflation (excluding volatile items and tobacco) had picked up in response to the depreciation of the Australian dollar over the past year or so.
Prices appeared to have levelled out in late 2009 in lower-priced suburbs, consistent with reduced demand following the winding back of the higher grants to first-home buyers.
In contrast, recent data in China had been much more positive.
Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declined relative to 10-year government bond yields in other advanced countries in anticipation of the Bank's bond purchase program.
The one-notch ratings downgrade by Moody's of Australia's four major banks had had no effect on banks' bond spreads, mainly because the downgrade had been expected for some time.
Indicators of consumer spending had been soft.
Members noted that global financial conditions had eased over prior months.
These data and reports from liaison with businesses suggested that wages growth was unlikely to pick up in the near future.
The wage price index for the private sector increased by 0.9 per cent in the March quarter, to be 3.7 per cent higher over the year; growth of public-sector wages slowed a little in the quarter and was running at 3.1 per cent in year-ended terms.
Turning to the outlook for inflation, members took account of wages growth running at about 4¼ per cent, adjusting for the changed timing of the most recent minimum wage increase, and the fact that capacity utilisation was currently at its highest level on record.
As a result, government bond yields in Australia had moved further below those in the United States.
Members observed that financing conditions for corporations had improved.
A few central banks, including the Bank of Korea, Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, had already increased their policy rates.
While this had been largely driven by domestic demand in these economies, reflecting strong economic stimulus, there were also recent signs of a pick-up in their exports.
Policy rates were also steady in Japan and the UK, but had been cut by 50 basis points in Canada.
The case to hold the cash rate steady at this meeting was further supported by the need to balance the risks to the inflation forecast with those surrounding the outlook for full employment.
Members noted, however, that this did not change the Bank's assessment of how inflationary pressures were likely to evolve in the forecast period.
Inflationary pressures remained well contained and were likely to remain so in the period ahead.
Members noted that food and energy make up a relatively large share of Chinese households' consumption and that recent disease- and weather-related supply problems are likely to result in further increases in food prices.
This was consistent with both the ongoing increase in iron ore supply and further weakening of the Chinese property market, which is an important source of demand for steel.
Members noted that the most recent data on the labour market had been a little more positive than early in 2014.
Members also noted that Chinese steel production per capita was likely to be close to its peak and that growth in Chinese steel production would not add much to global demand for iron ore in the future.
There had been an increase in inflation for retail items because there had been some pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation and the drought had boosted certain food prices.
The local share market also moved generally in line with its global counterparts, but in contrast to recent months, it tended to outperform other markets.
In most advanced economies, labour markets had remained tight and wages growth had picked up, while inflation had remained subdued.
Information from liaison suggested employment intentions had remained weak in the residential construction sector but positive among services firms.
Members noted that, while non-bank lending comprised a small share of system-wide credit and there had been little evidence of a decline in lending standards, it was important that lending standards remained prudent.
In particular, underlying inflation was still, on the latest data, above the target and, while current forecasts suggested it would fall in the coming year, the expected trough in inflation was significantly higher than earlier thought.
In the euro area, the fall in German yields had reflected, in part, the effect of safe-haven flows and an easing in growth momentum in the euro area.
The unemployment rate in August was 3.5 per cent, around the lowest rate in almost 50 years.
Members noted that the cost of borrowing US dollars in money markets had fallen a little in October following the implementation of new regulations for US money market funds.
Conditions in the labour market were expected to ease further over the coming year or so, to levels consistent with sustained full employment.
Total social financing flows had moderated in recent months and overall inflationary pressures remained subdued.
Indicators of domestic demand across advanced economies had been mixed.
While the yield on 3-year AGS had remained consistent with the target, it had been a little higher than 25 basis points over the preceding weeks.
The New Payments Platform was highlighted for its capability to deliver more than 19 million COVID-19 support payments in recent months, providing immediate value and mostly on weekends.
Forecasts for public consumption and investment, including infrastructure spending, had been upgraded.
However, the Australian equity market had declined, with share prices for some companies falling in response to profit warnings.
This suggested that there continued to be excess capacity in the labour market, as did indicators such as the underutilisation rate.
The depreciation from the middle of the year had been consistent with the decline in yields on Australian government bonds compared with those of other major advanced economies and, more recently, concerns around slowing momentum of the Chinese economy.
Inflationary pressures were expected to remain subdued.
While the Bank's liaison continued to suggest modest growth, there was a surprisingly large fall in the ABS estimate of retail spending in October.
Growth in public sector investment had been positive despite a decline in defence spending.
Activity in China had rebounded in May following the relaxation of COVID-19-related mobility restrictions and in response to ongoing policy stimulus.
Although the prospects for a partial trade agreement between the United States and China had improved since the previous meeting, the likelihood of a more comprehensive agreement remained uncertain.
Members noted that while the timing of investment upturns was very difficult to predict, it appeared likely that growth of the economy over the coming year would be below trend but that growth could reasonably be expected to pick up thereafter.
Swiss government bond yields were negative up to a tenor of nearly 50 years.
Members recognised that these forecasts were subject to a high degree of uncertainty and that there were significant risks on both the upside and downside.
In the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 4¼ per cent by the end of 2022 and to 4 per cent by the end of 2023, which was lower than previously forecast.
Financial market participants' expectations were that the federal funds rate would be increased by more than previously thought, but a slower pace of increase was expected than indicated by the FOMC.
Following a moderation in growth in the March quarter, some of the recent Chinese data had been more positive.
An example was the trimmed mean measure of underlying inflation for the June quarter, which was lowered from 0.9 per cent to 0.7 per cent, bringing the year-ended rate down from 2.7 per cent to 2.5 per cent (though underlying inflation looked slightly higher in history).
This had been most evident for Spain and Italy, where yields on government bonds had risen significantly as foreign investors reduced their exposures by not rolling over maturing debt and selling debt in the secondary market.
Output in the rest of east Asia appeared to have been growing at around its average pace of recent years, supported by stronger domestic demand.
Markets also expected smaller rate cuts from that point, given the ongoing resilience in economic activity and labour market conditions.
Outside Western Australia, business failure rates had declined.
Pricing in domestic financial markets indicated that there was little chance of a reduction in the cash rate at the present meeting.
Over the period ahead, new information should allow the Board to assess whether the improvement in labour market conditions was continuing and whether the recent financial turbulence presaged weaker global and domestic demand.
In the established housing market, the number of auctions had declined and remained lower than a year earlier, even though auction clearance rates had increased of late (particularly in Sydney).
Housing construction activity had experienced a significant downturn since mid 2007, triggered by the introduction of tighter safety requirements for buildings.
The tightening had flowed through to increased corporate bond spreads; recent bond issuance in China had been weak after a sustained period of strength, although yields had remained low.
Members also noted data on domestic migration in Australia showing that the population flow from capital cities to regional areas had picked up.
Members noted that the shift from cash to electronic payments is further advanced in Australia than in a number of other countries.
In the meantime, the expectation that policy might be eased was itself being reflected in a reduced level of market interest rates.
The Australian equity market had also shown little net change over the past month, with company earnings announcements broadly in line with expectations.
Members recalled that the wage price index had risen by 4 per cent over the year to the June quarter, which indicated no acceleration in wages.
However, the marked deterioration in global financial conditions over the past couple of months, which had also had an effect on Australian financial markets and share prices, was likely to have a significant effect as well on business and consumer sentiment, and liaison information was reflecting this.
Chinese authorities had taken measures to stabilise the property market, in addition to fiscal and monetary policy measures to support the recovery more broadly.
The closure of international borders had led to sharp falls in tourism imports and exports, and education exports had also been much lower.
Contacts had reported that tighter access to credit for off-the-plan and project homes had been constraining buyer demand.
Private sector wages growth had picked up further in the December quarter, consistent with the Bank's forecasts and survey evidence that a significant share of firms were finding it difficult to attract suitable labour.
Despite the resumption of growth, there remained significant spare capacity in the advanced economies as evidenced by the high levels of unemployment and low levels of measures of capacity utilisation.
Potential catalysts for this included persistently high global inflation, which would require interest rates to remain high for longer than currently expected, and/or a sharp downturn in the global economy.
Compared with a yield target, a BPP provides more flexibility to respond to evolving economic circumstances, although it could entail larger financial costs.
Insolvencies and firm closures in 2020 had been supressed by a range of support measures, including stimulus payments, loan repayment deferrals, rent reductions and a moratorium on insolvencies.
Members noted that the first $100 billion phase of the bond purchase program was scheduled to be completed in early April.
Housing prices, in particular, had increased strongly in a number of countries in the latter part of 2020 and early 2021.
Expectations for policy tightening had increased.
Equity market volatility had increased from the very low levels of 2017, in part reflecting concerns over the direction of international trade policy in the United States.
On a year-ended basis, underlying inflation was running at a little below 2½ per cent, the midpoint of the medium-term target.
Higher energy prices, alongside the strong recovery in global demand and ongoing capacity constraints in the goods sector, had contributed to this development.
Members were informed that, measured by the change in the terms of trade over the past five years, Australia had received a larger income gain than any other comparable country, even before taking this year's projected increase into account.
Members observed the heightened uncertainty regarding developments in Russia and Greece, and that most banks in the major advanced markets, including Australia, had relatively little direct exposure to these economies.
This was a significant increase over such a period and much of the effect of it was still to be seen.
The exchange rate had also declined somewhat from the very high levels of a few months ago.
While the unemployment rate had edged down a little further in previous months, broader measures of labour underutilisation had not declined.
Internationally, spreads in money markets had continued to fall and were now clearly below the levels that had prevailed shortly before the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September.
Growth in total credit in April had remained around the fastest pace of the preceding decade.
The WTI crude oil price had reached almost US$100 per barrel during the past month, but had dropped back to below US$90 in the past week or so.
Financial market pricing implied that the Australian cash rate was expected to remain unchanged for a considerable period, with some expectation of a decrease by late 2019.
Thereafter, they were expected to drift lower, reflecting the effect of the expected slowing in world GDP growth.
The announcement of this had little effect on interest rates on bank debt, though a scarcity premium on guaranteed issues saw spreads on guaranteed debt decline a little.
Members concurred that the appropriate course was to set policy as required by the most likely outcome, and to be ready to respond to other outcomes if they eventuated.
Members noted that these indicators were consistent with data and evidence from liaison suggesting that non-mining business investment had been growing in some parts of the economy that were less exposed to the effects of the decline in commodity prices and the fall in mining investment.
After depreciating sharply since the beginning of 2018, these economies' exchange rates had appreciated over the preceding couple of months.
Against the background of rising global inflationary pressures, a few central banks, including the Federal Reserve, had increased their policy rates in recent months, and the degree of monetary policy accommodation was expected gradually to be reduced.
Liaison suggested that financing conditions for firms in the construction sector were improving, though they remained tight.
However, a sustained decline in inflation was expected in 2023, as global supply-side issues continue to be resolved, the recent declines in commodity prices work their way through to consumer prices and growth in demand slows.
As a result of the increase in home loan interest rates that had already occurred over the year, housing mortgage payments were set to rise further in the period ahead.
This could be in response to stronger wealth effects and a decline in uncertainty, which boosted households' willingness to consume out of earlier savings and recurring labour income.
Spare capacity had continued to be absorbed, especially in the major advanced economies.
Members noted that uncertainty about job losses had affected the demand for new housing, and building approvals had declined, particularly for apartments.
The largest downward revisions for growth among advanced economies were for the United States, where many forecasters expected a shallow recession.
The US dollar had appreciated since the start of 2022 in line with the more pronounced rise in US Government bond yields compared with those in most advanced economies.
Demand had been strong from both domestic and international buyers.
Profits of non-financial companies had increased strongly in the June quarter, especially in the mining sector.
Over 2013, the US dollar had appreciated by 3 per cent on a trade-weighted basis, with a marked appreciation against the Japanese yen and a number of emerging market and commodity currencies (including the Australian dollar) partly offset by a modest depreciation against various European currencies and the Chinese renminbi.
Members noted that global shipping costs had increased recently, partly related to attacks on vessels in the Red Sea.
The CPI rose by 1.3 per cent in the quarter and by 4.2 per cent over the year.
The level of employment was little changed over the past year, although total hours worked had increased.
The Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances at zero per cent.
Financial market pricing indicated that the domestic cash rate was expected to remain unchanged at the current meeting.
European gas and thermal coal prices had fallen significantly over the prior month owing to the commitment to implement energy rationing and the imposition of a windfall tax on non-gas energy generation, including from coal.
The vaccination program would assist with containment of the virus and longer-term economic recovery.
Looking ahead, the forecast for GDP still anticipated mining investment making a significant contribution to growth in the coming quarters, with non-resource investment remaining weak, some possibility of an increase in dwelling investment, consumption growing broadly in line with incomes, and public demand subtracting from growth.
In weighing up the two options, members agreed that the case to keep the cash rate target unchanged at this meeting was the stronger one.
Consistent with the rise in investment, imports of capital goods had been growing particularly strongly over the past year.
As a result, imports of both commodities had been on an upward trend, and iron ore imports from Australia had remained around record highs in recent months.
Members noted that the Chinese market was the second largest in absolute size in Asia, behind Japan, but was quite small in international comparative terms relative to GDP.
In most of the major markets, bond yields had remained close to historic lows.
Banks were well placed to meet the Basel III capital requirements, which APRA had begun phasing in from the start of the year.
Liaison suggested that retailers had been more cautious about the outlook of late, although trading conditions had remained generally positive, and surveys suggested that consumers' perceptions of their own finances were still a little above average.
Despite the moderation in major trading partner growth in early 2016, members noted that there had been a further sizeable increase in commodity prices, particularly for iron ore, coking coal and oil.
The US dollar depreciated on a trade-weighted basis over the past month, particularly following the downward revision of the Federal Open Market Committee's policy rate expectations.
In that regard, an important contributor to the recent depreciation of the Australian dollar had been the US dollar's appreciation.
In China, economic activity stabilised early in the December quarter following an earlier period of regulatory tightening.
The path of business investment spending would be affected by the turning of the cycle in resources investment, where indicators continued to suggest that a decline was likely over the next several years.
Growth in economic activity was still expected to be a little below trend this year, picking up gradually to be close to trend through 2014.
Growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers had slowed to 4¾ per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, although the monthly growth rate had increased slightly in February.
Employment was estimated to have fallen in April, following a large rise in March.
Regarding inflation, it could decline quickly in the face of slower growth and improved supply conditions.
Growth in output in the United States had continued to be supported by strong growth in consumption, while growth in investment appeared to have slowed further.
Members noted that many market participants expected a further increase in the cash rate at this meeting.
These markets had risen by 20–25 per cent over 2006 to date, after even larger rises in 2005 as improving economic conditions had become apparent.
The pipeline of work already approved or under way was expected to continue supporting dwelling investment around current levels over the subsequent year or so; the peak of apartment completions was expected to occur during this period.
The labour market remained tight, but less so than a few months earlier.
As a result, the forecast for the unemployment rate had been revised lower and the forecast for wages growth had been revised slightly higher.
Members noted that the information received on inflation over the prior month had been reassuring.
The Government had announced a series of measures in response and was still forecasting a small surplus in 2012/13.
Uncertainty about both the timing and speed of the recovery in non-mining business investment remained key risks to the forecasts.
Mining investment had continued to fall in the June quarter and now accounted for around 5 per cent of nominal GDP, down from a peak of around 8 per cent.
This was considered unlikely for as long as substantial spare capacity remained in labour markets and wages growth remained subdued.
There had been a slight rise in export volumes, after some very large falls, and surveyed business conditions were up strongly, to close to average levels.
Core inflation had been close to the Federal Reserve's target in the United States, where demand was likely to have been boosted by the effects of recent reductions in corporate and personal income tax rates.
The Governor proposed that members consider a substantial reduction in the cash rate.
Members again considered two options for the size of the increase in the cash rate: a 25 basis point increase or a 50 basis point increase.
The forecasts for the Australian economy were largely unchanged.
Members noted that there was an inevitable element of pro-cyclicality in public investment spending, as periods of rapid growth in private investment spending tended to require complementary investment in public infrastructure.
Quarterly GDP growth was expected to be around ½ per cent, supported by a strong recovery in resource exports from earlier supply disruptions.
Members noted that projections by members of the FOMC for the path of the federal funds rate had been revised down at the FOMC's March meeting.
Market expectations for the future path of the cash rate had shifted up materially since the February meeting.
Rental vacancy rates were much lower in Perth, where growth in new supply had been relatively modest in recent years and international students accounted for a smaller share of rental housing demand.
However, the forecast pick-up in underlying inflation was now expected to occur a little later than previously expected, mainly as a result of the lower forecast for growth in GDP and downside risks to utilities and administered price inflation in the near term.
Members noted that there were also other signs that the rate of contraction in the US economy had slowed, with the ISM surveys of business conditions in the manufacturing and other sectors showing some improvement.
Inflation was still declining towards the target and the recent information did not materially alter its trajectory.
Conditions in foreign exchange markets had remained very subdued, with little change in the major exchange rates and volatility declining further to multi-decade lows in the past month.
GDP growth in the United States had remained strong over 2018.
Although wage growth had been a little lower than expected in the September quarter, it appeared to have stabilised at a low rate.
Revised GDP and inflation forecasts prepared for this meeting were similar to those presented at the previous meeting, but took account of the higher-than-expected growth in the June quarter national accounts.
Members noted that most model-based estimates of the currency generally placed a large weight on the terms of trade.
Labour market conditions were again strong in May.
The unemployment rate had been broadly steady at around 5½ per cent since mid 2017, suggesting that spare capacity remained in the labour market.
Banks were still keenly bidding for deposits across the yield curve.
The housing sector was an area of particular weakness at present and business sentiment had also deteriorated.
But labour market conditions remained soft overall.
However, they also noted that earnings forecasts generally assumed that the high share of profits in national income and high rates of earnings growth would continue.
Members noted the high degree of uncertainty around this forecast.
Members discussed the implications of this for the Australian dollar exchange rate.
Employment had continued to grow more rapidly than the working-age population, and the unemployment rate was around its long-run average level.
Total household debt payments as a share of disposable income had increased significantly during the tightening phase.
Members noted that European governments were still looking to craft a full response to their financial problems and that tighter fiscal policy was contributing to weaker near-term growth prospects.
Much of the rise in sovereign yields since late 2020 had reflected investors revising up their expectations for inflation to be more consistent with central banks' inflation targets.
Year-ended growth in the WPI had picked up compared with the previous year across most industries and in all states and territories.
Members discussed the updated staff forecasts, which were little changed from the forecasts prepared at the time of the May meeting.
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global economy had continued to recover and that conditions were in place for a sustained expansion.
Members noted that there was considerable uncertainty around the timing and extent of the expected increase in household consumption growth and non-mining business investment.
Term premia for sovereign debt and exchange rate volatility also remained low in the major markets.
The level of corporate debt in China was particularly high for the country's stage of economic development.
However, it was also noted that Chinese demand for Australian iron ore exports remained firm.
Members observed that the softness in commercial construction meant that there was labour available to support the strong growth of higher-density dwelling construction.
Members observed that iron ore prices could remain high for some time, but prices were still expected to decline over the medium term.
In India, GDP had increased strongly in the December quarter, after two very weak quarters.
The Bank's forecasts for inflation to remain close to the target over the next year or so assumed ongoing productivity growth and wage growth remaining around the more moderate pace of recent quarters.
It was nonetheless unlikely that the market would reach its previous levels of outstandings and may no longer provide a source of funding for some purposes.
Corporate bond yields had declined alongside the fall in government bond yields and a narrowing of credit spreads.
Mining investment had declined noticeably to be around 15 per cent below its peak in late 2012, and further substantial falls were anticipated over coming quarters.
Members also noted the ongoing work of the Bank, under the oversight of the Payments System Board, to promote the efficiency, competitiveness and safety of the payments system.
The overall effect on bank funding costs had been less than the rise in the cost of wholesale debt funding since February, in part because there had been little change in interest rates for retail deposits, which account for around one-third of total bank funding.
The inflation data for the December quarter had been in line with the forecasts presented in the November Statement on Monetary Policy.
As had been the case for some time, the flow of new listings for sale remained similar to pre-pandemic levels but total listings were much lower, implying that dwellings were being sold at a rapid pace.
Members noted that the International Monetary Fund's Financial Sector Assessment Program report on the Australian financial system was generally positive about the resilience of domestic financial institutions and the quality of regulatory and supervisory oversight, but made several high-level recommendations for improving current arrangements.
They noted the sharp differences in performance between sectors and regions of the economy, and the considerable structural change that was occurring, as well as the soft overall conditions in the housing sector and the likelihood of significant fiscal tightening in the next few years.
Broader measures of spare capacity had also declined slightly over October, to remain around multi-decade lows, and the rate of participation in the labour force was close to its recent record high.
Core inflation had continued to edge higher, but remained below the Bank of Japan's 2 per cent target.
Measures of consumer sentiment had declined over recent months, but consumers' views on their personal financial situation, which historically have had a stronger link to consumption, had been little changed.
Members noted that market expectations for the path of the cash rate implied by money market rates had declined since the July meeting, as had market economists’ expectations.
For the global economy, data received over the previous month had been somewhat more positive.
However, investment had held up much better than expected earlier in the year.
It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to 3 per cent.
Resource exports and dwelling investment were expected to have made positive contributions to growth in the September quarter, following declines in the June quarter.
However, across the rest of the country, which accounts for around 60 per cent of Australia's dwelling stock, housing price growth had declined.
The problems besetting Bear Stearns, which had been covered at the previous meeting, had worsened further in recent weeks.
Members noted that there had been several periods in the preceding decade in which housing prices had fallen, or growth had slowed significantly, in different parts of the country.
Non-farm output increased by 4.6 per cent over the year, with strength in most major components in the most recent quarter.
Equity prices had increased by 4 per cent since the start of 2015 even though prices of resource companies had fallen further.
As a result, spare capacity in the labour markets of these economies was likely to continue to decline.
The lockdown and other containment measures were expected to remain in place for at least a couple of months in most countries, although there was considerable uncertainty about the extent of this, as well as the variability of the measures across countries.
In Australia, the share of total income paid to workers in wages and salaries (the ‘labour share’) had risen over the 1960s and 1970s but had gradually declined since then.
This was most notable for households and less so for large businesses.
Members discussed a paper on the potential use of new digital assets in payments.
The labour market continued to strengthen and inflation had picked up a little over recent months, while the pace of recovery in the housing market had slowed.
Members noted that each of these outcomes was conceivable given the considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook.
Retail deposit rates had also increased, but by a smaller amount.
The consensus view within financial markets remained for a ‘tapering’ of the Fed's asset purchases to commence in March.
Members noted that economic conditions early this year were, on balance, consistent with global economic growth being around average.
Conditions in the labour market had remained subdued, with members noting that the latest vintage of the labour force survey data, which was released by the ABS during the meeting, showed a small rise in the unemployment rate over the previous six months and employment growth somewhat below the pace of population growth.
At the time of the meeting, the Bank held 34 per cent of outstanding Australian Government Securities and 17 per cent of outstanding securities issued by the states and territories.
US 10-year bond yields declined by around 25 basis points to 4½ per cent in reaction to weaker US economic data and the fall in the Chinese share market.
However, regulators globally remained concerned that ‘search for yield’ behaviour could ultimately lead to disruptive repricing in financial markets.
Members noted that unusual population trends during the pandemic had materially affected national housing market conditions and other parts of the economy, and would continue to do so for some time.
These discussions had also highlighted that weaker demand conditions, including for short-term rental accommodation, were expected to extend the weakness in residential construction.
Over time, however, real incomes would be affected by higher prices and rises in interest rates; falling housing prices would dampen consumption as well as dwelling investment.
The argument for an increase of 25 basis points was that a sequence of 25 basis point moves represented a steady approach to withdrawing monetary policy stimulus and that this was appropriate in an uncertain environment.
Members felt that these arguments were finely balanced.
Domestically, there were significant differences in conditions across sectors, with a considerable degree of structural adjustment occurring in the economy.
The recent appreciation had reduced the fall in the exchange rate over the past year to 13 per cent.
In contrast, economic activity in the euro area remained weak.
Since the last change to monetary policy in June, the Board had concluded that the stance of monetary policy resulting in interest rates being a bit below average was appropriate, given low inflation and the weaker outlook for growth globally.
While consumption had held up so far, the higher interest rates and high inflation were putting pressure on household budgets at a time when housing prices were also falling.
Market pricing implied that the Fed could start raising its policy rate in late 2022 or early 2023, consistent with the ‘dot plot’, which summarises Federal Open Market Committee participants' outlook for the federal funds rate.
This was consistent with information from liaison that a larger share of firms expected wages growth to be stable (rather than increasing) in the year ahead compared with a year or so earlier.
Equity prices in most advanced economies had been rising since mid-October.
Many households have built up large financial buffers and are benefiting from stronger income growth.
The currencies of Brazil, India and other emerging economies had appreciated from their recent low points, while foreign exchange markets generally were more subdued through October.
While measures of asset quality had weakened and expenses for bad and doubtful debts had risen, overall asset quality remained strong by international standards.
Underlying inflation had picked up a little and had been slightly higher than forecast, but the increase in headline inflation had been smaller than forecast.
GDP in the euro area picked up in the final quarter of 2006, taking growth over the year to 3.3 per cent.
The Board affirmed its commitment to supporting jobs, incomes and businesses and to making sure that Australia is well placed for recovery.
Deposit rates had declined somewhat over the course of 2017, as banks' demand for deposit funding had eased once they had adjusted their balance sheets to comply with the net stable funding ratio (NSFR), which had come into effect at the start of 2018.
The rise in labour productivity apparent in the data over the year to the March quarter meant that unit labour costs as measured had increased only modestly over this period, and had even declined a little in the March quarter.
The Chinese authorities had adopted several policy measures in an attempt to reduce the speculative excesses in the equity market and to slow the pace of economic activity.
Banks' overall funding costs were at historically low levels.
Large falls in Chinese equity prices had occurred again more recently, resulting in cumulative falls from recent peaks being back around 30 per cent, although equity prices remained 70 per cent higher than a year earlier.
This reflected a trend towards higher gearing among businesses in a world that had seen macroeconomic stability, low volatility and high returns to equity for several years.
Members noted the uncertainty around the outlook and that the monthly meetings provided the Board with frequent opportunities to assess how these uncertainties were being resolved and to adjust policy if needed.
Pending this information, the Board judged it appropriate to hold the cash rate unchanged.
Movements in the month took markets back to levels of 2003, and in Japan, to levels of the early 1980s.
Project completions were expected to support further growth in resource exports, particularly iron ore and liquefied natural gas (LNG).
The main exception had been the price of gas in Europe, where a decline in October had been reversed in November with the onset of colder weather.
Growth in the Japanese economy picked up in the March quarter and indicators of activity pointed to continued growth in April.
Financial Markets Conditions in financial markets had continued to improve over the past couple of months, with sentiment supported by the partial resolution of the fiscal situation in the United States, approval of the revised Greek bailout package in December, policy developments in Japan and generally better-than-expected economic data globally.
Domestic cost pressures, including wage growth, had remained low and were expected to remain so for some time.
Foreign investors were largely limited to the China B market, which was relatively small and denominated in foreign currency.
The recovery in household spending from the pandemic-related restrictions seemed to have mostly run its course.
The slightly softer outlook for economic activity overall was expected to affect the labour market.
The staff's revised central forecast for GDP growth was broadly similar to that at the time of the August Statement on Monetary Policy.
Members noted that global growth could continue to surprise on the upside, given the synchronised nature of the current upturn.
Measures of consumer confidence had declined recently and were now below average.
Members observed that, nonetheless, the additional monetary policy stimulus as a result of the Bank's package of policy measures announced in November 2020 had contributed to the Australian dollar being noticeably lower than it would have been otherwise.
The run of regular data releases reviewed by the Board covered the business, household and housing sectors, the labour market, and prices and wages.
Looking at government finances, the Australian Government's fiscal package announced in February would provide significant stimulus to the economy over the next two years.
Survey data indicate that much of Australian household debt is owed by higher-income and middle-aged people, who tend to have more stable employment and often larger savings buffers.
Moreover, both central banks had maintained negative policy rates.
Iron ore prices had declined in response to expectations of lower near-term demand.
Although there had been some improvement in sentiment and activity over recent months, conditions were expected to remain weak, partly reflecting further fiscal consolidation over the balance of the year.
Market pricing implied that further monetary policy easing was expected following recent data and the Bank's communication since the previous meeting.
More recently, there had been evidence that wage growth in Australia had stabilised and that the effect on aggregate measures of labour costs of workers moving from mining-related activities to lower-paying jobs in the non-mining sector might almost have run its course.
The FOMC had also outlined some details regarding the plan for a gradual and predictable reduction in the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, which is expected to begin later this year.
In considering whether or not to reduce the cash rate further at this meeting, members discussed the various channels through which monetary policy was affecting the economy at present, including the asset price and exchange rate channels.
New dwelling prices had declined again in the June quarter, reflecting the use of bonus offers and purchase incentives by developers to counter the weak housing conditions.
Members observed that measures of spare capacity in the labour market remained near multi-decade lows.
The employment-to-population ratio and the participation rate were both around record highs, and measures of spare capacity in the labour market were near their lowest levels in decades.
The yield on 3-year AGS had remained at the target of around 25 basis points and market functioning had significantly improved for government bonds.
The People's Bank of China raised its policy interest rate by 25 basis points late in December and had also increased the reserve ratios of banks twice over the past two months.
Building approvals, particularly for houses, were bottoming out in all states except Western Australia, where approvals continued to trend up.
The three-month LIBOR to swap spread in the Australian market was now back at the low end of the international range, which had been the situation for most of the period since the onset of the financial crisis.
Reviewing household-sector balance sheets, members noted that generally these remained in good shape, reflecting the favourable macroeconomic environment.
And while the effects on Chinese exports had been modest to date, members noted that disruptions to goods production and distribution networks would become more evident if there were further outbreaks of COVID-19.
They also noted that the sharp increase in equity market volatility early in February had been mostly reversed, and volatility in financial markets generally remained at or a little below longer-run averages.
In both economies, activity in the March quarter had been driven by relatively strong growth in household consumption.
Business investment was expected to have increased modestly in the December quarter, led by the non-mining sector.
The large falls in employment in recent months had led to a rise in the unemployment rate to 8½ per cent in March, although there were signs that the rate of deterioration in the labour market had stabilised.
The value of retail sales had fallen slightly in February, following average growth in January, and households' perceptions of their personal finances had declined to below-average levels.
Employment had increased a little in February, following strong growth in January, and the unemployment rate had declined to 4.9 per cent, continuing the run of months with an unemployment rate at or around 5 per cent.
Members noted that indicators of the domestic economy over the past month had again been better than expected.
Domestically, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin accommodative financial conditions.
Members noted that the measured unemployment rate would be a less useful indicator of labour market underutilisation over coming months compared with hours-based measures.
However, the rollout of past commitments had been constrained by industry bottlenecks and there were risks of further delays owing to capacity constraints.
Share prices had fallen over the preceding month, reflecting concerns about international trade policy developments, as well as regulatory and company-specific developments in the technology sector.
Liaison with banks and other lenders suggested that the requirements for more thorough verification of income and expenditure data had led to an increase in loan approval times in 2018, but subsequent investments in people and technology had reduced approval times.
The high level of equity raisings in the September quarter in Australia had led to a marked reduction in corporate gearing ratios, which were now down to around 65 per cent.
Members agreed that whether further tightening of monetary policy is required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a reasonable timeframe will depend on how the incoming data alter the economic outlook and the evolving assessment of risks.
The authorities in Brazil and Thailand had increased taxes on capital inflows, while the introduction of capital controls was being considered in Korea, Indonesia and South Africa.
Commercial property yields more broadly were being compressed across a range of market segments.
The Australian banking system continued to be in a relatively strong condition.
Growth in credit extended to investors in housing had also strengthened from low levels.
In considering this month's decision, members recognised that the global economy was experiencing a severe downturn as countries sought to contain the COVID-19 outbreak.
As had been the case elsewhere around the world, business confidence had fallen noticeably and growth in business credit remained weak.
Housing credit growth had gradually increased, suggesting households had been more willing to borrow.
Members acknowledged that the risks to the inflation forecast had changed, with the distribution of possible outcomes shifting upwards.
Nevertheless, employment growth had slowed and hiring intentions pointed to further moderation in coming months.
Retail price inflation had been low as competitive pressures in the retail sector had continued to restrain price rises.
A material slowdown in the Chinese economy remained a key risk to the global outlook.
There had been a large volume of government-guaranteed bank bond issuance around the world in the past few months.
Large shipbuilders were also planning to increase capacity following several years where investment in shipping had been weak, but this would take time.
Guy Debelle (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Economic), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Peter Stebbing (Deputy Secretary) Sentiment in global financial markets deteriorated in May, as political uncertainty in Greece and growing concerns about the fiscal and banking problems in Spain added to the pessimism surrounding the outlook for the euro area.
However, in Europe, yield spreads to German government bonds had widened, most notably for Greek government bonds, following a ratings announcement, as well as concerns over Greek banks' reliance on funding from the European Central Bank.
At the time of the October meeting, market pricing implied that financial market participants applied around a 75 per cent likelihood of a 50 basis point increase in the cash rate and a 25 per cent likelihood of a 25 basis point increase; the cash rate was expected to be around 3.4 per cent by the end of 2022 and peak slightly above 4¼ per cent in mid-2023.
In response to mounting concerns about developers pausing or abandoning development projects, the Chinese authorities had put in place a number of measures to support the completion of projects.
Inflationary pressures had earlier proven more persistent than expected and there were upside risks to inflation from the labour market, rents and energy costs.
This was supported by information from liaison contacts, with around one-third of private sector firms reporting wage increases above 5 per cent.
Overall, it appeared that banks' lending standards were being maintained.
In contrast to past patterns, most of the private capital flows into Australia since the onset of the global financial crisis had been to the non-financial sector, rather than the financial sector (mainly banks), with much of that representing inflows into the resources sector, which had funded the recent high level of investment in that sector.
The participation rate had remained high in January and, for most age cohorts, participation rates had been near or above pre-pandemic levels.
Recent indicators suggested that the Australian economy had been expanding at a below-trend pace.
The supply disruptions, security concerns in the Middle East and speculative excesses that had led to a peak in the oil price of above US$70 per barrel during the middle of 2006 had since been unwinding.
In other major economies, the European Central Bank had indicated that it was prepared to add more monetary stimulus if the outlook for growth and inflation did not improve, including by expanding its bond-buying program.
Government payments and other measures, such as loan deferrals and rent moratoria, had also boosted cash flows for firms adversely affected by lockdowns.
Members assessed that overall labour market conditions nevertheless remained a little tighter than was consistent with sustained full employment and inflation at target.
There had been strong growth in employment and a welcome decline in the unemployment rate.
Housing credit growth had slowed further and the rate of credit card debt repayment had picked up.
Export and import volumes were lower than they had been in 2014, although iron ore imports from Australia appeared to have been steady over 2015.
Members noted that the current accommodative setting of monetary policy was expected to support demand and help growth strengthen at the same time as delivering inflation outcomes consistent with the target over the next two years.
Members were briefed on credit conditions, which continued to improve for both US and European corporates in October.
Members agreed that the Australian economy had significant underlying momentum and inflationary pressures were pronounced.
The wide range of economic data considered by the Board generally pointed to some improvement in confidence and economic activity in a number of countries.
Chinese exports were also estimated to have grown strongly, with recent data indicating strength in shipments to the major advanced economies as well as to elsewhere in Asia.
Health outcomes also continued to be an important source of uncertainty, although this was likely to diminish as a greater proportion of the population is vaccinated.
It will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range.
In contrast to some major advanced economy banking systems, growth of credit in some Asian economies had remained rapid.
Banks' funding costs had begun to increase from historically low levels owing to the rise in market rates over preceding months and the increase in the cash rate in May.
Recent indicators had suggested a pause in the recovery in Japan.
Private sector financial conditions had tightened, but remained favourable overall.
The authorities had announced a target for output growth in 2018 of around 6½ per cent, which was lower than the published rate of growth for 2017 of 6.9 per cent.
These firms' access to finance had been tightened over the course of 2018 as a result of earlier measures by the authorities to reduce risks in the financial system by restricting the availability of ‘shadow finance’.
Liaison suggested that the pace of retail spending might have eased somewhat more recently, while measures of consumer confidence fell back to around average levels in May.
Domestically, yields on longer-term Australian Government Securities (AGS) had also increased significantly, and the spread between 10-year AGS and US Treasury yields had widened to around 25 basis points.
Members discussed the extent to which the CPI data provided a signal about ongoing inflation trends.
In contrast, non-tradables inflation (excluding deposit & loan facilities) had picked up to a year-ended rate of 4.4 per cent, with significant increases in the prices of housing-related items, most notably utilities.
As expected, electricity prices had increased markedly in July as the higher default market offers came into effect, with some offset from government rebates.
This seemed to be mostly due to higher commodity prices.
Australian banks had been very active, and had benefitted from strong demand for their bonds.
As was the case in several other countries, this was the fourth consecutive year of strong returns.
The forecasts had also placed significant weight on the downside risks to consumption.
They emphasised that, as this decision was an operational one, it had no implications for the stance of monetary policy, nor did it have a bearing on the Board’s current approach to bond holdings acquired during the pandemic.
Members noted that the strength in the housing market and data on retail sales, for example, indicated that household consumption growth was likely to have picked up a little from the pace recorded in recent quarters.
It was also likely that having the various arms of policy all taking steps in the same direction would deliver a greater impact than the sum of the individual parts.
Members noted that over the prior month, bond yields had declined slightly in most major markets and in Australia, and had remained at generally low levels for both sovereign and corporate issuers.
Export volumes looked to have recovered somewhat in early 2018, after declining in the December quarter.
Data on the global economy suggested that prospects for all the major regions of the world were improving, though some more noticeably than others.
In the immediate aftermath of the Japanese disaster, commodity prices had declined as uncertainty rose, though this decline had been reversed after the situation became a little clearer.
The Bank has done this on multiple occasions in the past, notably during the global financial crisis and during a period of pandemic-related stress in March and April 2020.
Members reviewed a number of issues arising from the repricing of risk, which came after a long period during which risk was widely considered to be underpriced.
Year-ended growth in wages was a little stronger than had been expected but the most recent forecasts had wages growth peaking at around 4 per cent by the end of the year.
There had been only a relatively limited amount of data on the domestic economy over the past month.