Growth in household disposable income had picked up over 2017, partly reflecting the strength in employment growth over the course of the year.
There were some favourable signs in the Australian residential mortgage-backed securities market.
Nevertheless, members agreed that the outlook for domestic economic activity had eased a little, with a key source of uncertainty relating to the response of households to rising inflation, higher interest rates and declining housing prices in some cities.
Members stressed the importance of ES holders – in particular, banks – reflecting on the implications of the prospective framework for their own liquidity management operations as the stock of reserves declines.
Upward revisions to earlier data meant that nationwide housing prices were only slightly below their April 2022 peak.
It was slightly lower over the year in trade-weighted terms.
Mining investment had remained subdued despite the strength in commodity prices; however, a modest increase was expected over the forecast period, owing to sustaining investment for some major iron ore and energy projects, as well as increased exploration and production for some metals and minerals.
Members agreed to reconsider the case for a pause at the following meeting, recognising that pausing would allow additional time to reassess the outlook for the economy.
Members discussed the importance of understanding the evolution of demographic factors and foreign demand for interpreting developments in housing markets across states.
However, for the lower-income economies in the region, growth remained close to long-run averages.
The latest data received on the domestic economy had evolved much as expected, with further indications that growth had picked up a little over the past two quarters.
This was being led by household consumption, as high inflation weighed on household incomes and the effects of prior tightening in monetary policy worked their way through the economy.
For example, the increase in bank bill yields since July had been about 35 basis points more than the increase attributable to the increase in the cash rate.
Banks had also continued to receive large inflows of deposits, another relatively low-cost source of funding.
As a result, the saving ratio had declined further, although it remained well above the level it had been over much of the past 25 years.
Recent indicators suggested that dwelling investment had continued to grow strongly, particularly for higher-density dwellings.
This was consistent with the economic and financial exposures to Greece – apart from the official sector's financial exposure – being quite low.
Members noted that the ECB's assessment of the asset quality of the euro area banking system had been released during the month.
There had also been a large decline in the price of domestic holiday travel and accommodation, partly reflecting subdued demand in parts of that industry.
This scrutiny and related work had shown that investor activity was considerably higher – and lending standards in some parts of the market weaker – than had originally been thought.
More recently, there had also been some increase in real yields in most advanced economies.
Wages growth had picked up significantly over the preceding year or so.
The aggregate return on equity had fallen over the past year, partly owing to increases in banks' capital ratios.
Members noted that while iron ore and, to a lesser extent, coal exports had increased rapidly in recent years, a trend decline in oil exports, owing to the depletion of existing oil fields, had weighed on the figures for total resource exports.
Of particular relevance to Australia, Chinese steel production had fallen over the past few months.
The Board's judgement remained that, given the substantial degree of policy stimulus that had been imparted, it was prudent to hold the cash rate steady while continuing to gauge the effects of earlier reductions, but not to close off the possibility of reducing it further should that be appropriate to support sustainable growth in economic activity, consistent with the inflation target.
There had been very strong demand for the $4 billion of indexed bonds issued by the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) late in September.
Mining investment had declined further in the March quarter, as construction work at some liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects neared completion.
The outbreak of the Delta variant had delayed, but not derailed, the recovery.
Members noted that other signs of weakness in the US economy included the continued decline in housing activity and house prices, and a moderation in consumer spending.
Members noted that translating the data from the capital expenditure survey into national accounts estimates of business investment was challenging because firms tended to increase their expectations for capital expenditure over time.
Members noted that a full set of updated forecasts will be published in November following the release of the September quarter CPI.
Members concluded their discussion of international economic conditions by taking stock of upside and downside risks to the global outlook.
For the non-mining sector, the ABS survey of firms' capital expenditure intentions had been revised slightly higher and continued to imply modest growth in non-mining business investment over the course of 2014/15.
The rate of core inflation fell back in May after a large increase in April owing to the rise in the consumption tax rate.
The RBA Index of Commodity Prices was around its levels at the beginning of the year, despite the decline in the price of iron ore.
Labour market conditions in most advanced economies had continued to improve, although inflation remained below most central banks' targets.
In contrast, growth in prices of administered items and the cost of constructing new dwellings had increased in the June quarter.
Variable mortgage rates had declined broadly in line with the reductions in the cash rate in June and July.
Members noted that the German labour market had held up very well over the past two years.
Global disinflationary forces from the slowdown in the world economy and lower commodity prices would assist in this regard.
And the revisions to historical estimates of consumer spending meant that consumption growth, while still weak, had been more resilient than previously assessed.
The recovery was still expected to be uneven and protracted, with inflation remaining low.
Consumption had continued to recover in the December quarter despite a decline in household income.
The latest data on the US mortgage market, which related to the September quarter 2007, showed a further large rise in delinquencies on sub-prime loans, to over 16 per cent, as well as a smaller rise in delinquencies on prime loans.
The Australian dollar had depreciated by around 5 per cent since the previous Board meeting – in contrast to the resilience it had displayed in the period of heightened risk aversion earlier in the year.
Members discussed the important role that demand factors had played in slowing the pace of borrowing.
Limited spare capacity and gas-to-oil substitution in Europe and elsewhere were likely to support crude oil prices in the period ahead.
Wage and price inflation were at much lower levels than over the preceding decade, and, because of inertia in wage- and price-setting practices, it was possible that price pressures could be slow to build even if spare capacity were absorbed more quickly than expected.
Housing price growth remained strongest in Sydney and to a lesser extent Melbourne, while price rises in other parts of the country had been more modest and prices had even declined in some cities recently.
At the same time, the major banks' retail deposit rates had continued to drift down.
In contrast to previous months, market pricing had suggested that negative policy rates were unlikely to be adopted in either of these two economies.
In the household sector, measures of consumer sentiment had continued to rise to above-average levels, though the unemployment rate had recently edged up.
These had fallen considerably over the past year.
Looking at monetary policy settings around the world, members noted that market expectations were for the European Central Bank to lower its policy rate later in the week.
The continuing decline in the outstanding stock of RMBS had seen spreads in the secondary market decline considerably, such that investors were now seeking new issues at prices that were economic for the issuers.
Leading indicators of labour demand had softened a bit further, suggesting modest near-term employment growth was likely.
In Australia, the economic recovery was under way and recent data had generally been better than expected.
Most advanced economies were growing at above-trend rates and their labour markets had continued to tighten.
Members noted that, overall, global commodity prices were little changed since the previous Board meeting.
This had prompted the imposition of further capital controls and continued foreign exchange intervention by authorities in some economies.
A risk to the inflation outlook over the medium term was the possibility that price- and wage-setting behaviour would shift, resulting in domestic inflationary pressures becoming more persistent.
Members observed that inflation in Australia had moderated, with both headline and underlying inflation lower in the December quarter 2023 than had been expected three months prior.
Despite weak reported retail sales conditions generally, on a slightly more positive note some contacts in the Bank's liaison program had reported a mild pick-up in retail sales since July.
This reflected expectations of a particularly challenging period for earnings growth and capital raising for those industries in the months ahead.
The unemployment rate had edged back down to 3.4 per cent in October – the equal lowest rate since September 1974.
Should the cash rate be reduced to 25 basis points, the interest rate on ES balances would be zero.
Members noted that financial markets had been significantly more volatile over the past month in the wake of developments in Japan, Libya and Europe.
On the assumption that these structural changes would persist, but that the investment-to-output ratios for other industries would return to their long-run averages, this suggested there were some upside risks to the Bank's forecasts for growth in non-mining business investment over the medium term.
While the stock of unsold new houses was falling, it remained well above the average of the past two decades.
The revised forecast was for inflation to take a little longer than previously thought to return sustainably to target.
Reported housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne had risen noticeably in August and auction clearance rates had increased further, although volumes had remained low.
A number of advanced economies were growing at above-trend rates and were experiencing increasingly tight labour market conditions.
Growth in most of Asia was expected to remain relatively solid, but growth was expected to be fairly subdued in many of the advanced economies, with unemployment likely to remain high.
The news on Europe, however, had been notably weaker and it remained unclear as to how the current situation would be resolved.
This had occurred relatively early in the business cycle and lending rates in many cases would soon be at generational lows.
Before turning to the policy decision, members reviewed the policy and academic discussions taking place around the world regarding the operation of macroeconomic policy and monetary policy frameworks in an environment where interest rates are low because of structural factors.
The housing market was improving gradually, with both turnover and prices picking up in recent months.
The Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England had continued to use unconventional monetary measures.
This was consistent with the staff’s assessment that aggregate demand remains above the economy’s supply potential.
Members began their discussion on financial markets with the observation that most markets had been relatively steady over the past month, despite uncertainty about fiscal negotiations in the United States and the Greek bailout package.
Ongoing cost pressures and the recent softening in demand had put pressure on some businesses’ profits and liquid reserves, most notably in the construction sector and the arts and hospitality sector.
Members noted that the task facing monetary policy in future would become more difficult if a continuation of poor productivity growth were combined with an expectation of growth in nominal wages and profits at the same sorts of rates seen over the past two decades.
The Chinese renminbi had also continued to edge lower; the effective exchange rate had depreciated partly because of the appreciation of the yen, which has a significant weight in China's trade-weighted basket.
Members observed that conditions in financial markets continued to be characterised by low volatility, notwithstanding the heightened geopolitical tensions in Ukraine and Gaza, as well as the ongoing uncertainty about the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate in the United States.
Headline inflation was being affected by higher prices for petrol and newly constructed homes, as well as strains in global supply chains.
The improved outlook for activity and employment was expected to lift private sector wages growth a little over the forecast period.
Members observed that the major currencies had changed little since the previous Board meeting.
The Australian Government budget included additional transfer payments, including to low-income households, to help address cost-of-living pressures.
For example, heightened geopolitical tensions had increased the prospect of cyber-attacks that could have systemic implications.
In the United States, the yield curve was now as steep as it had been in previous decades.
Combined with other measures of potential labour supply currently classified as outside the labour force, this suggested there was still a pool of workers available to firms should the demand for labour continue to increase.
While overall conditions had eased relative to 2015, some indicators had strengthened over the previous few months.
These various responses were providing considerable support to Australian households and businesses through this very difficult period.
Commercial property seemed to be a key point of weakness in several countries.
Members noted that non-mining business investment was expected to have declined further in the September quarter and the outlook remained weak.
Members observed that business investment had been stronger than forecast a year earlier.
After declining in July, the value of retail sales rose in August and September, but was unchanged in October.
However, the level of yields on semis had nonetheless fallen to low levels.
They would be reviewed following receipt of the national accounts data for the December quarter.
Members noted that, overall, the Bank expected year-ended GDP growth to be 2¾ per cent over 2019 and 2020.
Private sector financing conditions had tightened a little in most advanced economies since the previous meeting.
Government bond yields had declined over the past month to as low as 3.8 per cent in the United States, though more recently they had risen a little from that trough.
Members observed that housing credit growth overall had been steady during the first part of 2017, with slower growth in lending to investors largely offset by a pick-up in the growth of lending to owner-occupiers.
The Board remains committed to the 3-year Australian Government bond yield target of 10 basis points.
Market pricing suggested that the federal funds rate was expected to decline by a further 100 basis points or so over the following year.
Members discussed the implications of the outbreak of the Delta variant for the Bank's bond purchase program.
Moreover, some further rise in wages growth would not necessarily be cause for concern, given the flexible and medium-term nature of the inflation target, so long as inflation expectations remained well anchored.
Members also agreed that, while less accommodative monetary policy would, all else equal, see lower housing prices and credit growth, it would result in fewer jobs and lower wages growth, which would in turn create further distance from the goals of monetary policy – namely, full employment and inflation sustainably within the target range.
The recovery in the United States appeared to be continuing at a moderate pace, notwithstanding some signs that fiscal consolidation was weighing on private demand.
While there had been additional evidence of the coming strong pick-up in investment in the resources sector, activity remained quite subdued in some other important parts of the economy, partly reflecting the Board's earlier actions as well as the appreciation of the exchange rate.
However, employment was flat or falling in manufacturing and goods distribution.
Tighter credit standards and APRA's supervisory measures had been helpful in containing the build-up of risk on household balance sheets.
Market participants had not ruled out the prospect of additional monetary policy support in the period ahead, including the possibility of negative policy rates in a number of jurisdictions.
Members noted that a range of important questions arose from assessments of the true trend in productivity in the Australian economy, including those relating to potential growth and living standards.
While the exchange rate had depreciated over the month, members agreed that it remained uncomfortably high and a lower level would likely be needed to achieve balanced growth in the economy.
Auction clearance rates in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up over February.
In contrast, the price of oil had increased in recent weeks.
Nevertheless, spot prices for Australia's bulk commodities were still above those in the June quarter 2010 export contracts.
Nationwide measures of housing prices had increased by around 9 per cent over the year to September.
Growth in incomes had been particularly strong in the June and September quarters of 2020, as fiscal transfers such as social assistance and subsidy payments had more than offset the declines in labour and financial income.
Those projections remained above market expectations, which had flattened further following the FOMC's reassessment and again after the release of weaker-than-expected employment data for March.
There was a significant contribution from the inventory cycle.
Government bond yields in the major countries had increased from their recent lows, following safe-haven buying by investors during August, and had returned to the range that they had traded in for the past few years.
Profitability had increased, partly because of growth in investment banking activity and lending.
The share of firms in the Bank's liaison program with wage freezes in place had remained high, and most firms had continued to report limited upward pressure on wages despite anecdotal reports of labour shortages in small segments of the labour market.
Commodity prices had remained high in recent months.
Lower prospective growth in demand was expected to reduce both goods and services inflation over time.
Share prices in Japan had not been as strong as elsewhere, and had shown little change since the start of the year after the sharp increases in the previous two years.
More broadly, bank funding costs were estimated to have declined a little further in recent months.
Wages growth could pick up faster than expected if labour market conditions tightened by more than expected.
The Australian dollar had depreciated slightly over the past month, but remained close to its post-float high.
Members noted that most lenders had passed on the increase in the cash rate in full to existing variable-rate housing and small business borrowers.
The decline in the exchange rate seen to date would assist in achieving balanced growth in the economy, though members noted that the exchange rate remained high by historical standards.
This increase reflected a combination of factors including lower economic growth, lower-than-expected capital gains tax revenue and changes in the timing of some policy measures.
However, underemployment was still high and the recent upswing in new cases of the virus in the northern hemisphere could damage these economies' labour markets in the period ahead.
Similarly, members observed that some firms were indexing their prices, either implicitly or directly, to past inflation.
In corporate bond markets, issuance in the United States had slowed in April following its high level in the March quarter.
The softening in global activity had been associated with a general decline in commodity prices.
Other commodity prices were also high at present.
On a year-ended basis, underlying inflation was running at around 2½ per cent, the midpoint of the medium-term target range.
The reduced flow of new arrivals to Australia was also affecting some markets.
Turnover had also increased to around its highest level in a number of years, with many properties staying on the market for short periods of time.
National housing price growth had remained robust in February and most capital cities had experienced at least moderate price increases.
A month earlier, members had noted that there were some tentative signs that Chinese growth might be stabilising at a more sustainable pace.
The difficulty the Fed had in getting cash to flow to the institutions most in need, despite the actual fed funds rate being well below target, led it on 17 August to cut the discount rate from 100 basis points to 50 basis points above the fed funds target rate.
Also, the US dollar and Japanese yen had appreciated, while the Chinese renminbi had depreciated.
Over the past year, resource exports had grown strongly and further growth was in prospect as the production of liquefied natural gas ramped up.
Members commenced their discussion of the domestic economy with a review of the consumer price index (CPI) for the June quarter.
It was noted that around half of the contraction in total hours worked had been reversed in preceding months, with average hours picking up more quickly than employment.
Global equity prices had recovered to around the peak reached in April, but prices of financial stocks remained well below that level.
Vaccine supplies remained limited in many emerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries.
The momentum in housing price increases had broadened recently to include the largest capital cities and the more expensive segments of these markets, although the increase in overall housing prices in Australia during the pandemic had been more modest than in a number of other countries.
In aggregate, the outlook was for growth in Australia's major trading partners to remain a little below average, as previously forecast.
The Australian dollar had depreciated by 5 per cent against the US dollar and by 4 per cent on a trade-weighted basis over the past month, taking the exchange rate to around its lowest level since 2009 on both measures.
Members observed that such pricing was indicative of investors expecting benign economic outcomes.
Members observed that the increasing use of technology to replace manual effort in the finance sector and long-run increases in the quality and size of homes, as well as a greater number of dwellings per capita, were likely to have contributed to these trends.
The price of oil had increased by around 70 per cent since recent lows and this had occurred alongside ongoing speculation about potential caps to OPEC production and signs that oil production in the United States was likely to decline.
Nevertheless, with central banks expected to maintain expansionary policy settings and risk premiums generally low, global financial conditions remained accommodative.
Meeting this condition will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it was at the time of the meeting.
New figures in a month's time would help clarify the situation.
This step had partly sought to offset the reduction in liquidity resulting from sales of foreign reserves by the PBC in recent months.
Residential building approvals had declined further over May and June and were around their lowest levels in six years.
The Board's judgement was that, given the substantial degree of policy stimulus that had been imparted, it was prudent to hold the cash rate steady while continuing to gauge the effects, but not to close off the possibility of reducing it further should that be appropriate to support sustainable growth in economic activity, consistent with the inflation target.
Government bond yields had remained very low across advanced economies partly as a result of these purchases and despite strong issuance by governments.
Despite dwelling prices declining relative to incomes and rises in rental yields, forward-looking indicators implied little prospect of an imminent recovery in housing construction.
Nonetheless, actual yields across the curve remained low.
While some of these purchases were retained in euros, a sizeable share was converted into other currencies, including a modest amount in the Australian dollar.
This was partly because many workers had maintained attachment to their employers while on reduced or zero hours in states affected by lockdowns.
The lagged response to higher housing prices and a period of low building activity had raised the likelihood that dwelling investment would be stronger in the medium term than currently expected.
Members noted that current market pricing implied around an even chance of a 25 basis point easing in monetary policy at this meeting.
Members discussed the implications of recent developments for the economic outlook.
Members noted that the Australian banks were in a strong position to withstand the large economic shock from the COVID-19 outbreak and financial market volatility.
Interest rates on housing and business loans remained historically low.
Members agreed that, if developments unfolded as currently expected, monetary policy would need to be adjusted further over time to lessen the degree of stimulus.
Consumption growth had strengthened, though this probably reflected, in part, the government payments made over recent months.
In addition, the global activity data had been somewhat softer and downside risks to the international economy had become a little more prominent over the past month, especially in the case of sovereign debt problems in Europe.
That said, a number of state governments had offered lump-sum payments to some of their public sector employees, in part to offset higher living costs.
Global financial conditions remained accommodative.
This was particularly so at the shorter end of the yield curve, reflecting the expectation that policy rates in the major economies would remain low for an extended period.
The forecasts assumed a rise in the cash rate over the year ahead.
Apart from the Japanese share market, which had shown little net change in 2006 following the sharp rise in 2005, most other countries' share markets had risen by 10–15 per cent this year.
In contrast, measures of year-ended headline and core inflation in the United States had picked up in recent months.
Improvements in labour market conditions were expected to reverse temporarily in the September quarter as a result of the lockdowns in Greater Sydney and other parts of the country.
The RBNZ had indicated that an increase in its policy rate would be appropriate soon because the economy is experiencing capacity constraints, inflationary pressures are building and inflation is near the RBNZ's target.
Growth in business and dwelling investment had been stronger than expected, supported by targeted fiscal measures.
The banks had also increased their liquid asset holdings and their Liquidity Coverage Ratios were well above the 100 per cent minimum requirement.
Rents had continued to fall in Perth and had been slightly lower in Brisbane, where valuations for some new inner-city apartments had declined below their purchase prices.
The Bank of Japan's latest policy announcement included a facility to enhance access to US dollar swap lines, which reduced the cost of borrowing US dollars in exchange for yen.
In China, growth in economic activity had slowed in a number of sectors.
In the month of February, the participation rate had declined a little and the unemployment rate had fallen back to 5.8 per cent.
Various factors might explain the weak productivity outcomes, including COVID-19-related disruptions and strong growth in employment in government-funded services, where achieving productivity increases is often difficult.
Across the advanced economies, unemployment rates had trended lower and surveys had suggested that more firms were facing labour shortages.
The December quarter 2020 national accounts showed that GDP in Australia had recovered to close to pre-pandemic levels, whereas GDP was still considerably below pre-pandemic levels in many other countries.
Consistent with this, growth in household credit had remained well below the average rate of recent years, and housing loan approvals had fallen in January and February.
Low population growth, reflecting reduced net overseas migration in particular, was also expected to affect high-density residential investment for some time to come.
Employment had increased at an above-average pace over the past year and the unemployment rate had declined.
Equity prices had generally declined but remained higher than at the start of the year.
They noted the staff’s assessment that aggregate demand had continued to exceed aggregate supply but that the gap was closing.
Unemployment rates in the advanced economies had declined, but the tighter conditions in labour markets had not flowed through to higher growth in wages or broader inflation pressures.
After peaking in the September quarter, Australia's terms of trade fell by almost 5 per cent in the December quarter 2011, owing to declines in bulk commodity prices.
Members recognised that the calibration of this guidance was not precise or straightforward.
Members noted that economic recoveries from financial crises tended to be slower, and that fiscal consolidation was also likely to be a drag on growth in coming years.
Members contrasted these measures with the actions taken by the US Federal Reserve at its June meeting, when it again reduced its asset purchases by a further US$10 billion to US$35 billion per month, down from a peak of US$85 billion per month in 2013.
If slower growth in demand could be expected to result in a more moderate inflation outcome, then a case could be made for a further easing of monetary policy.
In the United States, fiscal stimulus was expected to support growth in output over the period ahead and was likely to add to inflationary pressures as the US economy encountered capacity constraints.
This reversal of capital flows had been reflected in large depreciations of emerging market currencies against the US dollar.
Service exports had been particularly affected given that inbound tourism had essentially ceased as a result of travel restrictions.
The Board would continue to monitor both how the global economy evolved and the course of domestic economic activity and prices.
The slowdown in Asia had been more persistent than earlier anticipated and had contributed to lower commodity prices, along with increased supply of commodities, including from Australia.
Elsewhere, the European Central Bank (ECB) had foreshadowed additional monetary stimulus unless the outlook for inflation in the euro area improved.
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global economy had continued to recover from the largest contraction in decades, supported by a substantial fiscal and monetary policy response and the easing of measures to contain the virus in some countries.
Adjusting for this, in underlying terms wages growth had remained stable at just over 4 per cent, having increased slowly from around 3 per cent over the past eight years.
Company analysts had continued to revise up their estimates for overall profit growth in the year ahead, though within the aggregate, estimates of profit growth of resource companies had been revised down.
Investment in the resources sector was picking up very strongly and some related services sectors were experiencing better-than-average conditions.
The changes in bond yields globally had been associated with higher volatility, though with considerably less spillover to other markets than in March and April 2020.
Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities had risen by around 40 basis points since the previous meeting, exceeding 3 per cent for the first time since 2015.
Resource exports appeared to have continued growing in the December quarter and growth was expected to remain strong, particularly as liquefied natural gas (LNG) production came on line over the next year or so.
Accordingly, members judged the current stance of monetary policy to be consistent with fostering sustainable growth and low inflation, while leaving adequate flexibility to respond to developments as needed over the period ahead.
The large fiscal consolidation required over the next several years was likely to lead to a serious economic contraction.
The labour market remained strong, with employment increasing by nearly 60,000 over November and December, and the unemployment rate falling to 5 per cent.
There had been minimal issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities.
Global credit market conditions had generally been stable with solid issuance, including by sub-investment-grade issuers in the United States.
The European Central Bank had injected liquidity into the banking system through a one-year repurchase agreement at a fixed rate of 1 per cent, which had prompted a fall in short-term rates of more than 30 basis points in the euro area.
Turning to the labour market and wages, members observed that there had been no sign of slowing in employment growth, which had been steady at just below 3 per cent in year-ended terms for the past year or so.
In underlying terms, inflation had increased from 2½ per cent at the end of 2005 to around 3 per cent in the September quarter 2006, where it had remained in the final quarter of the year.
News of the Volkswagen emissions scandal in late September adversely affected European equities, while equity prices in emerging markets had partly recovered from their falls in late August, although they remained lower than at the start of the year.
Staff forecasts suggested that inflation, despite recent higher readings, was likely to be consistent with the 2–3 per cent target over the next two years.
This was a significant change from the strong rate of increase over 2007.
Recent data suggested that growth had probably slowed a little from that reported for the first quarter to be around trend pace.
Some economies, including the United States and United Kingdom, had seen relatively modest declines in inflation so far, although the extent of the contraction in economic activity that had occurred suggested that further disinflation was likely.
More recently, as a result of the increase in lending rates to investors in housing, a significant amount of housing lending had been reclassified from investment to owner-occupation.
In the business sector, members observed that the NAB survey for the month of January showed a divergence between business conditions and business confidence.
Members noted that conditions in the established housing market had continued to vary across the country.
Mining investment was expected to increase over the forecast period as mining firms invest to maintain production; this outlook was supported by mining firms' profitability having remained strong.
Employment in July continued to expand at around the same pace as that of the working-age population and the unemployment rate had remained steady at 5¼ per cent.
Elsewhere in the region, some central banks had also eased monetary policy, and modest fiscal measures were being deployed in some countries.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics measure of job vacancies had reached its highest level as a share of the labour force since the late 1970s, when the series commenced, and measures of firms' hiring intentions from business surveys had been strong.
Nevertheless, the available data suggested that private investment growth had picked up but remained low.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions for a return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the 2 to 3 per cent target.
In discussing recent developments in global inflation, members noted that global supply chain bottlenecks and higher commodity prices had contributed to an increase in producer price inflation in a number of countries.
Nevertheless, credit conditions for some borrowers had remained tighter than they had been for some time following the strengthening of lending policies and practices over recent years.
The effects of stimulatory monetary policy were continuing to emerge.
Members noted that, from October, the Australian Bureau of Statistics would commence publishing a monthly CPI indicator, which would provide a timelier read on price pressures – though it could take some time for reliable trends to be discernible.
Employment growth had been running well above growth in the working-age population and, in preceding months, had been concentrated in full-time employment.
The outlook for 2010 was also slightly stronger.
Members observed that inflation in many countries was increasingly driven by domestic demand pressures, and that the longer high inflation persists, the more central banks might need to tighten monetary policy to rein in inflation and contain inflation expectations.
Members noted the strong global competition to supply the Chinese market and that Australia does not have the same natural comparative advantage in other exports as it has in some resources.
Recent developments in commodity prices suggested that the terms of trade for Australia had been little changed in the March quarter.
Members noted that financial markets had generally experienced low volatility over preceding months.
Nonetheless, the terms of trade were still expected to decline over the following two years, partly reflecting prospective increases in low-cost supplies of bulk commodities.
On foreign exchange markets, members observed that the US dollar remained near its lows in both nominal and real effective terms.
Employment had increased in every state since the start of 2017, including solid growth in the mining-exposed states.
Alternatively, higher commodity prices, persistent supply chain bottlenecks and firms' reduced ability to address labour shortages through access to workers from abroad could mean that wages growth and inflation picked up earlier and more rapidly than expected as the economy continued to expand.
With Asia accounting for more than half of Japan's total exports, strength in domestic demand in the region was benefiting the Japanese economy, which had registered strong growth in the March quarter.
There was little spare capacity in the economy, with the unemployment rate very low.
Taking into account all of the available information, and the need to balance the risks associated with high household debt in a low-inflation environment, the Board judged that holding the stance of monetary policy unchanged would be consistent with sustainable growth in the economy and achieving the inflation target over time.
Housing prices in Perth and apartment prices in Brisbane had fallen further.
As such, the March quarter inflation data had generally increased confidence in the forecast that underlying inflation would pick up to around 2 per cent by early 2018.
This, together with the €490 billion provided in its first liquidity operation, left European banks well positioned to fund their bond maturities for at least the first half of this year.
However, members noted that the new US administration might introduce more restrictive policies on trade and immigration, which would pose significant downside risks to the forecast for global growth.
However, a substantial part of the increase in employment appeared to reflect changes in the sample.
Members noted that the central forecast scenario was based on the usual technical assumption that the cash rate followed the path implied by market pricing, which suggested interest rates were expected to be lower over the next six months.
Members agreed that it would be important to reassess the economic outlook in February 2020, when the Bank would prepare updated forecasts.
Private-sector price measures had strengthened further in June, and the ABS data showed a very strong increase in the June quarter after being relatively weak in the March quarter.
There had also been declines in a number of other Asian currencies, prompted by concerns relating to the global economic slowdown and the effects of high oil prices.
Australian share prices declined in October to be little changed from the beginning of 2016.
Recent data on activity in the United Kingdom had remained relatively soft.
They also observed that this was partly because the holdings of government debt by the Bank were relatively low as a share of GDP.
Indeed, market pricing pointed to around a 40 per cent chance of one further rate increase in 2024, with reductions in the cash rate seen as likely in 2025.
Although mining investment had declined in the March quarter as large liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects approached completion, the medium-term outlook for mining investment had remained positive.
In considering the level of interest rates, members noted that the three increases in the cash rate late in 2009, together with the widening in the margins between the cash rate and many lending rates, had meant a material adjustment to the stance of monetary policy.
Turning to domestic financial markets, members noted that growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers had slowed to 5 per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, while growth in lending to investors in housing had stabilised at a rate of around 1 per cent.
These measures included closing some unprofitable state-owned firms, restructuring some debt, reducing the size of non-bank financing and reducing non-banks' interactions with banks.
The bushfires over the summer months were expected to have affected growth in both the December quarter 2019 and the March quarter 2020, after which recovery efforts were expected to boost growth.
In terms of monetary policy, the authorities had raised reserve requirements steadily over the past year and lifted lending and deposit rates.
Accommodative policy settings had helped sustain growth above estimates of potential for several years.
While observing that there were typically lags between labour markets tightening and wage pressures emerging, members noted that the wage data might suggest these economies had more spare capacity than implied by conventional measures.
Demand had, until then, been sustained by very strong growth in real gross domestic income, which had been boosted by the strong rise in the terms of trade.
While members judged that lower interest rates were supporting the economy through the usual transmission channels (including a lower exchange rate, higher asset prices and higher cash flows for borrowers), they recognised the negative effects of lower interest rates on savers and confidence.
Members noted that supply concerns in the iron ore market had eased somewhat, and ongoing strength in Chinese steel demand had been met by an increase in iron ore imports.
Growth in advanced economies had slowed in response to tighter monetary policy and cost-of-living pressures, but not by as much as expected in some cases.
Members noted that market functioning in sovereign bond markets had improved significantly, as had conditions in key money markets.
Most of the increases in bond yields had reflected increases in expected inflation to levels that were consistent with or below central banks' targets.
Corporate bond issuance in Australian had also been strong, particularly offshore.
The trade surplus was at its highest level, and the current account deficit at its lowest level, measured as a share of GDP, since the 1970s.
There had been a large amount of domestic issuance as well.
Although residential building approvals had fallen in the September quarter and liaison indicated that pre-sales had become harder to obtain, the large pipeline of work yet to be done was expected to support dwelling investment at a high level over the following year or two.
Members noted that the risks around the wage and price inflation forecasts were evenly balanced.
In turn, this had led to a decline in spreads on term deposit ‘specials’ relative to equivalent term swap rates.
These increases would add about ¼ percentage point to the change in the CPI in each period.
Consumer spending, which accounts for the bulk of spending in the economy, had slowed noticeably since mid year as the effects of the boost to incomes from the package of tax rebates in the June quarter faded.
This had been most evident in Sydney, where housing prices had continued to decline across most segments of the market.
The ABS capital expenditure survey also indicated that non-mining business investment had been little changed over the past couple of years.
It was possible that this combination could continue for a while yet, but it was also possible that inflation could pick up by more than expected as spare capacity diminished.
Members noted that dwelling investment had picked up over the preceding year or so, partly in response to an easing in housing policies in 2015.
Fiscal outcomes were also diverging, with the latest IMF forecasts showing a significant upward revision to the expected debt/GDP ratio in Greece, which was now forecast to rise to around 190 per cent partly as a result of the weaker economy.
However, the prices for iron ore had recently fallen sharply, after initial resilience relative to other commodity prices.
While the financial situation in Europe remained fragile, the likelihood of an extremely bad outcome seemed to have diminished somewhat over the previous couple of months, partly reflecting actions by the European policymakers.
Resource exports looked to have rebounded in the September quarter, following earlier disruptions from adverse weather and some unanticipated shutdowns of LNG facilities.
Members noted that housing interest rates had increased a little over 2017, particularly for investors and interest-only loans.
Members noted that output growth was expected to pick up gradually from its below-average pace over the past year to exceed 3 per cent in 2017.
However, members noted that significant uncertainties around the forecasts remained, with scenarios where an increase in the cash rate would be appropriate at some point and other scenarios where a decrease in the cash rate would be appropriate.
Members noted that it was difficult to predict the effectiveness of recent policy measures in China and how the authorities would balance their objectives of supporting growth and containing financial risks.
Prices of tradable items declined in the December quarter.
There was no market expectation of any policy rate increase in the United States and the United Kingdom in the period ahead because of weaker-than-expected data.
Funding conditions more generally for Australian financial and non-financial corporations remained favourable.
Policy measures had continued to support growth and had been tilted towards steel-intensive activities.
Members noted that this would tend to increase liquidity and had been associated with a general decline in interest rates, which would help to offset the increased cost of finance associated with measures aimed at restricting the availability of credit provided by non-bank entities.
Yields on government bonds in the major markets had been volatile in the past month, reflecting the competing concerns of rising inflationary risks and the effects of the renewed credit disruption.
Members observed that, after abstracting from the effects of the earlier natural disasters, growth over the year had been close to trend.
The United States was the main exception, with relatively firm growth in real incomes and consumption underpinning robust economic growth.
New data on mortgage delinquencies in the US for the March quarter showed a rise to about 14 per cent for sub-prime loans, but there had been little change in the proportion of prime loans that were delinquent; this remained low.
Nevertheless, measures of aggregate wage growth remained high relative to the slow rate of productivity growth, implying that unit labour costs were growing more quickly.
The inventory cycle was expected to contribute to growth, after the subtractions brought on by the rapid de-stocking in the March quarter.
At the same time, wages growth had remained low and there were few indications that wage pressures were building.
Wages growth was expected to remain around its recent rate over the forecast period.
The five major Australian banks had now all announced their profits for the 2005/06 financial year, mostly ending in September (except for the CBA, whose financial year ended in June).
Market participants expected the next moves in policy rates in Canada, New Zealand and Australia to be down.
The authorities in some economies had moved to tighten policy somewhat recently, but monetary policies were still expansionary in the region.
Recent data had pointed to subdued price pressures across the economy in the June quarter.
GDP growth was expected to be quite strong for the September quarter, although not as rapid as in the June quarter.
There were some dampening factors affecting the outlook for the US economy, but these had had little effect elsewhere thus far, and global economic growth was expected to continue at an above-average pace next year.
The various forward-looking indicators were stronger than a year earlier, but remained at levels consistent with only modest employment growth in the months ahead.
A key ongoing uncertainty was the possibility that the slowing in the Chinese property market would have larger-than-expected ripple effects throughout the broader economy.
A key question was whether the necessary adjustment was occurring at an overall pace of growth that kept the economy close to trend and inflation close to target.
Members noted that these observations meant there remained a risk that output growth slows more sharply than expected; if so, it would bring inflation back to target more quickly than expected.
Members noted that Japanese equity prices had risen by nearly 5 per cent on the last day of October in response to the unexpected further easing in the BoJ's monetary policy.
As a result of the strong growth in output, measures of productivity had increased by almost 3 per cent over the year to the June quarter, well above average productivity growth in recent years.
On balance, with growth expected to remain below trend for longer and inflation to remain within the target even with the effects of a lower exchange rate, members concluded that a lower level of the cash rate would better contribute to achieving sustainable growth in demand consistent with the inflation target.
The staff continued to expect that the floods could take around ½ percentage point off growth in each of the December and March quarters, though ongoing problems in de-watering coal mines meant that the downside risks for the March quarter appeared larger than at the time of the February meeting.
Longer-term sovereign yields of most other developed countries, including Australia, tended to move in line with US Treasuries.
Looking at business conditions more broadly, members noted that commercial loan approvals, though typically volatile, had fallen sharply from the high levels recorded in 2007.
Liaison had indicated significant caution in hiring intentions, with firms waiting for evidence of growth in demand before looking to increase staff levels.
The euro area and Japanese economies had grown faster than their potential growth rates over 2016, resulting in further improvements in labour market conditions.
Both central banks were widely expected to have ceased net asset purchases by that time.
More timely payroll data suggested the number of jobs in the weeks up to early August had declined a little, with a notable drop in jobs in Victoria.
However, the authorities' goal of allowing the market to play a ‘decisive role’ in allocating resources was still some way from being realised.
Estimates of the neutral rate tend to be correlated across countries over time, reflecting similar global influences on saving and investment as well as spillovers across borders.
However, the WPI measure including bonuses implied that private-sector wage growth had been little changed for the past two years.
Risks related to some international political developments had also increased over the preceding six months, although markets had generally reacted in an orderly manner so far.
Prices of resource stocks were still noticeably below the peak in May, whereas prices of financial and industrial company stocks had mostly recovered the May peaks.
Equity markets in the advanced economies had been little changed in March, having previously rebounded from their sharp fall in late 2018.
More broadly, information from the Bank's liaison program indicated that upstream price pressures were being passed on by firms, as global and domestic supply chain pressures had persisted and demand had remained strong.
In Australia, expectations for the cash rate implied by market prices had been little changed over the preceding month after increasing in late October following the release of the September quarter Consumer Price Index (CPI) and market participants' increased expectations of the removal of the yield target.
Inflationary pressures were expected to pick up in response to above-trend growth in output and gradually tightening labour market conditions.
Recent levels of loan commitments suggested that housing credit growth could reach a six-month-ended annualised rate of around 10 per cent by early 2022.
For the advanced economies as a whole, budget deficits had increased more quickly, and by a larger amount, than in previous downturns, reflecting the synchronised nature of the current downturn and the significant discretionary easing of fiscal policy.
Members noted that these price developments could be largely explained by increases in supply, although easing demand was also a factor.
However, both the retail and transportation sectors had experienced well below-average conditions.
These conditions would, over time, help the economy negotiate the prospective downshift in resources investment via a switch to other sources of demand.
A notable exception was Japan, where the market was more than 15 per cent lower.
The outlook for non-mining business investment had improved further and the pick-up in public infrastructure investment was also supporting overall growth.
Market pricing no longer implied a reduction in the cash rate in 2024, and the Australian dollar had appreciated modestly, though remained within its recent range.
This was resulting in an upward drift in short-term market rates towards the ECB's policy rate.
Members noted that conditions in established housing markets had continued to vary considerably.
Members observed that inflation had increased, but remained low in underlying terms.
Data on approvals in recent months suggested that construction of non-residential buildings was likely to make a smaller contribution to growth in non-mining business investment in future.
meat), and several of these effects tended to be reversed in the period following drought.
Similarly, equity prices had declined a little for Australian banks but by much less than for other major banking systems.
Issuance of Kangaroo bonds (Australian dollar issues by offshore issuers) had been strong recently, taking advantage of the favourable cross-currency basis swap spread for such issuers.
The US dollar had depreciated significantly against the currencies of other advanced economies over recent months, including the Australian dollar.
Low interest rates were working to support demand, although it was difficult to judge the extent to which this would offset the expected substantial decline in mining investment and the effect of planned fiscal consolidation.
Members noted that it was not clear which assets the Chinese authorities had sold as part of the recent intervention nor which assets were being bought by those taking capital out of China, but given the potential size of these flows, their effects on asset markets could be large.
In signs of improving credit market conditions, US corporate bond issuance had been high in the past two months across the rating spectrum.
Prices of non-tradable items, which were mainly services, had increased strongly over the past year; the largest contributions in the June quarter had come from increases in rents, house purchase and health-related costs.
The central authorities had announced further support for social housing construction as well as additional restrictions on property transactions.
Forward-looking indicators had generally been consistent with the unemployment rate being around its current level or possibly slightly lower in the months ahead.
Domestically, the increase in GDP growth in the June quarter confirmed that some of the weakness in the previous quarter had been temporary and was consistent with expectations that growth would increase gradually over the coming year, supported by the current stance of monetary policy.
Members acknowledged that the primary response to the COVID-19 outbreak was to manage people's health, but that other arms of policy, including monetary and fiscal policy, would play an important role in reducing the economic and financial disruption.
Members were informed that the most accurate indicator of current trends in house prices was the Case-Shiller series, which was a monthly repeat-sales index derived from sales of houses in the 20 largest cities.
The US share market rose early in November but declined later in the month following the release of softer than expected economic data.
This reflected the lower level of liquidity in these short-term bonds and the tendency for demand to taper off when bonds are no longer in the basket for the three-year bond futures and as they approach maturity.
In monthly terms, growth in credit to owner-occupiers had increased in late 2021, after easing over the preceding few months, while growth in credit to investors had continued to rise.
However, services inflation remained high.
In view of this, members acknowledged the importance of a strong relationship between the Bank and other regulators, particularly APRA.
Public demand was expected to be sustained at a high level over the coming year; the decline in public consumption as the pandemic and flood-related support rolls off was expected to be largely offset by capital investment programs.
Elsewhere, housing prices had generally increased in recent months.
Members noted that the ongoing improvement in domestic demand, together with the increased competitiveness from the lower exchange rate, were expected to lead to a pick-up in non-mining business investment in the second half of the forecast period.
Lower numbers of international student arrivals would be likely to reduce aggregate demand (including for housing), but also lower growth in population and therefore the economy’s supply capacity.
With inflation rates in the region trending higher, the authorities were gradually removing monetary stimulus.
While measured employment had declined further and the unemployment rate had increased in October, the labour force survey for that month had been conducted prior to the lifting of lockdowns in New South Wales and Victoria.
Labour market conditions in the United States had begun to soften in the past few months, with a fall in non-farm payrolls in August and downward revisions to the growth in payrolls in the preceding two months.
Given this, it would be premature to consider withdrawing monetary stimulus.
Growth in housing credit for owner-occupiers had remained around 6 per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, while growth in credit for housing investors was noticeably faster, at over 10 per cent measured on the same basis.
The forecast for inflation had been revised up, and over the next couple of years it was likely that inflation would not be much below the top of the target range.
These measures were projected to result in an expansion of the BoE's balance sheet over 2017, although the BoE's asset holdings as a share of GDP were projected to remain lower than those of the European Central Bank, and well below those of the Bank of Japan (BoJ).
Members observed that the unemployment rate had declined more quickly than expected, to 3.5 per cent in June – its lowest level in almost 50 years.
Members noted that the domestic economy appeared to be growing at around trend pace in the June quarter, though activity continued to vary significantly across industries.
The retail trade data had suggested relatively subdued sales in December but solid growth in January.
Weakness in retail sales over the past year was concentrated in the smaller retailers, but these data were less reliable than previously, owing to reduced sampling.
High growth in population and nominal labour incomes and the difficulties associated with building new dwellings had supported demand for established housing nationally, despite recent increases in the cost of credit.
Members also observed the trade-offs that could be considered in the design of any future scheme.
The Board is committed to learning from this experience.
Issuance of government-guaranteed debt by banks in the United States and Australia had continued to be very strong.
Members observed that growth in China had been stronger than expected over 2017, but that investment growth had slowed and conditions in the industrial sector had softened over recent months, partly because of government policies to reduce pollution.
Members discussed two other risks to global financial stability, outside of China, that were relevant to Australia.
Monetary policy settings remained very stimulatory in all advanced economies.
Members noted the importance of banks maintaining their lending standards.
Given the exchange rate adjustment that was occurring, and with the substantial degree of monetary stimulus already in place, members assessed the current stance of policy to be appropriate for the time being.
Alternatively, in the downside scenario, the unemployment rate would be expected to peak at around 10½ per cent, and decline very gradually to around 9 per cent by the end of the forecast period.
The latest CPI data were regarded as providing confirmation that prices had indeed increased more modestly over the past six months than had been the case around the middle of 2006.
Spare capacity in the labour market appeared to have been fully absorbed in Japan, the United States and Germany, although some spare capacity appeared to remain in other parts of the euro area.
Members discussed the implications of the current financial market turmoil for global economic prospects, particularly through the channel of credit provision to businesses and households.
Members judged that the level of aggregate demand was still above the level of aggregate supply.
Measures of inflation expectations – from consumers, market economists, union officials and financial markets – had remained below average.
These indicators had suggested that the ongoing recovery in labour market conditions could be broadly sufficient to offset the job losses arising after the end of the JobKeeper program.
Turning to developments in the household sector, members noted that growth in household consumption had increased in the September quarter to be close to its decade average in year-ended terms.
More generally, the Northern Territory had a relatively young population and high labour market participation rates.
In July, the Bank of Canada raised its policy rate for the first time in seven years and financial market participants expected further increases.
House prices had increased more strongly in the September quarter.
If there were another serious economic setback, a different set of options would need to be considered.
Resource exports had continued to make a significant contribution to growth.
The case to hold the cash rate target constant reflected the view that the data over the prior month did not warrant a material revision to the outlook and that there is the possibility of a larger rise in the unemployment rate than anticipated.
Measures of core inflation had also drifted downwards, and were now a little below medium-term targets in a number of the advanced economies.
Resource shares had fallen in the month, reflecting concern about the possibility of a slowdown in the US and the wider implications that would flow from that, but other sectors of the share market had risen further.
Members had a detailed discussion of spare capacity in the labour market.
It had also been communicating that this was likely to require a faster rate of wages growth than had been experienced over previous years.
Information on economic activity suggested that the pace of growth in demand and output outside the resources and related sectors was a little lower than had been expected earlier in the year.
The easing in population growth over the past year helped to reconcile below-average growth in output with the relatively steady unemployment rate.
More generally, members noted that business conditions across and within states remained uneven, with some industries experiencing very challenging conditions, while others, including professional services, appeared to have weathered the recent period reasonably well.
Members noted that consumer sentiment had remained well below average in the past few months, with this being particularly evident in consumers' views on buying conditions.
Against this background, the recent improvement in labour market data had been a positive development.
Policy settings remained supportive of the recovery and national income had been substantially boosted by the large increases in commodity prices; it was likely that the terms of trade would exceed previous highs.
There had been acknowledgement that achieving this target would require some additional support from fiscal and financial policy.
Notwithstanding the general deterioration in financial market sentiment, conditions in global money markets were considerably better than late last year.
This was prompted by ongoing developments in the international regulatory architecture, where it has become increasingly common for central banks to provide more detailed information on ELA arrangements to assist banks in their contingency planning.
The Chinese equity market had weakened over the past two months.
The unemployment rate had been rising gradually over the past six months.
The terms of trade had declined in the June quarter, reflecting lower bulk commodity prices.
Members discussed a paper that reviewed the Bank’s approach to reducing its holdings of government bonds that had been purchased during the pandemic to support markets and provide economic stimulus.
Some lenders had reversed some of the tightening in the availability of housing finance that had occurred earlier in the pandemic, which had mostly reflected the application of existing credit standards in the context of weaker economic conditions.
In due course, inflation would be pushed up for a period by the lower exchange rate, but even so was forecast to be around the middle of the target range.
Overall, the market had been relatively strong, having risen by 12 per cent over the year to date.
Members observed that, in some countries, there appeared to be an adverse cycle whereby fiscal consolidation was weakening growth, which was leading to yet further fiscal tightening in an attempt to meet previously announced deficit targets.
Conditions in established housing markets in Sydney and Melbourne remained robust, but housing prices had been falling in Perth.
Members noted that the level of industrial production had fallen back to that of 25 years ago.
These developments did not suggest investors were having any problems in meeting their obligations and, in any event, market indices had subsequently risen.
The CPI had increased by 0.1 per cent in the quarter (in seasonally adjusted terms) and by 1.5 per cent over the year.
In part, this reflected continued slow growth in wages.
Over the past month, monetary policy had been tightened in the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand.
Members noted that meat prices had also been supported by strong demand from China to replace lost domestic pork production as a result of African swine flu and were likely to remain high for some time after the drought breaks, given that it would take time to rebuild herds.
The US dollar and Japanese yen had depreciated a little, while the Chinese renminbi had appreciated.
However, members observed that a range of indicators suggested that conditions in the housing market were stabilising.
As progress in lowering unemployment and having inflation return to the midpoint of the target was expected to be only gradual, members also agreed that there was not a strong case for a near-term adjustment in monetary policy.
In emerging economies, inflation remained uncomfortably high, particularly in India and China.
The Swiss franc had subsequently traded somewhat below the ceiling.
According to the latest national accounts, all components of demand, apart from housing investment, were increasing strongly and economic activity had expanded at a pace well above average over the year to June.
A few months earlier, it had appeared that those economies with poor fiscal positions might be able to wait until economic recovery was more firmly entrenched before undertaking significant fiscal consolidation.
Overall, however, total credit growth had picked up towards the end of 2007.
This included the effect of fixed interest rate loans rolling off over time.
A key question remained as to whether these developments would increase the capacity and willingness of European banks to lend.
Full-time employment had risen strongly again in May, to be around 6 per cent higher than its pre-pandemic level.
Turning to household consumption, members noted that the volume of retail sales declined in the June quarter, in part reflecting the unusually warm weather at the start of winter.
This meant that GDP was around 1 per cent below its December 2019 level at the end of 2020.
In assessing the appropriate stance for monetary policy in Australia, members noted that the outlook for global economic growth had not changed, with Australia's major trading partners forecast to grow by around the average of recent years in 2015.
This suggested that the risks associated with rising household sector leverage and rapid gains in housing prices had diminished.
Drought conditions in some parts of Australia were expected to result in lower overall rural production and exports in the period following the June quarter, although members noted that a record crop was expected in Western Australia.
Data for the US economy had been mixed, but prospects appeared to be gradually improving.
Members noted that the relative cost of issuance had continued to decline since the beginning of the year, though it remained higher than in mid 2011.
Members discussed issues surrounding high public debt levels in many advanced economies.
The tightening of monetary policy since May 2022 was still permeating through the economy and it would take some time for the full effects of this to be observed in the data.
In aggregate, the four major banks recorded solid profit results in the half year to September.
The Irish Government was in the process of dismantling Anglo Irish Bank, which had previously received sizable capital injections from the Government.
Both the Bank of England and the European Central Bank (ECB) were expected to ease monetary policy further in the near future.
Market expectations for the cash rate had been little changed, with market pricing still implying an expectation that the cash rate will begin to be increased from its current level late in 2022 or early in 2023.
The United States had proceeded to increase tariffs from 10 per cent to 25 per cent on US$200 billion of imports from China, and China had responded by announcing that tariffs would increase by 5–25 per cent on US$60 billion of US imports from 1 June 2019.
Members noted that household incomes continued to be supported by relatively favourable conditions in the labour market.
The main news in relation to inflation over the past month was the release of the wage price index for the December quarter, which indicated an increase of 1.2 per cent in the quarter and 4.3 per cent over the year.
Financial market conditions had remained favourable in most emerging markets, with the decline in government bond yields and the increase in equity prices since early 2017 having continued over the preceding month.
Current market pricing did not indicate any expectation of a change in monetary policy at this meeting.
Members discussed trends in retail spending.
Off-balance sheet financing had continued to decline, reflecting the authorities' efforts to discourage riskier forms of financing.
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy with the observation that growth in Australia's major trading partners had picked up in the September quarter, driven by an increase in growth in some Asian economies following weakness in the previous quarter.
The outlook for the global economy had been little changed, with the growth of Australia's major trading partners forecast to be a little above average in 2014 and 2015.
The Bank had purchased in aggregate around $36 billion of government bonds in secondary markets.
Overall business conditions had increased in the June quarter, according to the NAB survey, and were around previously recorded peaks Labour market data had continued to be strong.
GDP growth was expected to have slowed from the strong growth recorded in the March quarter, with export volumes declining following the very strong growth in the March quarter.
Money market spreads had fallen to low levels in the major markets and also in Australia, where they were now only a little above pre-crisis levels.
Conditions in the non-mining business sector remained subdued.
Consistent with market expectations for policy rates, longer term government bond yields had declined since the start of 2023 in most major advanced economies.
Members were mindful, however, that monetary policy was already expansionary and that the lower exchange rate was also supporting growth.
Despite the weakening labour market, wages, as measured by average earnings in the national accounts, had risen by around 6 per cent over 2008, well above its recent average.
In contrast, the non-resources business sector generally showed little sign of financial difficulties.
Data on capital expenditure intentions had pointed to a substantial and broad-based decline in non-mining investment over the following year or so.
Members noted that the household and business sectors in Australia had continued to display a relatively prudent approach towards their finances in recent quarters.
Market economists had also revised lower their expectations for further increases in the cash rate this year; the average expected peak in the cash rate had declined from 4.45 per cent prior to the August meeting to around 4.3 per cent subsequently.
Inflation in market-based services had remained steady, which was consistent with a lack of wage pressures in the economy.
Share markets in other developed countries had also been strong in 2006, apart from Japan, where the market had been relatively flat following a very strong year in 2005.
The Australian Government's budget had little effect on financial markets, with sales of Commonwealth Government Securities (CGS) continuing to be well received.
Inflation in India increased somewhat in July, which had prompted the Reserve Bank of India to tighten monetary policy.
However, members noted that the experience in Australia had been different from that in the United States, where job resignation rates were at historically high levels and were coming at a time when labour force participation and employment remained considerably below pre-pandemic levels.
The Chinese renminbi had depreciated further, to be around 5 per cent lower in trade-weighted terms than earlier in the year.
Non-tradables inflation had declined in the September quarter, suggesting that domestic inflationary pressures were well contained and consistent with low growth in labour costs and moderate demand growth.
Members discussed current influences on the participation rate, noting in particular the rise in participation by older female workers as they delayed their retirement.
The accounts confirmed that conditions varied considerably across sectors, with manufacturing output having been flat over the first three quarters of 2010, in contrast to solid rises in output in the mining sector and of some professional services.
However, iron ore prices had fallen since late March, which suggested that the Australian terms of trade were still likely to decline in the period ahead from their recent highs.
While the unemployment rate remained around the low levels of the preceding year, broader measures of labour underutilisation had increased a little and a range of indicators suggested the labour market was at a turning point.
Additionally, land sales to property developers are an important source of income for local governments, whose finances are already stretched.
Domestically, members noted that the economy appeared to be evolving broadly in line with the Bank's expectations.