Growth in household disposable income had picked up over 2017, partly reflecting the strength in employment growth over the course of the year.
There were some favourable signs in the Australian residential mortgage-backed securities market.
Nevertheless, members agreed that the outlook for domestic economic activity had eased a little, with a key source of uncertainty relating to the response of households to rising inflation, higher interest rates and declining housing prices in some cities.
Members stressed the importance of ES holders – in particular, banks – reflecting on the implications of the prospective framework for their own liquidity management operations as the stock of reserves declines.
Upward revisions to earlier data meant that nationwide housing prices were only slightly below their April 2022 peak.
It was slightly lower over the year in trade-weighted terms.
Mining investment had remained subdued despite the strength in commodity prices; however, a modest increase was expected over the forecast period, owing to sustaining investment for some major iron ore and energy projects, as well as increased exploration and production for some metals and minerals.
Members agreed to reconsider the case for a pause at the following meeting, recognising that pausing would allow additional time to reassess the outlook for the economy.
Members discussed the importance of understanding the evolution of demographic factors and foreign demand for interpreting developments in housing markets across states.
However, for the lower-income economies in the region, growth remained close to long-run averages.
The latest data received on the domestic economy had evolved much as expected, with further indications that growth had picked up a little over the past two quarters.
This was being led by household consumption, as high inflation weighed on household incomes and the effects of prior tightening in monetary policy worked their way through the economy.
For example, the increase in bank bill yields since July had been about 35 basis points more than the increase attributable to the increase in the cash rate.
Banks had also continued to receive large inflows of deposits, another relatively low-cost source of funding.
As a result, the saving ratio had declined further, although it remained well above the level it had been over much of the past 25 years.
Recent indicators suggested that dwelling investment had continued to grow strongly, particularly for higher-density dwellings.
This was consistent with the economic and financial exposures to Greece – apart from the official sector's financial exposure – being quite low.
Members noted that the ECB's assessment of the asset quality of the euro area banking system had been released during the month.
There had also been a large decline in the price of domestic holiday travel and accommodation, partly reflecting subdued demand in parts of that industry.
This scrutiny and related work had shown that investor activity was considerably higher – and lending standards in some parts of the market weaker – than had originally been thought.
More recently, there had also been some increase in real yields in most advanced economies.
Wages growth had picked up significantly over the preceding year or so.
The aggregate return on equity had fallen over the past year, partly owing to increases in banks' capital ratios.
Members noted that while iron ore and, to a lesser extent, coal exports had increased rapidly in recent years, a trend decline in oil exports, owing to the depletion of existing oil fields, had weighed on the figures for total resource exports.
Of particular relevance to Australia, Chinese steel production had fallen over the past few months.
The Board's judgement remained that, given the substantial degree of policy stimulus that had been imparted, it was prudent to hold the cash rate steady while continuing to gauge the effects of earlier reductions, but not to close off the possibility of reducing it further should that be appropriate to support sustainable growth in economic activity, consistent with the inflation target.
There had been very strong demand for the $4 billion of indexed bonds issued by the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) late in September.
Mining investment had declined further in the March quarter, as construction work at some liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects neared completion.
The outbreak of the Delta variant had delayed, but not derailed, the recovery.
Members noted that other signs of weakness in the US economy included the continued decline in housing activity and house prices, and a moderation in consumer spending.
Members noted that translating the data from the capital expenditure survey into national accounts estimates of business investment was challenging because firms tended to increase their expectations for capital expenditure over time.
Members noted that a full set of updated forecasts will be published in November following the release of the September quarter CPI.
Members concluded their discussion of international economic conditions by taking stock of upside and downside risks to the global outlook.
For the non-mining sector, the ABS survey of firms' capital expenditure intentions had been revised slightly higher and continued to imply modest growth in non-mining business investment over the course of 2014/15.
The rate of core inflation fell back in May after a large increase in April owing to the rise in the consumption tax rate.
The RBA Index of Commodity Prices was around its levels at the beginning of the year, despite the decline in the price of iron ore.
Labour market conditions in most advanced economies had continued to improve, although inflation remained below most central banks' targets.
In contrast, growth in prices of administered items and the cost of constructing new dwellings had increased in the June quarter.
Variable mortgage rates had declined broadly in line with the reductions in the cash rate in June and July.
Members noted that the German labour market had held up very well over the past two years.
Global disinflationary forces from the slowdown in the world economy and lower commodity prices would assist in this regard.
And the revisions to historical estimates of consumer spending meant that consumption growth, while still weak, had been more resilient than previously assessed.
The recovery was still expected to be uneven and protracted, with inflation remaining low.
Consumption had continued to recover in the December quarter despite a decline in household income.
The latest data on the US mortgage market, which related to the September quarter 2007, showed a further large rise in delinquencies on sub-prime loans, to over 16 per cent, as well as a smaller rise in delinquencies on prime loans.
The Australian dollar had depreciated by around 5 per cent since the previous Board meeting – in contrast to the resilience it had displayed in the period of heightened risk aversion earlier in the year.
Members discussed the important role that demand factors had played in slowing the pace of borrowing.
Limited spare capacity and gas-to-oil substitution in Europe and elsewhere were likely to support crude oil prices in the period ahead.
Wage and price inflation were at much lower levels than over the preceding decade, and, because of inertia in wage- and price-setting practices, it was possible that price pressures could be slow to build even if spare capacity were absorbed more quickly than expected.
Housing price growth remained strongest in Sydney and to a lesser extent Melbourne, while price rises in other parts of the country had been more modest and prices had even declined in some cities recently.
At the same time, the major banks' retail deposit rates had continued to drift down.
In contrast to previous months, market pricing had suggested that negative policy rates were unlikely to be adopted in either of these two economies.
In the household sector, measures of consumer sentiment had continued to rise to above-average levels, though the unemployment rate had recently edged up.
These had fallen considerably over the past year.
Looking at monetary policy settings around the world, members noted that market expectations were for the European Central Bank to lower its policy rate later in the week.
The continuing decline in the outstanding stock of RMBS had seen spreads in the secondary market decline considerably, such that investors were now seeking new issues at prices that were economic for the issuers.
Leading indicators of labour demand had softened a bit further, suggesting modest near-term employment growth was likely.
In Australia, the economic recovery was under way and recent data had generally been better than expected.
Most advanced economies were growing at above-trend rates and their labour markets had continued to tighten.
Members noted that, overall, global commodity prices were little changed since the previous Board meeting.
This had prompted the imposition of further capital controls and continued foreign exchange intervention by authorities in some economies.
A risk to the inflation outlook over the medium term was the possibility that price- and wage-setting behaviour would shift, resulting in domestic inflationary pressures becoming more persistent.
Members observed that inflation in Australia had moderated, with both headline and underlying inflation lower in the December quarter 2023 than had been expected three months prior.
Despite weak reported retail sales conditions generally, on a slightly more positive note some contacts in the Bank's liaison program had reported a mild pick-up in retail sales since July.
This reflected expectations of a particularly challenging period for earnings growth and capital raising for those industries in the months ahead.
The unemployment rate had edged back down to 3.4 per cent in October – the equal lowest rate since September 1974.
Should the cash rate be reduced to 25 basis points, the interest rate on ES balances would be zero.
Members noted that financial markets had been significantly more volatile over the past month in the wake of developments in Japan, Libya and Europe.
On the assumption that these structural changes would persist, but that the investment-to-output ratios for other industries would return to their long-run averages, this suggested there were some upside risks to the Bank's forecasts for growth in non-mining business investment over the medium term.
While the stock of unsold new houses was falling, it remained well above the average of the past two decades.
The revised forecast was for inflation to take a little longer than previously thought to return sustainably to target.
Reported housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne had risen noticeably in August and auction clearance rates had increased further, although volumes had remained low.
A number of advanced economies were growing at above-trend rates and were experiencing increasingly tight labour market conditions.
Growth in most of Asia was expected to remain relatively solid, but growth was expected to be fairly subdued in many of the advanced economies, with unemployment likely to remain high.
The news on Europe, however, had been notably weaker and it remained unclear as to how the current situation would be resolved.
This had occurred relatively early in the business cycle and lending rates in many cases would soon be at generational lows.
Before turning to the policy decision, members reviewed the policy and academic discussions taking place around the world regarding the operation of macroeconomic policy and monetary policy frameworks in an environment where interest rates are low because of structural factors.
The housing market was improving gradually, with both turnover and prices picking up in recent months.
The Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England had continued to use unconventional monetary measures.
This was consistent with the staff’s assessment that aggregate demand remains above the economy’s supply potential.
Members began their discussion on financial markets with the observation that most markets had been relatively steady over the past month, despite uncertainty about fiscal negotiations in the United States and the Greek bailout package.
Ongoing cost pressures and the recent softening in demand had put pressure on some businesses’ profits and liquid reserves, most notably in the construction sector and the arts and hospitality sector.
Members noted that the task facing monetary policy in future would become more difficult if a continuation of poor productivity growth were combined with an expectation of growth in nominal wages and profits at the same sorts of rates seen over the past two decades.
The Chinese renminbi had also continued to edge lower; the effective exchange rate had depreciated partly because of the appreciation of the yen, which has a significant weight in China's trade-weighted basket.
Members observed that conditions in financial markets continued to be characterised by low volatility, notwithstanding the heightened geopolitical tensions in Ukraine and Gaza, as well as the ongoing uncertainty about the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate in the United States.
Headline inflation was being affected by higher prices for petrol and newly constructed homes, as well as strains in global supply chains.
The improved outlook for activity and employment was expected to lift private sector wages growth a little over the forecast period.
Members observed that the major currencies had changed little since the previous Board meeting.
The Australian Government budget included additional transfer payments, including to low-income households, to help address cost-of-living pressures.
For example, heightened geopolitical tensions had increased the prospect of cyber-attacks that could have systemic implications.
In the United States, the yield curve was now as steep as it had been in previous decades.
Combined with other measures of potential labour supply currently classified as outside the labour force, this suggested there was still a pool of workers available to firms should the demand for labour continue to increase.
While overall conditions had eased relative to 2015, some indicators had strengthened over the previous few months.
These various responses were providing considerable support to Australian households and businesses through this very difficult period.
Commercial property seemed to be a key point of weakness in several countries.
Members noted that non-mining business investment was expected to have declined further in the September quarter and the outlook remained weak.
Members observed that business investment had been stronger than forecast a year earlier.
After declining in July, the value of retail sales rose in August and September, but was unchanged in October.
However, the level of yields on semis had nonetheless fallen to low levels.
They would be reviewed following receipt of the national accounts data for the December quarter.
Members noted that, overall, the Bank expected year-ended GDP growth to be 2¾ per cent over 2019 and 2020.
Private sector financing conditions had tightened a little in most advanced economies since the previous meeting.
Government bond yields had declined over the past month to as low as 3.8 per cent in the United States, though more recently they had risen a little from that trough.
Members observed that housing credit growth overall had been steady during the first part of 2017, with slower growth in lending to investors largely offset by a pick-up in the growth of lending to owner-occupiers.
The Board remains committed to the 3-year Australian Government bond yield target of 10 basis points.
Market pricing suggested that the federal funds rate was expected to decline by a further 100 basis points or so over the following year.
Members discussed the implications of the outbreak of the Delta variant for the Bank's bond purchase program.
Moreover, some further rise in wages growth would not necessarily be cause for concern, given the flexible and medium-term nature of the inflation target, so long as inflation expectations remained well anchored.
Members also agreed that, while less accommodative monetary policy would, all else equal, see lower housing prices and credit growth, it would result in fewer jobs and lower wages growth, which would in turn create further distance from the goals of monetary policy – namely, full employment and inflation sustainably within the target range.
The recovery in the United States appeared to be continuing at a moderate pace, notwithstanding some signs that fiscal consolidation was weighing on private demand.
While there had been additional evidence of the coming strong pick-up in investment in the resources sector, activity remained quite subdued in some other important parts of the economy, partly reflecting the Board's earlier actions as well as the appreciation of the exchange rate.
However, employment was flat or falling in manufacturing and goods distribution.
Tighter credit standards and APRA's supervisory measures had been helpful in containing the build-up of risk on household balance sheets.
Market participants had not ruled out the prospect of additional monetary policy support in the period ahead, including the possibility of negative policy rates in a number of jurisdictions.
Members noted that a range of important questions arose from assessments of the true trend in productivity in the Australian economy, including those relating to potential growth and living standards.
While the exchange rate had depreciated over the month, members agreed that it remained uncomfortably high and a lower level would likely be needed to achieve balanced growth in the economy.
Auction clearance rates in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up over February.
In contrast, the price of oil had increased in recent weeks.
Nevertheless, spot prices for Australia's bulk commodities were still above those in the June quarter 2010 export contracts.
Nationwide measures of housing prices had increased by around 9 per cent over the year to September.
Growth in incomes had been particularly strong in the June and September quarters of 2020, as fiscal transfers such as social assistance and subsidy payments had more than offset the declines in labour and financial income.
Those projections remained above market expectations, which had flattened further following the FOMC's reassessment and again after the release of weaker-than-expected employment data for March.
There was a significant contribution from the inventory cycle.
Government bond yields in the major countries had increased from their recent lows, following safe-haven buying by investors during August, and had returned to the range that they had traded in for the past few years.
Profitability had increased, partly because of growth in investment banking activity and lending.
The share of firms in the Bank's liaison program with wage freezes in place had remained high, and most firms had continued to report limited upward pressure on wages despite anecdotal reports of labour shortages in small segments of the labour market.
Commodity prices had remained high in recent months.
Lower prospective growth in demand was expected to reduce both goods and services inflation over time.
Share prices in Japan had not been as strong as elsewhere, and had shown little change since the start of the year after the sharp increases in the previous two years.
More broadly, bank funding costs were estimated to have declined a little further in recent months.
Wages growth could pick up faster than expected if labour market conditions tightened by more than expected.
The Australian dollar had depreciated slightly over the past month, but remained close to its post-float high.
Members noted that most lenders had passed on the increase in the cash rate in full to existing variable-rate housing and small business borrowers.
The decline in the exchange rate seen to date would assist in achieving balanced growth in the economy, though members noted that the exchange rate remained high by historical standards.
This increase reflected a combination of factors including lower economic growth, lower-than-expected capital gains tax revenue and changes in the timing of some policy measures.
However, underemployment was still high and the recent upswing in new cases of the virus in the northern hemisphere could damage these economies' labour markets in the period ahead.
Similarly, members observed that some firms were indexing their prices, either implicitly or directly, to past inflation.
In corporate bond markets, issuance in the United States had slowed in April following its high level in the March quarter.
The softening in global activity had been associated with a general decline in commodity prices.
Other commodity prices were also high at present.
On a year-ended basis, underlying inflation was running at around 2½ per cent, the midpoint of the medium-term target range.
The reduced flow of new arrivals to Australia was also affecting some markets.
Turnover had also increased to around its highest level in a number of years, with many properties staying on the market for short periods of time.
National housing price growth had remained robust in February and most capital cities had experienced at least moderate price increases.
A month earlier, members had noted that there were some tentative signs that Chinese growth might be stabilising at a more sustainable pace.
The difficulty the Fed had in getting cash to flow to the institutions most in need, despite the actual fed funds rate being well below target, led it on 17 August to cut the discount rate from 100 basis points to 50 basis points above the fed funds target rate.
Also, the US dollar and Japanese yen had appreciated, while the Chinese renminbi had depreciated.
Over the past year, resource exports had grown strongly and further growth was in prospect as the production of liquefied natural gas ramped up.
Members commenced their discussion of the domestic economy with a review of the consumer price index (CPI) for the June quarter.
It was noted that around half of the contraction in total hours worked had been reversed in preceding months, with average hours picking up more quickly than employment.
Global equity prices had recovered to around the peak reached in April, but prices of financial stocks remained well below that level.
Vaccine supplies remained limited in many emerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries.
The momentum in housing price increases had broadened recently to include the largest capital cities and the more expensive segments of these markets, although the increase in overall housing prices in Australia during the pandemic had been more modest than in a number of other countries.
In aggregate, the outlook was for growth in Australia's major trading partners to remain a little below average, as previously forecast.
The Australian dollar had depreciated by 5 per cent against the US dollar and by 4 per cent on a trade-weighted basis over the past month, taking the exchange rate to around its lowest level since 2009 on both measures.
Members observed that such pricing was indicative of investors expecting benign economic outcomes.
Members observed that the increasing use of technology to replace manual effort in the finance sector and long-run increases in the quality and size of homes, as well as a greater number of dwellings per capita, were likely to have contributed to these trends.
The price of oil had increased by around 70 per cent since recent lows and this had occurred alongside ongoing speculation about potential caps to OPEC production and signs that oil production in the United States was likely to decline.
Nevertheless, with central banks expected to maintain expansionary policy settings and risk premiums generally low, global financial conditions remained accommodative.
Meeting this condition will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it was at the time of the meeting.
New figures in a month's time would help clarify the situation.
This step had partly sought to offset the reduction in liquidity resulting from sales of foreign reserves by the PBC in recent months.
Residential building approvals had declined further over May and June and were around their lowest levels in six years.
The Board's judgement was that, given the substantial degree of policy stimulus that had been imparted, it was prudent to hold the cash rate steady while continuing to gauge the effects, but not to close off the possibility of reducing it further should that be appropriate to support sustainable growth in economic activity, consistent with the inflation target.
Government bond yields had remained very low across advanced economies partly as a result of these purchases and despite strong issuance by governments.
Despite dwelling prices declining relative to incomes and rises in rental yields, forward-looking indicators implied little prospect of an imminent recovery in housing construction.
Nonetheless, actual yields across the curve remained low.
While some of these purchases were retained in euros, a sizeable share was converted into other currencies, including a modest amount in the Australian dollar.
This was partly because many workers had maintained attachment to their employers while on reduced or zero hours in states affected by lockdowns.
The lagged response to higher housing prices and a period of low building activity had raised the likelihood that dwelling investment would be stronger in the medium term than currently expected.
Members noted that current market pricing implied around an even chance of a 25 basis point easing in monetary policy at this meeting.
Members discussed the implications of recent developments for the economic outlook.
Members noted that the Australian banks were in a strong position to withstand the large economic shock from the COVID-19 outbreak and financial market volatility.
Interest rates on housing and business loans remained historically low.
Members agreed that, if developments unfolded as currently expected, monetary policy would need to be adjusted further over time to lessen the degree of stimulus.
Consumption growth had strengthened, though this probably reflected, in part, the government payments made over recent months.
In addition, the global activity data had been somewhat softer and downside risks to the international economy had become a little more prominent over the past month, especially in the case of sovereign debt problems in Europe.
That said, a number of state governments had offered lump-sum payments to some of their public sector employees, in part to offset higher living costs.
Global financial conditions remained accommodative.
This was particularly so at the shorter end of the yield curve, reflecting the expectation that policy rates in the major economies would remain low for an extended period.
The forecasts assumed a rise in the cash rate over the year ahead.
Apart from the Japanese share market, which had shown little net change in 2006 following the sharp rise in 2005, most other countries' share markets had risen by 10–15 per cent this year.
In contrast, measures of year-ended headline and core inflation in the United States had picked up in recent months.
Improvements in labour market conditions were expected to reverse temporarily in the September quarter as a result of the lockdowns in Greater Sydney and other parts of the country.
The RBNZ had indicated that an increase in its policy rate would be appropriate soon because the economy is experiencing capacity constraints, inflationary pressures are building and inflation is near the RBNZ's target.
Growth in business and dwelling investment had been stronger than expected, supported by targeted fiscal measures.
The banks had also increased their liquid asset holdings and their Liquidity Coverage Ratios were well above the 100 per cent minimum requirement.
Rents had continued to fall in Perth and had been slightly lower in Brisbane, where valuations for some new inner-city apartments had declined below their purchase prices.
The Bank of Japan's latest policy announcement included a facility to enhance access to US dollar swap lines, which reduced the cost of borrowing US dollars in exchange for yen.
In China, growth in economic activity had slowed in a number of sectors.
In the month of February, the participation rate had declined a little and the unemployment rate had fallen back to 5.8 per cent.
Various factors might explain the weak productivity outcomes, including COVID-19-related disruptions and strong growth in employment in government-funded services, where achieving productivity increases is often difficult.
Across the advanced economies, unemployment rates had trended lower and surveys had suggested that more firms were facing labour shortages.
The December quarter 2020 national accounts showed that GDP in Australia had recovered to close to pre-pandemic levels, whereas GDP was still considerably below pre-pandemic levels in many other countries.
Consistent with this, growth in household credit had remained well below the average rate of recent years, and housing loan approvals had fallen in January and February.
Low population growth, reflecting reduced net overseas migration in particular, was also expected to affect high-density residential investment for some time to come.
Employment had increased at an above-average pace over the past year and the unemployment rate had declined.
Equity prices had generally declined but remained higher than at the start of the year.
They noted the staff’s assessment that aggregate demand had continued to exceed aggregate supply but that the gap was closing.
Unemployment rates in the advanced economies had declined, but the tighter conditions in labour markets had not flowed through to higher growth in wages or broader inflation pressures.
After peaking in the September quarter, Australia's terms of trade fell by almost 5 per cent in the December quarter 2011, owing to declines in bulk commodity prices.
Members recognised that the calibration of this guidance was not precise or straightforward.
Members noted that economic recoveries from financial crises tended to be slower, and that fiscal consolidation was also likely to be a drag on growth in coming years.
Members contrasted these measures with the actions taken by the US Federal Reserve at its June meeting, when it again reduced its asset purchases by a further US$10 billion to US$35 billion per month, down from a peak of US$85 billion per month in 2013.
If slower growth in demand could be expected to result in a more moderate inflation outcome, then a case could be made for a further easing of monetary policy.
In the United States, fiscal stimulus was expected to support growth in output over the period ahead and was likely to add to inflationary pressures as the US economy encountered capacity constraints.
This reversal of capital flows had been reflected in large depreciations of emerging market currencies against the US dollar.
Service exports had been particularly affected given that inbound tourism had essentially ceased as a result of travel restrictions.
The Board would continue to monitor both how the global economy evolved and the course of domestic economic activity and prices.
The slowdown in Asia had been more persistent than earlier anticipated and had contributed to lower commodity prices, along with increased supply of commodities, including from Australia.
Elsewhere, the European Central Bank (ECB) had foreshadowed additional monetary stimulus unless the outlook for inflation in the euro area improved.
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global economy had continued to recover from the largest contraction in decades, supported by a substantial fiscal and monetary policy response and the easing of measures to contain the virus in some countries.
Adjusting for this, in underlying terms wages growth had remained stable at just over 4 per cent, having increased slowly from around 3 per cent over the past eight years.
Company analysts had continued to revise up their estimates for overall profit growth in the year ahead, though within the aggregate, estimates of profit growth of resource companies had been revised down.
Investment in the resources sector was picking up very strongly and some related services sectors were experiencing better-than-average conditions.
The changes in bond yields globally had been associated with higher volatility, though with considerably less spillover to other markets than in March and April 2020.
Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities had risen by around 40 basis points since the previous meeting, exceeding 3 per cent for the first time since 2015.
Resource exports appeared to have continued growing in the December quarter and growth was expected to remain strong, particularly as liquefied natural gas (LNG) production came on line over the next year or so.
Accordingly, members judged the current stance of monetary policy to be consistent with fostering sustainable growth and low inflation, while leaving adequate flexibility to respond to developments as needed over the period ahead.
The large fiscal consolidation required over the next several years was likely to lead to a serious economic contraction.
The labour market remained strong, with employment increasing by nearly 60,000 over November and December, and the unemployment rate falling to 5 per cent.
There had been minimal issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities.
Global credit market conditions had generally been stable with solid issuance, including by sub-investment-grade issuers in the United States.
The European Central Bank had injected liquidity into the banking system through a one-year repurchase agreement at a fixed rate of 1 per cent, which had prompted a fall in short-term rates of more than 30 basis points in the euro area.
Turning to the labour market and wages, members observed that there had been no sign of slowing in employment growth, which had been steady at just below 3 per cent in year-ended terms for the past year or so.
In underlying terms, inflation had increased from 2½ per cent at the end of 2005 to around 3 per cent in the September quarter 2006, where it had remained in the final quarter of the year.
News of the Volkswagen emissions scandal in late September adversely affected European equities, while equity prices in emerging markets had partly recovered from their falls in late August, although they remained lower than at the start of the year.
Staff forecasts suggested that inflation, despite recent higher readings, was likely to be consistent with the 2–3 per cent target over the next two years.
This was a significant change from the strong rate of increase over 2007.
Recent data suggested that growth had probably slowed a little from that reported for the first quarter to be around trend pace.
Some economies, including the United States and United Kingdom, had seen relatively modest declines in inflation so far, although the extent of the contraction in economic activity that had occurred suggested that further disinflation was likely.
More recently, as a result of the increase in lending rates to investors in housing, a significant amount of housing lending had been reclassified from investment to owner-occupation.
In the business sector, members observed that the NAB survey for the month of January showed a divergence between business conditions and business confidence.
Members noted that conditions in the established housing market had continued to vary across the country.
Mining investment was expected to increase over the forecast period as mining firms invest to maintain production; this outlook was supported by mining firms' profitability having remained strong.
Employment in July continued to expand at around the same pace as that of the working-age population and the unemployment rate had remained steady at 5¼ per cent.
Elsewhere in the region, some central banks had also eased monetary policy, and modest fiscal measures were being deployed in some countries.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics measure of job vacancies had reached its highest level as a share of the labour force since the late 1970s, when the series commenced, and measures of firms' hiring intentions from business surveys had been strong.
Nevertheless, the available data suggested that private investment growth had picked up but remained low.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions for a return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the 2 to 3 per cent target.
In discussing recent developments in global inflation, members noted that global supply chain bottlenecks and higher commodity prices had contributed to an increase in producer price inflation in a number of countries.
Nevertheless, credit conditions for some borrowers had remained tighter than they had been for some time following the strengthening of lending policies and practices over recent years.
The effects of stimulatory monetary policy were continuing to emerge.
Members noted that, from October, the Australian Bureau of Statistics would commence publishing a monthly CPI indicator, which would provide a timelier read on price pressures – though it could take some time for reliable trends to be discernible.
Employment growth had been running well above growth in the working-age population and, in preceding months, had been concentrated in full-time employment.
The outlook for 2010 was also slightly stronger.
Members observed that inflation in many countries was increasingly driven by domestic demand pressures, and that the longer high inflation persists, the more central banks might need to tighten monetary policy to rein in inflation and contain inflation expectations.
Members noted the strong global competition to supply the Chinese market and that Australia does not have the same natural comparative advantage in other exports as it has in some resources.
Recent developments in commodity prices suggested that the terms of trade for Australia had been little changed in the March quarter.
Members noted that financial markets had generally experienced low volatility over preceding months.
Nonetheless, the terms of trade were still expected to decline over the following two years, partly reflecting prospective increases in low-cost supplies of bulk commodities.
On foreign exchange markets, members observed that the US dollar remained near its lows in both nominal and real effective terms.
Employment had increased in every state since the start of 2017, including solid growth in the mining-exposed states.
Alternatively, higher commodity prices, persistent supply chain bottlenecks and firms' reduced ability to address labour shortages through access to workers from abroad could mean that wages growth and inflation picked up earlier and more rapidly than expected as the economy continued to expand.
With Asia accounting for more than half of Japan's total exports, strength in domestic demand in the region was benefiting the Japanese economy, which had registered strong growth in the March quarter.
There was little spare capacity in the economy, with the unemployment rate very low.
Taking into account all of the available information, and the need to balance the risks associated with high household debt in a low-inflation environment, the Board judged that holding the stance of monetary policy unchanged would be consistent with sustainable growth in the economy and achieving the inflation target over time.
Housing prices in Perth and apartment prices in Brisbane had fallen further.
As such, the March quarter inflation data had generally increased confidence in the forecast that underlying inflation would pick up to around 2 per cent by early 2018.
This, together with the €490 billion provided in its first liquidity operation, left European banks well positioned to fund their bond maturities for at least the first half of this year.
However, members noted that the new US administration might introduce more restrictive policies on trade and immigration, which would pose significant downside risks to the forecast for global growth.
However, a substantial part of the increase in employment appeared to reflect changes in the sample.
Members noted that the central forecast scenario was based on the usual technical assumption that the cash rate followed the path implied by market pricing, which suggested interest rates were expected to be lower over the next six months.
Members agreed that it would be important to reassess the economic outlook in February 2020, when the Bank would prepare updated forecasts.
Private-sector price measures had strengthened further in June, and the ABS data showed a very strong increase in the June quarter after being relatively weak in the March quarter.
There had also been declines in a number of other Asian currencies, prompted by concerns relating to the global economic slowdown and the effects of high oil prices.
Australian share prices declined in October to be little changed from the beginning of 2016.
Recent data on activity in the United Kingdom had remained relatively soft.
They also observed that this was partly because the holdings of government debt by the Bank were relatively low as a share of GDP.
Indeed, market pricing pointed to around a 40 per cent chance of one further rate increase in 2024, with reductions in the cash rate seen as likely in 2025.
Although mining investment had declined in the March quarter as large liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects approached completion, the medium-term outlook for mining investment had remained positive.
In considering the level of interest rates, members noted that the three increases in the cash rate late in 2009, together with the widening in the margins between the cash rate and many lending rates, had meant a material adjustment to the stance of monetary policy.
Turning to domestic financial markets, members noted that growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers had slowed to 5 per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, while growth in lending to investors in housing had stabilised at a rate of around 1 per cent.
These measures included closing some unprofitable state-owned firms, restructuring some debt, reducing the size of non-bank financing and reducing non-banks' interactions with banks.
The bushfires over the summer months were expected to have affected growth in both the December quarter 2019 and the March quarter 2020, after which recovery efforts were expected to boost growth.
In terms of monetary policy, the authorities had raised reserve requirements steadily over the past year and lifted lending and deposit rates.
Accommodative policy settings had helped sustain growth above estimates of potential for several years.
While observing that there were typically lags between labour markets tightening and wage pressures emerging, members noted that the wage data might suggest these economies had more spare capacity than implied by conventional measures.
Demand had, until then, been sustained by very strong growth in real gross domestic income, which had been boosted by the strong rise in the terms of trade.
While members judged that lower interest rates were supporting the economy through the usual transmission channels (including a lower exchange rate, higher asset prices and higher cash flows for borrowers), they recognised the negative effects of lower interest rates on savers and confidence.
Members noted that supply concerns in the iron ore market had eased somewhat, and ongoing strength in Chinese steel demand had been met by an increase in iron ore imports.
Growth in advanced economies had slowed in response to tighter monetary policy and cost-of-living pressures, but not by as much as expected in some cases.
Members noted that market functioning in sovereign bond markets had improved significantly, as had conditions in key money markets.
Most of the increases in bond yields had reflected increases in expected inflation to levels that were consistent with or below central banks' targets.
Corporate bond issuance in Australian had also been strong, particularly offshore.
The trade surplus was at its highest level, and the current account deficit at its lowest level, measured as a share of GDP, since the 1970s.
There had been a large amount of domestic issuance as well.
Although residential building approvals had fallen in the September quarter and liaison indicated that pre-sales had become harder to obtain, the large pipeline of work yet to be done was expected to support dwelling investment at a high level over the following year or two.
Members noted that the risks around the wage and price inflation forecasts were evenly balanced.
In turn, this had led to a decline in spreads on term deposit ‘specials’ relative to equivalent term swap rates.
These increases would add about ¼ percentage point to the change in the CPI in each period.
Consumer spending, which accounts for the bulk of spending in the economy, had slowed noticeably since mid year as the effects of the boost to incomes from the package of tax rebates in the June quarter faded.
This had been most evident in Sydney, where housing prices had continued to decline across most segments of the market.
The ABS capital expenditure survey also indicated that non-mining business investment had been little changed over the past couple of years.
It was possible that this combination could continue for a while yet, but it was also possible that inflation could pick up by more than expected as spare capacity diminished.
Members noted that dwelling investment had picked up over the preceding year or so, partly in response to an easing in housing policies in 2015.
Fiscal outcomes were also diverging, with the latest IMF forecasts showing a significant upward revision to the expected debt/GDP ratio in Greece, which was now forecast to rise to around 190 per cent partly as a result of the weaker economy.
However, the prices for iron ore had recently fallen sharply, after initial resilience relative to other commodity prices.
While the financial situation in Europe remained fragile, the likelihood of an extremely bad outcome seemed to have diminished somewhat over the previous couple of months, partly reflecting actions by the European policymakers.
Resource exports looked to have rebounded in the September quarter, following earlier disruptions from adverse weather and some unanticipated shutdowns of LNG facilities.
Members noted that housing interest rates had increased a little over 2017, particularly for investors and interest-only loans.
Members noted that output growth was expected to pick up gradually from its below-average pace over the past year to exceed 3 per cent in 2017.
However, members noted that significant uncertainties around the forecasts remained, with scenarios where an increase in the cash rate would be appropriate at some point and other scenarios where a decrease in the cash rate would be appropriate.
Members noted that it was difficult to predict the effectiveness of recent policy measures in China and how the authorities would balance their objectives of supporting growth and containing financial risks.
Prices of tradable items declined in the December quarter.
There was no market expectation of any policy rate increase in the United States and the United Kingdom in the period ahead because of weaker-than-expected data.
Funding conditions more generally for Australian financial and non-financial corporations remained favourable.
Policy measures had continued to support growth and had been tilted towards steel-intensive activities.
Members noted that this would tend to increase liquidity and had been associated with a general decline in interest rates, which would help to offset the increased cost of finance associated with measures aimed at restricting the availability of credit provided by non-bank entities.
Yields on government bonds in the major markets had been volatile in the past month, reflecting the competing concerns of rising inflationary risks and the effects of the renewed credit disruption.
Members observed that, after abstracting from the effects of the earlier natural disasters, growth over the year had been close to trend.
The United States was the main exception, with relatively firm growth in real incomes and consumption underpinning robust economic growth.
New data on mortgage delinquencies in the US for the March quarter showed a rise to about 14 per cent for sub-prime loans, but there had been little change in the proportion of prime loans that were delinquent; this remained low.
Nevertheless, measures of aggregate wage growth remained high relative to the slow rate of productivity growth, implying that unit labour costs were growing more quickly.
The inventory cycle was expected to contribute to growth, after the subtractions brought on by the rapid de-stocking in the March quarter.
At the same time, wages growth had remained low and there were few indications that wage pressures were building.
Wages growth was expected to remain around its recent rate over the forecast period.
The five major Australian banks had now all announced their profits for the 2005/06 financial year, mostly ending in September (except for the CBA, whose financial year ended in June).
Market participants expected the next moves in policy rates in Canada, New Zealand and Australia to be down.
The authorities in some economies had moved to tighten policy somewhat recently, but monetary policies were still expansionary in the region.
Recent data had pointed to subdued price pressures across the economy in the June quarter.
GDP growth was expected to be quite strong for the September quarter, although not as rapid as in the June quarter.
There were some dampening factors affecting the outlook for the US economy, but these had had little effect elsewhere thus far, and global economic growth was expected to continue at an above-average pace next year.
The various forward-looking indicators were stronger than a year earlier, but remained at levels consistent with only modest employment growth in the months ahead.
A key ongoing uncertainty was the possibility that the slowing in the Chinese property market would have larger-than-expected ripple effects throughout the broader economy.
A key question was whether the necessary adjustment was occurring at an overall pace of growth that kept the economy close to trend and inflation close to target.
Members noted that these observations meant there remained a risk that output growth slows more sharply than expected; if so, it would bring inflation back to target more quickly than expected.
Members noted that Japanese equity prices had risen by nearly 5 per cent on the last day of October in response to the unexpected further easing in the BoJ's monetary policy.
As a result of the strong growth in output, measures of productivity had increased by almost 3 per cent over the year to the June quarter, well above average productivity growth in recent years.
On balance, with growth expected to remain below trend for longer and inflation to remain within the target even with the effects of a lower exchange rate, members concluded that a lower level of the cash rate would better contribute to achieving sustainable growth in demand consistent with the inflation target.
The staff continued to expect that the floods could take around ½ percentage point off growth in each of the December and March quarters, though ongoing problems in de-watering coal mines meant that the downside risks for the March quarter appeared larger than at the time of the February meeting.
Longer-term sovereign yields of most other developed countries, including Australia, tended to move in line with US Treasuries.
Looking at business conditions more broadly, members noted that commercial loan approvals, though typically volatile, had fallen sharply from the high levels recorded in 2007.
Liaison had indicated significant caution in hiring intentions, with firms waiting for evidence of growth in demand before looking to increase staff levels.
The euro area and Japanese economies had grown faster than their potential growth rates over 2016, resulting in further improvements in labour market conditions.
Both central banks were widely expected to have ceased net asset purchases by that time.
More timely payroll data suggested the number of jobs in the weeks up to early August had declined a little, with a notable drop in jobs in Victoria.
However, the authorities' goal of allowing the market to play a ‘decisive role’ in allocating resources was still some way from being realised.
Estimates of the neutral rate tend to be correlated across countries over time, reflecting similar global influences on saving and investment as well as spillovers across borders.
However, the WPI measure including bonuses implied that private-sector wage growth had been little changed for the past two years.
Risks related to some international political developments had also increased over the preceding six months, although markets had generally reacted in an orderly manner so far.
Prices of resource stocks were still noticeably below the peak in May, whereas prices of financial and industrial company stocks had mostly recovered the May peaks.
Equity markets in the advanced economies had been little changed in March, having previously rebounded from their sharp fall in late 2018.
More broadly, information from the Bank's liaison program indicated that upstream price pressures were being passed on by firms, as global and domestic supply chain pressures had persisted and demand had remained strong.
In Australia, expectations for the cash rate implied by market prices had been little changed over the preceding month after increasing in late October following the release of the September quarter Consumer Price Index (CPI) and market participants' increased expectations of the removal of the yield target.
Inflationary pressures were expected to pick up in response to above-trend growth in output and gradually tightening labour market conditions.
Recent levels of loan commitments suggested that housing credit growth could reach a six-month-ended annualised rate of around 10 per cent by early 2022.
For the advanced economies as a whole, budget deficits had increased more quickly, and by a larger amount, than in previous downturns, reflecting the synchronised nature of the current downturn and the significant discretionary easing of fiscal policy.
Members noted that these price developments could be largely explained by increases in supply, although easing demand was also a factor.
However, both the retail and transportation sectors had experienced well below-average conditions.
These conditions would, over time, help the economy negotiate the prospective downshift in resources investment via a switch to other sources of demand.
A notable exception was Japan, where the market was more than 15 per cent lower.
The outlook for non-mining business investment had improved further and the pick-up in public infrastructure investment was also supporting overall growth.
Market pricing no longer implied a reduction in the cash rate in 2024, and the Australian dollar had appreciated modestly, though remained within its recent range.
This was resulting in an upward drift in short-term market rates towards the ECB's policy rate.
Members noted that conditions in established housing markets had continued to vary considerably.
Members observed that inflation had increased, but remained low in underlying terms.
Data on approvals in recent months suggested that construction of non-residential buildings was likely to make a smaller contribution to growth in non-mining business investment in future.
meat), and several of these effects tended to be reversed in the period following drought.
Similarly, equity prices had declined a little for Australian banks but by much less than for other major banking systems.
Issuance of Kangaroo bonds (Australian dollar issues by offshore issuers) had been strong recently, taking advantage of the favourable cross-currency basis swap spread for such issuers.
The US dollar had depreciated significantly against the currencies of other advanced economies over recent months, including the Australian dollar.
Low interest rates were working to support demand, although it was difficult to judge the extent to which this would offset the expected substantial decline in mining investment and the effect of planned fiscal consolidation.
Members noted that it was not clear which assets the Chinese authorities had sold as part of the recent intervention nor which assets were being bought by those taking capital out of China, but given the potential size of these flows, their effects on asset markets could be large.
In signs of improving credit market conditions, US corporate bond issuance had been high in the past two months across the rating spectrum.
Prices of non-tradable items, which were mainly services, had increased strongly over the past year; the largest contributions in the June quarter had come from increases in rents, house purchase and health-related costs.
The central authorities had announced further support for social housing construction as well as additional restrictions on property transactions.
Forward-looking indicators had generally been consistent with the unemployment rate being around its current level or possibly slightly lower in the months ahead.
Domestically, the increase in GDP growth in the June quarter confirmed that some of the weakness in the previous quarter had been temporary and was consistent with expectations that growth would increase gradually over the coming year, supported by the current stance of monetary policy.
Members acknowledged that the primary response to the COVID-19 outbreak was to manage people's health, but that other arms of policy, including monetary and fiscal policy, would play an important role in reducing the economic and financial disruption.
Members were informed that the most accurate indicator of current trends in house prices was the Case-Shiller series, which was a monthly repeat-sales index derived from sales of houses in the 20 largest cities.
The US share market rose early in November but declined later in the month following the release of softer than expected economic data.
This reflected the lower level of liquidity in these short-term bonds and the tendency for demand to taper off when bonds are no longer in the basket for the three-year bond futures and as they approach maturity.
In monthly terms, growth in credit to owner-occupiers had increased in late 2021, after easing over the preceding few months, while growth in credit to investors had continued to rise.
However, services inflation remained high.
In view of this, members acknowledged the importance of a strong relationship between the Bank and other regulators, particularly APRA.
Public demand was expected to be sustained at a high level over the coming year; the decline in public consumption as the pandemic and flood-related support rolls off was expected to be largely offset by capital investment programs.
Elsewhere, housing prices had generally increased in recent months.
Members noted that the ongoing improvement in domestic demand, together with the increased competitiveness from the lower exchange rate, were expected to lead to a pick-up in non-mining business investment in the second half of the forecast period.
Lower numbers of international student arrivals would be likely to reduce aggregate demand (including for housing), but also lower growth in population and therefore the economy’s supply capacity.
With inflation rates in the region trending higher, the authorities were gradually removing monetary stimulus.
While measured employment had declined further and the unemployment rate had increased in October, the labour force survey for that month had been conducted prior to the lifting of lockdowns in New South Wales and Victoria.
Labour market conditions in the United States had begun to soften in the past few months, with a fall in non-farm payrolls in August and downward revisions to the growth in payrolls in the preceding two months.
Given this, it would be premature to consider withdrawing monetary stimulus.
Growth in housing credit for owner-occupiers had remained around 6 per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, while growth in credit for housing investors was noticeably faster, at over 10 per cent measured on the same basis.
The forecast for inflation had been revised up, and over the next couple of years it was likely that inflation would not be much below the top of the target range.
These measures were projected to result in an expansion of the BoE's balance sheet over 2017, although the BoE's asset holdings as a share of GDP were projected to remain lower than those of the European Central Bank, and well below those of the Bank of Japan (BoJ).
Members observed that the unemployment rate had declined more quickly than expected, to 3.5 per cent in June – its lowest level in almost 50 years.
Members noted that the domestic economy appeared to be growing at around trend pace in the June quarter, though activity continued to vary significantly across industries.
The retail trade data had suggested relatively subdued sales in December but solid growth in January.
Weakness in retail sales over the past year was concentrated in the smaller retailers, but these data were less reliable than previously, owing to reduced sampling.
High growth in population and nominal labour incomes and the difficulties associated with building new dwellings had supported demand for established housing nationally, despite recent increases in the cost of credit.
Members also observed the trade-offs that could be considered in the design of any future scheme.
The Board is committed to learning from this experience.
Issuance of government-guaranteed debt by banks in the United States and Australia had continued to be very strong.
Members observed that growth in China had been stronger than expected over 2017, but that investment growth had slowed and conditions in the industrial sector had softened over recent months, partly because of government policies to reduce pollution.
Members discussed two other risks to global financial stability, outside of China, that were relevant to Australia.
Monetary policy settings remained very stimulatory in all advanced economies.
Members noted the importance of banks maintaining their lending standards.
Given the exchange rate adjustment that was occurring, and with the substantial degree of monetary stimulus already in place, members assessed the current stance of policy to be appropriate for the time being.
Alternatively, in the downside scenario, the unemployment rate would be expected to peak at around 10½ per cent, and decline very gradually to around 9 per cent by the end of the forecast period.
The latest CPI data were regarded as providing confirmation that prices had indeed increased more modestly over the past six months than had been the case around the middle of 2006.
Spare capacity in the labour market appeared to have been fully absorbed in Japan, the United States and Germany, although some spare capacity appeared to remain in other parts of the euro area.
Members discussed the implications of the current financial market turmoil for global economic prospects, particularly through the channel of credit provision to businesses and households.
Members judged that the level of aggregate demand was still above the level of aggregate supply.
Measures of inflation expectations – from consumers, market economists, union officials and financial markets – had remained below average.
These indicators had suggested that the ongoing recovery in labour market conditions could be broadly sufficient to offset the job losses arising after the end of the JobKeeper program.
Turning to developments in the household sector, members noted that growth in household consumption had increased in the September quarter to be close to its decade average in year-ended terms.
More generally, the Northern Territory had a relatively young population and high labour market participation rates.
In July, the Bank of Canada raised its policy rate for the first time in seven years and financial market participants expected further increases.
House prices had increased more strongly in the September quarter.
If there were another serious economic setback, a different set of options would need to be considered.
Resource exports had continued to make a significant contribution to growth.
The case to hold the cash rate target constant reflected the view that the data over the prior month did not warrant a material revision to the outlook and that there is the possibility of a larger rise in the unemployment rate than anticipated.
Measures of core inflation had also drifted downwards, and were now a little below medium-term targets in a number of the advanced economies.
Resource shares had fallen in the month, reflecting concern about the possibility of a slowdown in the US and the wider implications that would flow from that, but other sectors of the share market had risen further.
Members had a detailed discussion of spare capacity in the labour market.
It had also been communicating that this was likely to require a faster rate of wages growth than had been experienced over previous years.
Information on economic activity suggested that the pace of growth in demand and output outside the resources and related sectors was a little lower than had been expected earlier in the year.
The easing in population growth over the past year helped to reconcile below-average growth in output with the relatively steady unemployment rate.
More generally, members noted that business conditions across and within states remained uneven, with some industries experiencing very challenging conditions, while others, including professional services, appeared to have weathered the recent period reasonably well.
Members noted that consumer sentiment had remained well below average in the past few months, with this being particularly evident in consumers' views on buying conditions.
Against this background, the recent improvement in labour market data had been a positive development.
Policy settings remained supportive of the recovery and national income had been substantially boosted by the large increases in commodity prices; it was likely that the terms of trade would exceed previous highs.
There had been acknowledgement that achieving this target would require some additional support from fiscal and financial policy.
Notwithstanding the general deterioration in financial market sentiment, conditions in global money markets were considerably better than late last year.
This was prompted by ongoing developments in the international regulatory architecture, where it has become increasingly common for central banks to provide more detailed information on ELA arrangements to assist banks in their contingency planning.
The Chinese equity market had weakened over the past two months.
The unemployment rate had been rising gradually over the past six months.
The terms of trade had declined in the June quarter, reflecting lower bulk commodity prices.
Members discussed a paper that reviewed the Bank’s approach to reducing its holdings of government bonds that had been purchased during the pandemic to support markets and provide economic stimulus.
Some lenders had reversed some of the tightening in the availability of housing finance that had occurred earlier in the pandemic, which had mostly reflected the application of existing credit standards in the context of weaker economic conditions.
In due course, inflation would be pushed up for a period by the lower exchange rate, but even so was forecast to be around the middle of the target range.
Overall, the market had been relatively strong, having risen by 12 per cent over the year to date.
Members observed that, in some countries, there appeared to be an adverse cycle whereby fiscal consolidation was weakening growth, which was leading to yet further fiscal tightening in an attempt to meet previously announced deficit targets.
Conditions in established housing markets in Sydney and Melbourne remained robust, but housing prices had been falling in Perth.
Members noted that the level of industrial production had fallen back to that of 25 years ago.
These developments did not suggest investors were having any problems in meeting their obligations and, in any event, market indices had subsequently risen.
The CPI had increased by 0.1 per cent in the quarter (in seasonally adjusted terms) and by 1.5 per cent over the year.
In part, this reflected continued slow growth in wages.
Over the past month, monetary policy had been tightened in the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand.
Members noted that meat prices had also been supported by strong demand from China to replace lost domestic pork production as a result of African swine flu and were likely to remain high for some time after the drought breaks, given that it would take time to rebuild herds.
The US dollar and Japanese yen had depreciated a little, while the Chinese renminbi had appreciated.
However, members observed that a range of indicators suggested that conditions in the housing market were stabilising.
As progress in lowering unemployment and having inflation return to the midpoint of the target was expected to be only gradual, members also agreed that there was not a strong case for a near-term adjustment in monetary policy.
In emerging economies, inflation remained uncomfortably high, particularly in India and China.
The Swiss franc had subsequently traded somewhat below the ceiling.
According to the latest national accounts, all components of demand, apart from housing investment, were increasing strongly and economic activity had expanded at a pace well above average over the year to June.
A few months earlier, it had appeared that those economies with poor fiscal positions might be able to wait until economic recovery was more firmly entrenched before undertaking significant fiscal consolidation.
Overall, however, total credit growth had picked up towards the end of 2007.
This included the effect of fixed interest rate loans rolling off over time.
A key question remained as to whether these developments would increase the capacity and willingness of European banks to lend.
Full-time employment had risen strongly again in May, to be around 6 per cent higher than its pre-pandemic level.
Turning to household consumption, members noted that the volume of retail sales declined in the June quarter, in part reflecting the unusually warm weather at the start of winter.
This meant that GDP was around 1 per cent below its December 2019 level at the end of 2020.
In assessing the appropriate stance for monetary policy in Australia, members noted that the outlook for global economic growth had not changed, with Australia's major trading partners forecast to grow by around the average of recent years in 2015.
This suggested that the risks associated with rising household sector leverage and rapid gains in housing prices had diminished.
Drought conditions in some parts of Australia were expected to result in lower overall rural production and exports in the period following the June quarter, although members noted that a record crop was expected in Western Australia.
Data for the US economy had been mixed, but prospects appeared to be gradually improving.
Members noted that the relative cost of issuance had continued to decline since the beginning of the year, though it remained higher than in mid 2011.
Members discussed issues surrounding high public debt levels in many advanced economies.
The tightening of monetary policy since May 2022 was still permeating through the economy and it would take some time for the full effects of this to be observed in the data.
In aggregate, the four major banks recorded solid profit results in the half year to September.
The Irish Government was in the process of dismantling Anglo Irish Bank, which had previously received sizable capital injections from the Government.
Both the Bank of England and the European Central Bank (ECB) were expected to ease monetary policy further in the near future.
Market expectations for the cash rate had been little changed, with market pricing still implying an expectation that the cash rate will begin to be increased from its current level late in 2022 or early in 2023.
The United States had proceeded to increase tariffs from 10 per cent to 25 per cent on US$200 billion of imports from China, and China had responded by announcing that tariffs would increase by 5–25 per cent on US$60 billion of US imports from 1 June 2019.
Members noted that household incomes continued to be supported by relatively favourable conditions in the labour market.
The main news in relation to inflation over the past month was the release of the wage price index for the December quarter, which indicated an increase of 1.2 per cent in the quarter and 4.3 per cent over the year.
Financial market conditions had remained favourable in most emerging markets, with the decline in government bond yields and the increase in equity prices since early 2017 having continued over the preceding month.
Current market pricing did not indicate any expectation of a change in monetary policy at this meeting.
Members discussed trends in retail spending.
Off-balance sheet financing had continued to decline, reflecting the authorities' efforts to discourage riskier forms of financing.
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy with the observation that growth in Australia's major trading partners had picked up in the September quarter, driven by an increase in growth in some Asian economies following weakness in the previous quarter.
The outlook for the global economy had been little changed, with the growth of Australia's major trading partners forecast to be a little above average in 2014 and 2015.
The Bank had purchased in aggregate around $36 billion of government bonds in secondary markets.
Overall business conditions had increased in the June quarter, according to the NAB survey, and were around previously recorded peaks Labour market data had continued to be strong.
GDP growth was expected to have slowed from the strong growth recorded in the March quarter, with export volumes declining following the very strong growth in the March quarter.
Money market spreads had fallen to low levels in the major markets and also in Australia, where they were now only a little above pre-crisis levels.
Conditions in the non-mining business sector remained subdued.
Consistent with market expectations for policy rates, longer term government bond yields had declined since the start of 2023 in most major advanced economies.
Members were mindful, however, that monetary policy was already expansionary and that the lower exchange rate was also supporting growth.
Despite the weakening labour market, wages, as measured by average earnings in the national accounts, had risen by around 6 per cent over 2008, well above its recent average.
In contrast, the non-resources business sector generally showed little sign of financial difficulties.
Data on capital expenditure intentions had pointed to a substantial and broad-based decline in non-mining investment over the following year or so.
Members noted that the household and business sectors in Australia had continued to display a relatively prudent approach towards their finances in recent quarters.
Market economists had also revised lower their expectations for further increases in the cash rate this year; the average expected peak in the cash rate had declined from 4.45 per cent prior to the August meeting to around 4.3 per cent subsequently.
Inflation in market-based services had remained steady, which was consistent with a lack of wage pressures in the economy.
Share markets in other developed countries had also been strong in 2006, apart from Japan, where the market had been relatively flat following a very strong year in 2005.
The Australian Government's budget had little effect on financial markets, with sales of Commonwealth Government Securities (CGS) continuing to be well received.
Inflation in India increased somewhat in July, which had prompted the Reserve Bank of India to tighten monetary policy.
However, members noted that the experience in Australia had been different from that in the United States, where job resignation rates were at historically high levels and were coming at a time when labour force participation and employment remained considerably below pre-pandemic levels.
The Chinese renminbi had depreciated further, to be around 5 per cent lower in trade-weighted terms than earlier in the year.
Non-tradables inflation had declined in the September quarter, suggesting that domestic inflationary pressures were well contained and consistent with low growth in labour costs and moderate demand growth.
Members discussed current influences on the participation rate, noting in particular the rise in participation by older female workers as they delayed their retirement.
The accounts confirmed that conditions varied considerably across sectors, with manufacturing output having been flat over the first three quarters of 2010, in contrast to solid rises in output in the mining sector and of some professional services.
However, iron ore prices had fallen since late March, which suggested that the Australian terms of trade were still likely to decline in the period ahead from their recent highs.
While the unemployment rate remained around the low levels of the preceding year, broader measures of labour underutilisation had increased a little and a range of indicators suggested the labour market was at a turning point.
Additionally, land sales to property developers are an important source of income for local governments, whose finances are already stretched.
Domestically, members noted that the economy appeared to be evolving broadly in line with the Bank's expectations.
Turning to the immediate decision regarding the level of the cash rate, members noted that GDP growth had been stronger than expected in a number of major economies in the September quarter and that the outlook for global economic conditions had continued to improve.
Accordingly, the staff had revised their growth forecasts upwards.
Indeed, the strength of deposit growth and the decline in the yield curve saw a reduction in some deposit rates as well as some fixed-term lending rates.
In Australia, economic conditions continued to vary significantly across sectors, which was complicating the task of assessing the strength of the overall economy.
It was still expected to be above 3 per cent by mid 2010.
Translating estimates of the neutral rate to a nominal interest rate involves adding inflation expectations.
Members noted that the exchange rate had remained above most estimates of its fundamental value, given the decline in commodity prices over the past year, and that future exchange rate movements would be affected by market expectations for monetary policy, both domestically and abroad.
Members noted that the data released since the December meeting suggested that the domestic economy had continued to grow at a below-trend pace over the second half of 2014.
Wages growth was expected to pick up as remaining wage freezes and cuts implemented in 2020 were unwound and the labour market tightened.
The improved outlook for steel demand and stockpiling ahead of the Chinese New Year had supported prices for iron ore at the end of 2018, and earlier increases in oil prices had boosted liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices.
Many of these economies are highly integrated into global production chains, which had recently been evident in a sharp pick-up in their exports of electronic items.
Resource exports had grown strongly in the December quarter and there were early indications of strength in resource exports in the first few months of 2015.
Members noted that the strength of recent labour market data had removed some of the downside risk in the Bank's forecast of wage growth.
Labour demand was strong and unemployment rates were near or below pre-pandemic levels.
Headline CPI inflation had increased to 3.5 per cent over the year to the December quarter, largely reflecting higher fuel prices, higher prices for newly constructed homes and disruptions to supply chains (including for imported durable goods).
The domestic economy had grown strongly over the first half of 2022, showing resilience to disruptions caused by the Omicron outbreak and the floods on the east coast.
Together with a small fall in the participation rate, this had left the unemployment rate at around 5¼ per cent.
Over the previous five years, most of the growth in business investment had occurred in Victoria and New South Wales.
Members concluded on balance that the global economy was most likely on a sustained, if modest, recovery path, though it was still too soon to be confident of this assessment.
In Japan, the expansion appeared to be continuing, though growth in exports and production had slowed over the past couple of months.
The current yield curve implied that the market was expecting stabilisation in the economy with the possibility of rising inflation down the track.
Although headline inflation had continued to decline as energy prices fell and food price inflation eased, members noted that core inflation had remained sticky and shown little sign of easing.
Members noted that exposures of Australian banks to the fiscally stretched euro area economies were very small.
The latest set of indicators suggested that GDP was likely to have fallen again in the March quarter.
Members noted that, over the same period, banks’ lending rates had increased slightly, driven by increases in housing lending rates for investors and on interest-only loans.
Inflation was significantly higher in the United Kingdom, partly reflecting the increase in the VAT rate and the depreciation of the pound sterling.
Most of the increase in longer term yields reflected higher real yields.
Despite wages growth having generally trended higher over the preceding few years, inflation had remained below target in a range of economies.
Members began their discussion on financial markets by noting that markets had been relatively stable over the past month.
Notwithstanding the slower growth in output, labour markets in the major advanced economies had remained tight and there had been ongoing signs of upward pressure on wages.
Liaison with retailers suggested that household spending had softened somewhat in July but had been better in August.
Labour markets in the advanced economies had continued to tighten and wages growth had picked up.
The Board's decision to lower the cash rate by 25 basis points at the October meeting had been largely anticipated by the market and did not have a large effect on the yield curve.
While no explicit target was set, the ECB's intention appears to be to expand its balance sheet back to its crisis peak, which would be around 1 trillion euros larger than at present, through a combination of targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and asset purchases.
Growth of Australia's major trading partners remained consistent with the earlier outlook, with growth early in 2014 around its long-run average.
Members noted that the extent of spare capacity in the economy at the end of the forecast period was uncertain, which meant that the gradual increase in inflation could be slower or faster than envisaged in the baseline scenario.
Members noted that investor demand for recent AGS issuance had been strong and that spreads of semi-government yields to AGS had remained narrow.
In light of these considerations and turning to the policy decision, members agreed that a further increase in interest rates was warranted.
One important pre-condition was a restructuring of private-sector holdings of Greek debt with a haircut of effectively more than 70 per cent, which was to occur later in the week.
Activity in the rest of east Asia continued to recover from the natural disasters in 2011, which had disrupted supply chains throughout the region.
Members granted leave of absence to Alison Watkins AM in accordance with section 18A of the Reserve Bank Act 1959.
Members also noted that the current price growth was somewhat at odds with the falls in housing loan approvals over recent months.
This meant that average outstanding mortgage rates had declined by around 65 basis points since the middle of the year.
Banks' longer-term funding costs had declined a little over recent months, consistent with lower long-term government bond yields, even though spreads on bank bonds had increased over the preceding year.
A sharp increase in fertiliser prices had raised concerns about rationing by farmers, which could depress agricultural output and sustain upward pressure on some food prices in the period ahead.
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members noted that recent data had provided more confidence that global growth was rising and that the pick-up was broadly based across both developed and emerging economies.
They noted the staff estimate of growth in Australia's trading partners in the June quarter of around ½ per cent, and about 4 per cent over the year.
Growth in consumption was expected to increase over the forecast period, supported by some recovery in growth in household income and the turnaround in prices in the established housing market.
Nonetheless, members acknowledged that inflation remained high and broadly based.
The monthly CPI indicator for headline inflation had moderated to 7.4 per cent over the year (from 8.4 per cent in December).
Members noted that housing prices had increased noticeably across all major capital cities in June, based on preliminary data.
On the second option, the Board agreed that market participants could question the longevity of the yield target it if were raised or its tenor shortened.
Issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) had been strong in 2017.
The question to be addressed at that time would be whether the interest rates faced by borrowers as a result of the combination of policy action and market developments would exert sufficient restraint to contain inflation over the medium term.
Members commenced their discussion of the domestic economy by noting that domestic demand had grown by around 3 per cent over the year to the December quarter.
The unemployment rate had also increased noticeably in Ireland.
Accounting for household offset accounts, the household credit-to-GDP ratio was at its lowest since the early 2000s, as was the ratio of business credit to GDP.
Accommodative monetary policy, strong public demand, a renewed expansion in the resources sector and growth in exports were also expected to support a return of GDP growth to trend over coming years.
Members noted that economic activity in the first half of 2020 would be significantly affected by the global response to the COVID-19 outbreak.
Auction clearance rates and the number of auctions increased in May, but remained lower than a year earlier.
Growth had been boosted by exports, following the substantial depreciation of the US dollar.
Similar trends had been seen, though to a lesser extent, in the US and Canada, which also had puzzling strength in employment in the context of apparently weak productivity growth.
They discussed the extent to which this should be interpreted as a signal that demand was weaker than previously assumed.
Members observed that the forecasts were predicated on there being an additional one to two increases in the cash rate over coming quarters and an assumption that productivity growth would recover over the year ahead.
The fall in the Chinese share market could not be traced to any particular event, though it may have reflected concerns about measures, such as a capital gains tax, the authorities were contemplating to curb speculative excesses in asset markets.
Members observed that the forces underpinning developments in the domestic economy were much as they had been for some time.
Members noted that the adjustment in the retail sector had been protracted and had put downward pressure on inflation for some years.
Members noted that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase in all major markets.
But total provision of credit to the business sector had nevertheless accelerated.
Some surveyed firms were reporting a lack of available labour as a constraint on output.
This slowing had been broad-based across states and industries, and was particularly pronounced in the household services and retail sectors.
In considering the stance of monetary policy, members noted that the available data suggested that the global economy continued to record moderate growth.
As a result, the exchange rate was offering less assistance than would normally be expected in achieving balanced growth in the economy.
Recent data suggested that the US economy had grown at a moderate pace over recent months, after contracting in the first quarter.
Growth was then expected to slow to around 1¾ per cent over both 2023 and 2024.
Members observed that some resource firms may have been able to increase their exports to take advantage of higher commodity prices by running down inventories.
June quarter GDP outcomes for other countries in the region were generally soft, although domestic demand had continued to grow solidly.
The Japanese labour market remained very tight and unit labour costs growth had increased relative to long-term averages, yet both headline and core inflation in year-ended terms had fallen over the past six months or so.
Once they take effect, these increases would imply a small rise in the average outstanding variable housing loan rate, unwinding about half of the decline observed in the average housing loan rate over the preceding year.
These factors supported an argument for taking more pre-emptive action.
Overall, data on the domestic economy appeared to be broadly consistent with the Bank's most recent forecasts.
Although job vacancy rates had declined, they remained unusually high.
With growth expected to be close to trend and inflation consistent with the target, the Board considered that this setting was appropriate for the overall macroeconomic outlook.
In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Bank of England, the expectation of further easing had followed guidance from these central banks that they were preparing for the possibility of negative policy rates.
Members also discussed the staff’s assessment of spare capacity in the economy.
Although there was considerable uncertainty about the size of the net effect on GDP, it was expected to be small based on the available evidence.
The Bank had injected substantial liquidity into the financial system through its daily open market operations to support credit and maintain low funding costs in the economy.
The prices of tradable items (excluding volatile items and tobacco) had declined modestly in the June quarter and over the preceding year.
Persistent inflationary pressures related to rising energy prices and labour shortages had brought forward the timing of the Bank of England's first policy rate increase implied by market pricing to early 2022.
Members noted that when total returns – which include dividend payments – were taken into account, Australian equities had performed similarly to equity markets in most other advanced economies, apart from the United States, where equity markets had outperformed.
While growth was forecast to slow to 4¾ per cent in 2007, if realised this would be the fifth consecutive year of growth above the 30-year average; these forecasts did not yet incorporate the higher-than-expected US December quarter GDP figures.
Members observed that the average growth rate for the world economy had been drifting up in recent years as the share of the world economy represented by the advanced economies declined and that of emerging economies, such as China and India, grew.
The strength in Chinese crude steel production had supported imports of high-quality iron ore and coking coal.
Ultimately, if upside risks to inflation were to materialise, or the credibility of the path to reduce inflation came into question, it would be costly to re-establish low inflation.
Overall growth was expected to be moderate in the period ahead.
Strength in sales appeared to be concentrated among large retailers, whose sales were rising rapidly.
Members noted that this had contributed to a depreciation of the Australian dollar, which had declined to around its lowest level in 2021 in US dollar and TWI terms, notwithstanding a rise in commodity prices and interest rates in Australia relative to other large advanced economies over the year to date.
Fertiliser prices had also risen sharply, which could reduce crop yields internationally if farmers respond by curtailing the use of fertiliser.
Among these, an appreciation of the Australian dollar would be expected to result in a slower pick-up in economic activity and inflation than otherwise.
Housing credit growth had continued to pick up, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially first-home buyers.
Growth in crude steel production had been modest and steel prices had fallen noticeably over the past month.
The rapid growth in house prices in Perth over the past several years was quite different from that seen in the other capitals, where prices had been flat between the end of 2003 and the end of 2005 and risen mildly since then.
The main exception was rural exports, which had been revised a little higher because of favourable weather.
Conditions in the Sydney and Melbourne housing markets had continued to ease, following significant growth over preceding years.
Members noted that Australian banks continued to raise funds relatively cheaply, with a recent issue of residential mortgage-backed securities being of record size in the domestic market and occurring at the tightest pricing since the financial crisis.
However, members observed that there was considerable uncertainty about the resilience of household consumption and that the squeeze on many households’ finances could result in consumption slowing more sharply than implied by the current forecasts.
Members noted that the recent banking system problems in the United States and Switzerland had created stress and volatility in financial markets, especially bond markets.
Longer term government bond yields had declined in most economies over the prior month, driven by the decline in longer term policy rate expectations amid signs that inflation may have peaked and the weakening economic outlook.
Wage growth had picked up in the September quarter, following a relatively weak outcome in June, to be around rates of recent years in year-ended terms.
There had been little change in the outlook for the world economy since the previous Board meeting.
An appreciating exchange rate would complicate this adjustment.
Overall, recent data and information from liaison were consistent with further recovery in the established housing market and moderate growth in dwelling investment.
This effect alone was expected to lower Australian GDP growth by around ½ percentage point in the March quarter.
Members agreed that the fiscal problems in Europe, if not resolved satisfactorily, could result in renewed turmoil in markets and fresh weakness in the global economy, which could have implications for Australia.
Market participants expected the cash rate to be around 15 basis points for an extended period, a little above the 10 basis point deposit rate on Exchange Settlement balances.
Members noted that this appeared to have been mainly due to softening demand from investors in an environment of declining housing prices in some markets, although it was likely that there had also been some reduction in the supply of credit associated with tighter lending standards.
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 2.85 per cent.
As in the financial crises of 2008 and 1998, the renminbi had remained stable, with foreign exchange reserves having declined a little from high levels.
The stock of non-residential building work yet to be done had fallen further in the June quarter but was still around its decade-average as a share of GDP, and approvals for new work remained low.
Chinese equity prices had declined further over September, reflecting concerns about growth prospects in China.
In the established housing market, new listings in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up and prices had levelled off in recent months.
The exchange rate had depreciated by more than 20 per cent over the past year and was now about 5 per cent below its post-float average.
Finally, the arguments for no change in the cash rate placed further emphasis on the lagged effects of the large policy adjustment to date, and the value in proceeding cautiously in an uncertain environment.
Overall, the market was pricing in two 25 basis point increases in the cash rate over the remainder of 2023, an expectation shared by around half of market economists.
Members noted that the expectation within financial markets remained that forthcoming changes to the Bank of Japan's executive would usher in a more aggressive policy stance.
Financial strains had continued during September but lessened noticeably following the reduction in the federal funds rate of 50 basis points announced by the Federal Reserve on 18 September.
Nevertheless, there were ongoing reports of firms using bonuses and other non-wage incentives to attract and retain labour, within a general environment of subdued wages growth.
Members observed that outcomes for the nominal side of the economy had not been as positive.
Members noted that this combination of factors posed downside risks.
In foreign exchange markets, the US dollar had depreciated a little further in trade-weighted terms over the preceding month to be lower than before the US election.
The tensions in European financial markets had seen a further pushing back in the expectations of when central banks in the three largest advanced economies would begin tightening policy.
Wage growth in the public sector over 2013 was around its slowest pace since 2000, consistent with ongoing fiscal restraint.
A similar development had occurred in countries where resource stocks carried a high weighting in the share market, e.g.
Higher iron ore prices had supported overall export values and the trade surplus had increased to almost 3 per cent of GDP in the March quarter.
Firms in the Bank’s liaison program reported that the demand for labour had remained strong, but had eased over preceding months in line with the job advertisements data.
However, it was clear that investment spending plans for the year ahead were now being scaled back.
Compared with some earlier cyclical growth slowdowns, measures of confidence and household spending looked weaker, but the slowdown in the labour market and survey-based measures of business conditions had, so far at least, been relatively mild by past standards.
The latest IMF and private-sector forecasts were suggesting that growth in both the developed and emerging economies in 2009 would be significantly lower than thought only a few months earlier.
The euro area was experiencing significant economic weakness.
However, central banks had also emphasised that policy rates were unlikely to decline over coming months, in contrast to market-implied expectations.
In any event, the data indicated that some divergence in growth among the states was not uncommon, though it was noteworthy that NSW had underperformed the national average for five consecutive years.
Members also noted that, consistent with reports of deposit outflows, Greek banks' use of emergency liquidity assistance had increased further during April and May.
Meanwhile, net service exports had risen further in response to the earlier depreciation of the exchange rate and were expected to continue supporting GDP growth over the forecast period.
The Australian dollar had also traded in a relatively wide range in the recent period and closely tracked the changing sentiment in global financial markets.
Developments in credit and asset markets, on the other hand, had remained subdued.
Tradables inflation (excluding volatile items and tobacco) had picked up in response to the depreciation of the Australian dollar over the past year or so.
Prices appeared to have levelled out in late 2009 in lower-priced suburbs, consistent with reduced demand following the winding back of the higher grants to first-home buyers.
In contrast, recent data in China had been much more positive.
Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declined relative to 10-year government bond yields in other advanced countries in anticipation of the Bank's bond purchase program.
The one-notch ratings downgrade by Moody's of Australia's four major banks had had no effect on banks' bond spreads, mainly because the downgrade had been expected for some time.
Indicators of consumer spending had been soft.
Members noted that global financial conditions had eased over prior months.
These data and reports from liaison with businesses suggested that wages growth was unlikely to pick up in the near future.
The wage price index for the private sector increased by 0.9 per cent in the March quarter, to be 3.7 per cent higher over the year; growth of public-sector wages slowed a little in the quarter and was running at 3.1 per cent in year-ended terms.
Turning to the outlook for inflation, members took account of wages growth running at about 4¼ per cent, adjusting for the changed timing of the most recent minimum wage increase, and the fact that capacity utilisation was currently at its highest level on record.
As a result, government bond yields in Australia had moved further below those in the United States.
Members observed that financing conditions for corporations had improved.
A few central banks, including the Bank of Korea, Norges Bank and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, had already increased their policy rates.
While this had been largely driven by domestic demand in these economies, reflecting strong economic stimulus, there were also recent signs of a pick-up in their exports.
Policy rates were also steady in Japan and the UK, but had been cut by 50 basis points in Canada.
The case to hold the cash rate steady at this meeting was further supported by the need to balance the risks to the inflation forecast with those surrounding the outlook for full employment.
Members noted, however, that this did not change the Bank's assessment of how inflationary pressures were likely to evolve in the forecast period.
Inflationary pressures remained well contained and were likely to remain so in the period ahead.
Members noted that food and energy make up a relatively large share of Chinese households' consumption and that recent disease- and weather-related supply problems are likely to result in further increases in food prices.
This was consistent with both the ongoing increase in iron ore supply and further weakening of the Chinese property market, which is an important source of demand for steel.
Members noted that the most recent data on the labour market had been a little more positive than early in 2014.
Members also noted that Chinese steel production per capita was likely to be close to its peak and that growth in Chinese steel production would not add much to global demand for iron ore in the future.
There had been an increase in inflation for retail items because there had been some pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation and the drought had boosted certain food prices.
The local share market also moved generally in line with its global counterparts, but in contrast to recent months, it tended to outperform other markets.
In most advanced economies, labour markets had remained tight and wages growth had picked up, while inflation had remained subdued.
Information from liaison suggested employment intentions had remained weak in the residential construction sector but positive among services firms.
Members noted that, while non-bank lending comprised a small share of system-wide credit and there had been little evidence of a decline in lending standards, it was important that lending standards remained prudent.
In particular, underlying inflation was still, on the latest data, above the target and, while current forecasts suggested it would fall in the coming year, the expected trough in inflation was significantly higher than earlier thought.
In the euro area, the fall in German yields had reflected, in part, the effect of safe-haven flows and an easing in growth momentum in the euro area.
The unemployment rate in August was 3.5 per cent, around the lowest rate in almost 50 years.
Members noted that the cost of borrowing US dollars in money markets had fallen a little in October following the implementation of new regulations for US money market funds.
Conditions in the labour market were expected to ease further over the coming year or so, to levels consistent with sustained full employment.
Total social financing flows had moderated in recent months and overall inflationary pressures remained subdued.
Indicators of domestic demand across advanced economies had been mixed.
While the yield on 3-year AGS had remained consistent with the target, it had been a little higher than 25 basis points over the preceding weeks.
The New Payments Platform was highlighted for its capability to deliver more than 19 million COVID-19 support payments in recent months, providing immediate value and mostly on weekends.
Forecasts for public consumption and investment, including infrastructure spending, had been upgraded.
However, the Australian equity market had declined, with share prices for some companies falling in response to profit warnings.
This suggested that there continued to be excess capacity in the labour market, as did indicators such as the underutilisation rate.
The depreciation from the middle of the year had been consistent with the decline in yields on Australian government bonds compared with those of other major advanced economies and, more recently, concerns around slowing momentum of the Chinese economy.
Inflationary pressures were expected to remain subdued.
While the Bank's liaison continued to suggest modest growth, there was a surprisingly large fall in the ABS estimate of retail spending in October.
Growth in public sector investment had been positive despite a decline in defence spending.
Activity in China had rebounded in May following the relaxation of COVID-19-related mobility restrictions and in response to ongoing policy stimulus.
Although the prospects for a partial trade agreement between the United States and China had improved since the previous meeting, the likelihood of a more comprehensive agreement remained uncertain.
Members noted that while the timing of investment upturns was very difficult to predict, it appeared likely that growth of the economy over the coming year would be below trend but that growth could reasonably be expected to pick up thereafter.
Swiss government bond yields were negative up to a tenor of nearly 50 years.
Members recognised that these forecasts were subject to a high degree of uncertainty and that there were significant risks on both the upside and downside.
In the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 4¼ per cent by the end of 2022 and to 4 per cent by the end of 2023, which was lower than previously forecast.
Financial market participants' expectations were that the federal funds rate would be increased by more than previously thought, but a slower pace of increase was expected than indicated by the FOMC.
Following a moderation in growth in the March quarter, some of the recent Chinese data had been more positive.
An example was the trimmed mean measure of underlying inflation for the June quarter, which was lowered from 0.9 per cent to 0.7 per cent, bringing the year-ended rate down from 2.7 per cent to 2.5 per cent (though underlying inflation looked slightly higher in history).
This had been most evident for Spain and Italy, where yields on government bonds had risen significantly as foreign investors reduced their exposures by not rolling over maturing debt and selling debt in the secondary market.
Output in the rest of east Asia appeared to have been growing at around its average pace of recent years, supported by stronger domestic demand.
Markets also expected smaller rate cuts from that point, given the ongoing resilience in economic activity and labour market conditions.
Outside Western Australia, business failure rates had declined.
Pricing in domestic financial markets indicated that there was little chance of a reduction in the cash rate at the present meeting.
Over the period ahead, new information should allow the Board to assess whether the improvement in labour market conditions was continuing and whether the recent financial turbulence presaged weaker global and domestic demand.
In the established housing market, the number of auctions had declined and remained lower than a year earlier, even though auction clearance rates had increased of late (particularly in Sydney).
Housing construction activity had experienced a significant downturn since mid 2007, triggered by the introduction of tighter safety requirements for buildings.
The tightening had flowed through to increased corporate bond spreads; recent bond issuance in China had been weak after a sustained period of strength, although yields had remained low.
Members also noted data on domestic migration in Australia showing that the population flow from capital cities to regional areas had picked up.
Members noted that the shift from cash to electronic payments is further advanced in Australia than in a number of other countries.
In the meantime, the expectation that policy might be eased was itself being reflected in a reduced level of market interest rates.
The Australian equity market had also shown little net change over the past month, with company earnings announcements broadly in line with expectations.
Members recalled that the wage price index had risen by 4 per cent over the year to the June quarter, which indicated no acceleration in wages.
However, the marked deterioration in global financial conditions over the past couple of months, which had also had an effect on Australian financial markets and share prices, was likely to have a significant effect as well on business and consumer sentiment, and liaison information was reflecting this.
Chinese authorities had taken measures to stabilise the property market, in addition to fiscal and monetary policy measures to support the recovery more broadly.
The closure of international borders had led to sharp falls in tourism imports and exports, and education exports had also been much lower.
Contacts had reported that tighter access to credit for off-the-plan and project homes had been constraining buyer demand.
Private sector wages growth had picked up further in the December quarter, consistent with the Bank's forecasts and survey evidence that a significant share of firms were finding it difficult to attract suitable labour.
Despite the resumption of growth, there remained significant spare capacity in the advanced economies as evidenced by the high levels of unemployment and low levels of measures of capacity utilisation.
Potential catalysts for this included persistently high global inflation, which would require interest rates to remain high for longer than currently expected, and/or a sharp downturn in the global economy.
Compared with a yield target, a BPP provides more flexibility to respond to evolving economic circumstances, although it could entail larger financial costs.
Insolvencies and firm closures in 2020 had been supressed by a range of support measures, including stimulus payments, loan repayment deferrals, rent reductions and a moratorium on insolvencies.
Members noted that the first $100 billion phase of the bond purchase program was scheduled to be completed in early April.
Housing prices, in particular, had increased strongly in a number of countries in the latter part of 2020 and early 2021.
Expectations for policy tightening had increased.
Equity market volatility had increased from the very low levels of 2017, in part reflecting concerns over the direction of international trade policy in the United States.
On a year-ended basis, underlying inflation was running at a little below 2½ per cent, the midpoint of the medium-term target.
Higher energy prices, alongside the strong recovery in global demand and ongoing capacity constraints in the goods sector, had contributed to this development.
Members were informed that, measured by the change in the terms of trade over the past five years, Australia had received a larger income gain than any other comparable country, even before taking this year's projected increase into account.
Members observed the heightened uncertainty regarding developments in Russia and Greece, and that most banks in the major advanced markets, including Australia, had relatively little direct exposure to these economies.
This was a significant increase over such a period and much of the effect of it was still to be seen.
The exchange rate had also declined somewhat from the very high levels of a few months ago.
While the unemployment rate had edged down a little further in previous months, broader measures of labour underutilisation had not declined.
Internationally, spreads in money markets had continued to fall and were now clearly below the levels that had prevailed shortly before the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September.
Growth in total credit in April had remained around the fastest pace of the preceding decade.
The WTI crude oil price had reached almost US$100 per barrel during the past month, but had dropped back to below US$90 in the past week or so.
Financial market pricing implied that the Australian cash rate was expected to remain unchanged for a considerable period, with some expectation of a decrease by late 2019.
Thereafter, they were expected to drift lower, reflecting the effect of the expected slowing in world GDP growth.
The announcement of this had little effect on interest rates on bank debt, though a scarcity premium on guaranteed issues saw spreads on guaranteed debt decline a little.
Members concurred that the appropriate course was to set policy as required by the most likely outcome, and to be ready to respond to other outcomes if they eventuated.
Members noted that these indicators were consistent with data and evidence from liaison suggesting that non-mining business investment had been growing in some parts of the economy that were less exposed to the effects of the decline in commodity prices and the fall in mining investment.
After depreciating sharply since the beginning of 2018, these economies' exchange rates had appreciated over the preceding couple of months.
Against the background of rising global inflationary pressures, a few central banks, including the Federal Reserve, had increased their policy rates in recent months, and the degree of monetary policy accommodation was expected gradually to be reduced.
Liaison suggested that financing conditions for firms in the construction sector were improving, though they remained tight.
However, a sustained decline in inflation was expected in 2023, as global supply-side issues continue to be resolved, the recent declines in commodity prices work their way through to consumer prices and growth in demand slows.
As a result of the increase in home loan interest rates that had already occurred over the year, housing mortgage payments were set to rise further in the period ahead.
This could be in response to stronger wealth effects and a decline in uncertainty, which boosted households' willingness to consume out of earlier savings and recurring labour income.
Spare capacity had continued to be absorbed, especially in the major advanced economies.
Members noted that uncertainty about job losses had affected the demand for new housing, and building approvals had declined, particularly for apartments.
The largest downward revisions for growth among advanced economies were for the United States, where many forecasters expected a shallow recession.
The US dollar had appreciated since the start of 2022 in line with the more pronounced rise in US Government bond yields compared with those in most advanced economies.
Demand had been strong from both domestic and international buyers.
Profits of non-financial companies had increased strongly in the June quarter, especially in the mining sector.
Over 2013, the US dollar had appreciated by 3 per cent on a trade-weighted basis, with a marked appreciation against the Japanese yen and a number of emerging market and commodity currencies (including the Australian dollar) partly offset by a modest depreciation against various European currencies and the Chinese renminbi.
Members noted that global shipping costs had increased recently, partly related to attacks on vessels in the Red Sea.
The CPI rose by 1.3 per cent in the quarter and by 4.2 per cent over the year.
The level of employment was little changed over the past year, although total hours worked had increased.
The Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances at zero per cent.
Financial market pricing indicated that the domestic cash rate was expected to remain unchanged at the current meeting.
European gas and thermal coal prices had fallen significantly over the prior month owing to the commitment to implement energy rationing and the imposition of a windfall tax on non-gas energy generation, including from coal.
The vaccination program would assist with containment of the virus and longer-term economic recovery.
Looking ahead, the forecast for GDP still anticipated mining investment making a significant contribution to growth in the coming quarters, with non-resource investment remaining weak, some possibility of an increase in dwelling investment, consumption growing broadly in line with incomes, and public demand subtracting from growth.
In weighing up the two options, members agreed that the case to keep the cash rate target unchanged at this meeting was the stronger one.
Consistent with the rise in investment, imports of capital goods had been growing particularly strongly over the past year.
As a result, imports of both commodities had been on an upward trend, and iron ore imports from Australia had remained around record highs in recent months.
Members noted that the Chinese market was the second largest in absolute size in Asia, behind Japan, but was quite small in international comparative terms relative to GDP.
In most of the major markets, bond yields had remained close to historic lows.
Banks were well placed to meet the Basel III capital requirements, which APRA had begun phasing in from the start of the year.
Liaison suggested that retailers had been more cautious about the outlook of late, although trading conditions had remained generally positive, and surveys suggested that consumers' perceptions of their own finances were still a little above average.
Despite the moderation in major trading partner growth in early 2016, members noted that there had been a further sizeable increase in commodity prices, particularly for iron ore, coking coal and oil.
The US dollar depreciated on a trade-weighted basis over the past month, particularly following the downward revision of the Federal Open Market Committee's policy rate expectations.
In that regard, an important contributor to the recent depreciation of the Australian dollar had been the US dollar's appreciation.
In China, economic activity stabilised early in the December quarter following an earlier period of regulatory tightening.
The path of business investment spending would be affected by the turning of the cycle in resources investment, where indicators continued to suggest that a decline was likely over the next several years.
Growth in economic activity was still expected to be a little below trend this year, picking up gradually to be close to trend through 2014.
Growth in housing lending to owner-occupiers had slowed to 4¾ per cent in six-month-ended annualised terms, although the monthly growth rate had increased slightly in February.
Employment was estimated to have fallen in April, following a large rise in March.
Regarding inflation, it could decline quickly in the face of slower growth and improved supply conditions.
Growth in output in the United States had continued to be supported by strong growth in consumption, while growth in investment appeared to have slowed further.
Members noted that many market participants expected a further increase in the cash rate at this meeting.
These markets had risen by 20–25 per cent over 2006 to date, after even larger rises in 2005 as improving economic conditions had become apparent.
The pipeline of work already approved or under way was expected to continue supporting dwelling investment around current levels over the subsequent year or so; the peak of apartment completions was expected to occur during this period.
The labour market remained tight, but less so than a few months earlier.
As a result, the forecast for the unemployment rate had been revised lower and the forecast for wages growth had been revised slightly higher.
Members noted that the information received on inflation over the prior month had been reassuring.
The Government had announced a series of measures in response and was still forecasting a small surplus in 2012/13.
Uncertainty about both the timing and speed of the recovery in non-mining business investment remained key risks to the forecasts.
Mining investment had continued to fall in the June quarter and now accounted for around 5 per cent of nominal GDP, down from a peak of around 8 per cent.
This was considered unlikely for as long as substantial spare capacity remained in labour markets and wages growth remained subdued.
There had been a slight rise in export volumes, after some very large falls, and surveyed business conditions were up strongly, to close to average levels.
Core inflation had been close to the Federal Reserve's target in the United States, where demand was likely to have been boosted by the effects of recent reductions in corporate and personal income tax rates.
The Governor proposed that members consider a substantial reduction in the cash rate.
Members again considered two options for the size of the increase in the cash rate: a 25 basis point increase or a 50 basis point increase.
The forecasts for the Australian economy were largely unchanged.
Members noted that there was an inevitable element of pro-cyclicality in public investment spending, as periods of rapid growth in private investment spending tended to require complementary investment in public infrastructure.
Quarterly GDP growth was expected to be around ½ per cent, supported by a strong recovery in resource exports from earlier supply disruptions.
Members noted that projections by members of the FOMC for the path of the federal funds rate had been revised down at the FOMC's March meeting.
Market expectations for the future path of the cash rate had shifted up materially since the February meeting.
Rental vacancy rates were much lower in Perth, where growth in new supply had been relatively modest in recent years and international students accounted for a smaller share of rental housing demand.
However, the forecast pick-up in underlying inflation was now expected to occur a little later than previously expected, mainly as a result of the lower forecast for growth in GDP and downside risks to utilities and administered price inflation in the near term.
Members noted that there were also other signs that the rate of contraction in the US economy had slowed, with the ISM surveys of business conditions in the manufacturing and other sectors showing some improvement.
Inflation was still declining towards the target and the recent information did not materially alter its trajectory.
Conditions in foreign exchange markets had remained very subdued, with little change in the major exchange rates and volatility declining further to multi-decade lows in the past month.
GDP growth in the United States had remained strong over 2018.
Although wage growth had been a little lower than expected in the September quarter, it appeared to have stabilised at a low rate.
Revised GDP and inflation forecasts prepared for this meeting were similar to those presented at the previous meeting, but took account of the higher-than-expected growth in the June quarter national accounts.
Members noted that most model-based estimates of the currency generally placed a large weight on the terms of trade.
Labour market conditions were again strong in May.
The unemployment rate had been broadly steady at around 5½ per cent since mid 2017, suggesting that spare capacity remained in the labour market.
Banks were still keenly bidding for deposits across the yield curve.
The housing sector was an area of particular weakness at present and business sentiment had also deteriorated.
But labour market conditions remained soft overall.
However, they also noted that earnings forecasts generally assumed that the high share of profits in national income and high rates of earnings growth would continue.
Members noted the high degree of uncertainty around this forecast.
Members discussed the implications of this for the Australian dollar exchange rate.
Employment had continued to grow more rapidly than the working-age population, and the unemployment rate was around its long-run average level.
Total household debt payments as a share of disposable income had increased significantly during the tightening phase.
Members noted that European governments were still looking to craft a full response to their financial problems and that tighter fiscal policy was contributing to weaker near-term growth prospects.
Much of the rise in sovereign yields since late 2020 had reflected investors revising up their expectations for inflation to be more consistent with central banks' inflation targets.
Year-ended growth in the WPI had picked up compared with the previous year across most industries and in all states and territories.
Members discussed the updated staff forecasts, which were little changed from the forecasts prepared at the time of the May meeting.
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global economy had continued to recover and that conditions were in place for a sustained expansion.
Members noted that there was considerable uncertainty around the timing and extent of the expected increase in household consumption growth and non-mining business investment.
Term premia for sovereign debt and exchange rate volatility also remained low in the major markets.
The level of corporate debt in China was particularly high for the country's stage of economic development.
However, it was also noted that Chinese demand for Australian iron ore exports remained firm.
Members observed that the softness in commercial construction meant that there was labour available to support the strong growth of higher-density dwelling construction.
Members observed that iron ore prices could remain high for some time, but prices were still expected to decline over the medium term.
In India, GDP had increased strongly in the December quarter, after two very weak quarters.
The Bank's forecasts for inflation to remain close to the target over the next year or so assumed ongoing productivity growth and wage growth remaining around the more moderate pace of recent quarters.
It was nonetheless unlikely that the market would reach its previous levels of outstandings and may no longer provide a source of funding for some purposes.
Corporate bond yields had declined alongside the fall in government bond yields and a narrowing of credit spreads.
Mining investment had declined noticeably to be around 15 per cent below its peak in late 2012, and further substantial falls were anticipated over coming quarters.
Members also noted the ongoing work of the Bank, under the oversight of the Payments System Board, to promote the efficiency, competitiveness and safety of the payments system.
The overall effect on bank funding costs had been less than the rise in the cost of wholesale debt funding since February, in part because there had been little change in interest rates for retail deposits, which account for around one-third of total bank funding.
The inflation data for the December quarter had been in line with the forecasts presented in the November Statement on Monetary Policy.
As had been the case for some time, the flow of new listings for sale remained similar to pre-pandemic levels but total listings were much lower, implying that dwellings were being sold at a rapid pace.
Members noted that the International Monetary Fund's Financial Sector Assessment Program report on the Australian financial system was generally positive about the resilience of domestic financial institutions and the quality of regulatory and supervisory oversight, but made several high-level recommendations for improving current arrangements.
They noted the sharp differences in performance between sectors and regions of the economy, and the considerable structural change that was occurring, as well as the soft overall conditions in the housing sector and the likelihood of significant fiscal tightening in the next few years.
Broader measures of spare capacity had also declined slightly over October, to remain around multi-decade lows, and the rate of participation in the labour force was close to its recent record high.
Core inflation had continued to edge higher, but remained below the Bank of Japan's 2 per cent target.
Measures of consumer sentiment had declined over recent months, but consumers' views on their personal financial situation, which historically have had a stronger link to consumption, had been little changed.
Members noted that market expectations for the path of the cash rate implied by money market rates had declined since the July meeting, as had market economists’ expectations.
For the global economy, data received over the previous month had been somewhat more positive.
However, investment had held up much better than expected earlier in the year.
It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to 3 per cent.
Resource exports and dwelling investment were expected to have made positive contributions to growth in the September quarter, following declines in the June quarter.
However, across the rest of the country, which accounts for around 60 per cent of Australia's dwelling stock, housing price growth had declined.
The problems besetting Bear Stearns, which had been covered at the previous meeting, had worsened further in recent weeks.
Members noted that there had been several periods in the preceding decade in which housing prices had fallen, or growth had slowed significantly, in different parts of the country.
Non-farm output increased by 4.6 per cent over the year, with strength in most major components in the most recent quarter.
Equity prices had increased by 4 per cent since the start of 2015 even though prices of resource companies had fallen further.
As a result, spare capacity in the labour markets of these economies was likely to continue to decline.
The lockdown and other containment measures were expected to remain in place for at least a couple of months in most countries, although there was considerable uncertainty about the extent of this, as well as the variability of the measures across countries.
In Australia, the share of total income paid to workers in wages and salaries (the ‘labour share’) had risen over the 1960s and 1970s but had gradually declined since then.
This was most notable for households and less so for large businesses.
Members discussed a paper on the potential use of new digital assets in payments.
The labour market continued to strengthen and inflation had picked up a little over recent months, while the pace of recovery in the housing market had slowed.
Members noted that each of these outcomes was conceivable given the considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook.
Retail deposit rates had also increased, but by a smaller amount.
The consensus view within financial markets remained for a ‘tapering’ of the Fed's asset purchases to commence in March.
Members noted that economic conditions early this year were, on balance, consistent with global economic growth being around average.
Conditions in the labour market had remained subdued, with members noting that the latest vintage of the labour force survey data, which was released by the ABS during the meeting, showed a small rise in the unemployment rate over the previous six months and employment growth somewhat below the pace of population growth.
At the time of the meeting, the Bank held 34 per cent of outstanding Australian Government Securities and 17 per cent of outstanding securities issued by the states and territories.
US 10-year bond yields declined by around 25 basis points to 4½ per cent in reaction to weaker US economic data and the fall in the Chinese share market.
However, regulators globally remained concerned that ‘search for yield’ behaviour could ultimately lead to disruptive repricing in financial markets.
Members noted that unusual population trends during the pandemic had materially affected national housing market conditions and other parts of the economy, and would continue to do so for some time.
These discussions had also highlighted that weaker demand conditions, including for short-term rental accommodation, were expected to extend the weakness in residential construction.
Over time, however, real incomes would be affected by higher prices and rises in interest rates; falling housing prices would dampen consumption as well as dwelling investment.
The argument for an increase of 25 basis points was that a sequence of 25 basis point moves represented a steady approach to withdrawing monetary policy stimulus and that this was appropriate in an uncertain environment.
Members felt that these arguments were finely balanced.
Domestically, there were significant differences in conditions across sectors, with a considerable degree of structural adjustment occurring in the economy.
The recent appreciation had reduced the fall in the exchange rate over the past year to 13 per cent.
In contrast, economic activity in the euro area remained weak.
Since the last change to monetary policy in June, the Board had concluded that the stance of monetary policy resulting in interest rates being a bit below average was appropriate, given low inflation and the weaker outlook for growth globally.
While consumption had held up so far, the higher interest rates and high inflation were putting pressure on household budgets at a time when housing prices were also falling.
Market pricing implied that the Fed could start raising its policy rate in late 2022 or early 2023, consistent with the ‘dot plot’, which summarises Federal Open Market Committee participants' outlook for the federal funds rate.
This was consistent with information from liaison that a larger share of firms expected wages growth to be stable (rather than increasing) in the year ahead compared with a year or so earlier.
Equity prices in most advanced economies had been rising since mid-October.
Many households have built up large financial buffers and are benefiting from stronger income growth.
The currencies of Brazil, India and other emerging economies had appreciated from their recent low points, while foreign exchange markets generally were more subdued through October.
While measures of asset quality had weakened and expenses for bad and doubtful debts had risen, overall asset quality remained strong by international standards.
Underlying inflation had picked up a little and had been slightly higher than forecast, but the increase in headline inflation had been smaller than forecast.
GDP in the euro area picked up in the final quarter of 2006, taking growth over the year to 3.3 per cent.
The Board affirmed its commitment to supporting jobs, incomes and businesses and to making sure that Australia is well placed for recovery.
Deposit rates had declined somewhat over the course of 2017, as banks' demand for deposit funding had eased once they had adjusted their balance sheets to comply with the net stable funding ratio (NSFR), which had come into effect at the start of 2018.
The rise in labour productivity apparent in the data over the year to the March quarter meant that unit labour costs as measured had increased only modestly over this period, and had even declined a little in the March quarter.
The Chinese authorities had adopted several policy measures in an attempt to reduce the speculative excesses in the equity market and to slow the pace of economic activity.
Banks' overall funding costs were at historically low levels.
Large falls in Chinese equity prices had occurred again more recently, resulting in cumulative falls from recent peaks being back around 30 per cent, although equity prices remained 70 per cent higher than a year earlier.
This reflected a trend towards higher gearing among businesses in a world that had seen macroeconomic stability, low volatility and high returns to equity for several years.
Members noted the uncertainty around the outlook and that the monthly meetings provided the Board with frequent opportunities to assess how these uncertainties were being resolved and to adjust policy if needed.
Pending this information, the Board judged it appropriate to hold the cash rate unchanged.
Movements in the month took markets back to levels of 2003, and in Japan, to levels of the early 1980s.
Project completions were expected to support further growth in resource exports, particularly iron ore and liquefied natural gas (LNG).
The main exception had been the price of gas in Europe, where a decline in October had been reversed in November with the onset of colder weather.
Growth in the Japanese economy picked up in the March quarter and indicators of activity pointed to continued growth in April.
Financial Markets Conditions in financial markets had continued to improve over the past couple of months, with sentiment supported by the partial resolution of the fiscal situation in the United States, approval of the revised Greek bailout package in December, policy developments in Japan and generally better-than-expected economic data globally.
Domestic cost pressures, including wage growth, had remained low and were expected to remain so for some time.
Foreign investors were largely limited to the China B market, which was relatively small and denominated in foreign currency.
The recovery in household spending from the pandemic-related restrictions seemed to have mostly run its course.
The slightly softer outlook for economic activity overall was expected to affect the labour market.
The staff's revised central forecast for GDP growth was broadly similar to that at the time of the August Statement on Monetary Policy.
Members noted that global growth could continue to surprise on the upside, given the synchronised nature of the current upturn.
Measures of consumer confidence had declined recently and were now below average.
Members observed that, nonetheless, the additional monetary policy stimulus as a result of the Bank's package of policy measures announced in November 2020 had contributed to the Australian dollar being noticeably lower than it would have been otherwise.
The run of regular data releases reviewed by the Board covered the business, household and housing sectors, the labour market, and prices and wages.
Looking at government finances, the Australian Government's fiscal package announced in February would provide significant stimulus to the economy over the next two years.
Survey data indicate that much of Australian household debt is owed by higher-income and middle-aged people, who tend to have more stable employment and often larger savings buffers.
Moreover, both central banks had maintained negative policy rates.
Iron ore prices had declined in response to expectations of lower near-term demand.
Although there had been some improvement in sentiment and activity over recent months, conditions were expected to remain weak, partly reflecting further fiscal consolidation over the balance of the year.
Market pricing implied that further monetary policy easing was expected following recent data and the Bank's communication since the previous meeting.
More recently, there had been evidence that wage growth in Australia had stabilised and that the effect on aggregate measures of labour costs of workers moving from mining-related activities to lower-paying jobs in the non-mining sector might almost have run its course.
The FOMC had also outlined some details regarding the plan for a gradual and predictable reduction in the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, which is expected to begin later this year.
In considering whether or not to reduce the cash rate further at this meeting, members discussed the various channels through which monetary policy was affecting the economy at present, including the asset price and exchange rate channels.
New dwelling prices had declined again in the June quarter, reflecting the use of bonus offers and purchase incentives by developers to counter the weak housing conditions.
Members observed that measures of spare capacity in the labour market remained near multi-decade lows.
The employment-to-population ratio and the participation rate were both around record highs, and measures of spare capacity in the labour market were near their lowest levels in decades.
The yield on 3-year AGS had remained at the target of around 25 basis points and market functioning had significantly improved for government bonds.
The People's Bank of China raised its policy interest rate by 25 basis points late in December and had also increased the reserve ratios of banks twice over the past two months.
Building approvals, particularly for houses, were bottoming out in all states except Western Australia, where approvals continued to trend up.
The three-month LIBOR to swap spread in the Australian market was now back at the low end of the international range, which had been the situation for most of the period since the onset of the financial crisis.
Reviewing household-sector balance sheets, members noted that generally these remained in good shape, reflecting the favourable macroeconomic environment.
And while the effects on Chinese exports had been modest to date, members noted that disruptions to goods production and distribution networks would become more evident if there were further outbreaks of COVID-19.
They also noted that the sharp increase in equity market volatility early in February had been mostly reversed, and volatility in financial markets generally remained at or a little below longer-run averages.
In both economies, activity in the March quarter had been driven by relatively strong growth in household consumption.
Business investment was expected to have increased modestly in the December quarter, led by the non-mining sector.
The large falls in employment in recent months had led to a rise in the unemployment rate to 8½ per cent in March, although there were signs that the rate of deterioration in the labour market had stabilised.
The value of retail sales had fallen slightly in February, following average growth in January, and households' perceptions of their personal finances had declined to below-average levels.
Employment had increased a little in February, following strong growth in January, and the unemployment rate had declined to 4.9 per cent, continuing the run of months with an unemployment rate at or around 5 per cent.
Members noted that indicators of the domestic economy over the past month had again been better than expected.
Domestically, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin accommodative financial conditions.
Members noted that the measured unemployment rate would be a less useful indicator of labour market underutilisation over coming months compared with hours-based measures.
However, the rollout of past commitments had been constrained by industry bottlenecks and there were risks of further delays owing to capacity constraints.
Share prices had fallen over the preceding month, reflecting concerns about international trade policy developments, as well as regulatory and company-specific developments in the technology sector.
Liaison with banks and other lenders suggested that the requirements for more thorough verification of income and expenditure data had led to an increase in loan approval times in 2018, but subsequent investments in people and technology had reduced approval times.
The high level of equity raisings in the September quarter in Australia had led to a marked reduction in corporate gearing ratios, which were now down to around 65 per cent.
Members agreed that whether further tightening of monetary policy is required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a reasonable timeframe will depend on how the incoming data alter the economic outlook and the evolving assessment of risks.
The authorities in Brazil and Thailand had increased taxes on capital inflows, while the introduction of capital controls was being considered in Korea, Indonesia and South Africa.
Commercial property yields more broadly were being compressed across a range of market segments.
The Australian banking system continued to be in a relatively strong condition.
Growth in credit extended to investors in housing had also strengthened from low levels.
In considering this month's decision, members recognised that the global economy was experiencing a severe downturn as countries sought to contain the COVID-19 outbreak.
As had been the case elsewhere around the world, business confidence had fallen noticeably and growth in business credit remained weak.
Housing credit growth had gradually increased, suggesting households had been more willing to borrow.
Members acknowledged that the risks to the inflation forecast had changed, with the distribution of possible outcomes shifting upwards.
Nevertheless, employment growth had slowed and hiring intentions pointed to further moderation in coming months.
Retail price inflation had been low as competitive pressures in the retail sector had continued to restrain price rises.
A material slowdown in the Chinese economy remained a key risk to the global outlook.
There had been a large volume of government-guaranteed bank bond issuance around the world in the past few months.
Large shipbuilders were also planning to increase capacity following several years where investment in shipping had been weak, but this would take time.
Guy Debelle (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Economic), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Peter Stebbing (Deputy Secretary) Sentiment in global financial markets deteriorated in May, as political uncertainty in Greece and growing concerns about the fiscal and banking problems in Spain added to the pessimism surrounding the outlook for the euro area.
However, in Europe, yield spreads to German government bonds had widened, most notably for Greek government bonds, following a ratings announcement, as well as concerns over Greek banks' reliance on funding from the European Central Bank.
At the time of the October meeting, market pricing implied that financial market participants applied around a 75 per cent likelihood of a 50 basis point increase in the cash rate and a 25 per cent likelihood of a 25 basis point increase; the cash rate was expected to be around 3.4 per cent by the end of 2022 and peak slightly above 4¼ per cent in mid-2023.
In response to mounting concerns about developers pausing or abandoning development projects, the Chinese authorities had put in place a number of measures to support the completion of projects.
Inflationary pressures had earlier proven more persistent than expected and there were upside risks to inflation from the labour market, rents and energy costs.
This was supported by information from liaison contacts, with around one-third of private sector firms reporting wage increases above 5 per cent.
Overall, it appeared that banks' lending standards were being maintained.
In contrast to past patterns, most of the private capital flows into Australia since the onset of the global financial crisis had been to the non-financial sector, rather than the financial sector (mainly banks), with much of that representing inflows into the resources sector, which had funded the recent high level of investment in that sector.
The participation rate had remained high in January and, for most age cohorts, participation rates had been near or above pre-pandemic levels.
Recent indicators suggested that the Australian economy had been expanding at a below-trend pace.
The supply disruptions, security concerns in the Middle East and speculative excesses that had led to a peak in the oil price of above US$70 per barrel during the middle of 2006 had since been unwinding.
In other major economies, the European Central Bank had indicated that it was prepared to add more monetary stimulus if the outlook for growth and inflation did not improve, including by expanding its bond-buying program.
Government payments and other measures, such as loan deferrals and rent moratoria, had also boosted cash flows for firms adversely affected by lockdowns.
Members assessed that overall labour market conditions nevertheless remained a little tighter than was consistent with sustained full employment and inflation at target.
There had been strong growth in employment and a welcome decline in the unemployment rate.
Housing credit growth had slowed further and the rate of credit card debt repayment had picked up.
Export and import volumes were lower than they had been in 2014, although iron ore imports from Australia appeared to have been steady over 2015.
Members noted that the current accommodative setting of monetary policy was expected to support demand and help growth strengthen at the same time as delivering inflation outcomes consistent with the target over the next two years.
Members were briefed on credit conditions, which continued to improve for both US and European corporates in October.
Members agreed that the Australian economy had significant underlying momentum and inflationary pressures were pronounced.
The wide range of economic data considered by the Board generally pointed to some improvement in confidence and economic activity in a number of countries.
Chinese exports were also estimated to have grown strongly, with recent data indicating strength in shipments to the major advanced economies as well as to elsewhere in Asia.
Health outcomes also continued to be an important source of uncertainty, although this was likely to diminish as a greater proportion of the population is vaccinated.
It will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range.
In contrast to some major advanced economy banking systems, growth of credit in some Asian economies had remained rapid.
Banks' funding costs had begun to increase from historically low levels owing to the rise in market rates over preceding months and the increase in the cash rate in May.
Recent indicators had suggested a pause in the recovery in Japan.
Private sector financial conditions had tightened, but remained favourable overall.
The authorities had announced a target for output growth in 2018 of around 6½ per cent, which was lower than the published rate of growth for 2017 of 6.9 per cent.
These firms' access to finance had been tightened over the course of 2018 as a result of earlier measures by the authorities to reduce risks in the financial system by restricting the availability of ‘shadow finance’.
Liaison suggested that the pace of retail spending might have eased somewhat more recently, while measures of consumer confidence fell back to around average levels in May.
Domestically, yields on longer-term Australian Government Securities (AGS) had also increased significantly, and the spread between 10-year AGS and US Treasury yields had widened to around 25 basis points.
Members discussed the extent to which the CPI data provided a signal about ongoing inflation trends.
In contrast, non-tradables inflation (excluding deposit & loan facilities) had picked up to a year-ended rate of 4.4 per cent, with significant increases in the prices of housing-related items, most notably utilities.
As expected, electricity prices had increased markedly in July as the higher default market offers came into effect, with some offset from government rebates.
This seemed to be mostly due to higher commodity prices.
Australian banks had been very active, and had benefitted from strong demand for their bonds.
As was the case in several other countries, this was the fourth consecutive year of strong returns.
The forecasts had also placed significant weight on the downside risks to consumption.
They emphasised that, as this decision was an operational one, it had no implications for the stance of monetary policy, nor did it have a bearing on the Board’s current approach to bond holdings acquired during the pandemic.
Members noted that the strength in the housing market and data on retail sales, for example, indicated that household consumption growth was likely to have picked up a little from the pace recorded in recent quarters.
It was also likely that having the various arms of policy all taking steps in the same direction would deliver a greater impact than the sum of the individual parts.
Members noted that over the prior month, bond yields had declined slightly in most major markets and in Australia, and had remained at generally low levels for both sovereign and corporate issuers.
Export volumes looked to have recovered somewhat in early 2018, after declining in the December quarter.
Data on the global economy suggested that prospects for all the major regions of the world were improving, though some more noticeably than others.
In the immediate aftermath of the Japanese disaster, commodity prices had declined as uncertainty rose, though this decline had been reversed after the situation became a little clearer.
The Bank has done this on multiple occasions in the past, notably during the global financial crisis and during a period of pandemic-related stress in March and April 2020.
Members reviewed a number of issues arising from the repricing of risk, which came after a long period during which risk was widely considered to be underpriced.
Year-ended growth in wages was a little stronger than had been expected but the most recent forecasts had wages growth peaking at around 4 per cent by the end of the year.
There had been only a relatively limited amount of data on the domestic economy over the past month.