The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held thefirst quarterly meeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago. The Committee agreed that China’seconomy continued to expand in a stable and relatively rapid pace. According tothe overall arrangement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitoredeconomic and financial performance and employed a combination of monetarypolicy instruments to enhance liquidity management, steadily advance market-basedinterest rate reform, and strengthen RMB exchange rate flexibility. The overallperformance of financial sector has remained sound. The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation at home and abroad and agreed that China’s economy was broadly in good shape although it stillfaced some problems such as inappropriate economic structure, extensive growthmodel and imbalanced BOP. The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, vigorous efforts should be made to improve macroeconomicpolicy, enhance macroeconomic management, and further improve coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal, industrial, foreign trade and financial regulatorypolicies. Greater progress shall be made to boost domestic consumption demand,properly contain fixed asset investment, and optimize investment structure.Importance should be attached to adjust economic structure and growth model,enhance quality and efficiency of economic growth, and promote a basic balanceunder the BOP, with a view to accelerating sound and rapid economic growth. In discussing monetary policy stance and measures tobe adopted in the coming period, the Committee suggested that the PBC shallcontinue to implement a sound monetary policy and strengthen coordination ofpolicies on local and foreign currencies as well as liquidity management in thebanking system so as to further enhance the forward-looking and scientificnature and effectiveness of monetary policy and maintain price stability. The growthof money and credit shall be properly controlled and credit structure furtheroptimized. Meanwhile, efforts shall be made to advance financial reform andinnovation, foster a multi-layered financial market system, and enhance the competitivenessof financial institutions and resource allocation efficiency of financialmarket. The managed floating exchange rate regime shall be improved in aself-initiated, controllable and gradual way to enable market supply and demandto play a fundamental role in RMB exchange rate formation and keep the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.