Having weakened after the first quarter of 2014, nonfarm employment posted notable gains during August-October period.
Nevertheless, the Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures might cause an earlier-than-projected tightening in monetary policies, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased data-sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 are 2.4% in the USA and 2.3% in the euro area, while the core inflation expectation is 2.3% for both the USA and the euro area.
Firms' investment and employment expectations, although being high, declined as of July.
Given the inflation outlook and the upside risks, the Committee evaluated strengthening the monetary policy framework in line with the price stability objective.
Exchange rate developments, soaring commodity prices and the disruptions in supply chains shaped the prices of durable goods and other core goods.
The headline PMI and the PMI production indices fell in January, despite staying above neutral levels.
Although energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably, cumulative exchange rate movements delay the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Meanwhile, in February, tobacco prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group registered a decline.
The group’s annual inflation plummeted by 4.22 points to -1.54 percent, hitting the lowest level of the index history.
When the rent subgroup is excluded, annual inflation proves almost unchanged.
Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market, and price stability are being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.
Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
Weak global economic activity coupled with more apparent downside risks repress commodity prices and lead to a mild course in oil prices despite supply-side problems stemming from geopolitical developments.
Prices of services edged up by 0.38 percent, while annual services inflation rose by 0.17 points to 8.11 percent in December.
This period was marked by escalating vegetable prices caused by adverse weather conditions and supply-related upsurges in meat prices.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
Effects of exchange rate developments were apparent in many items, particularly on core goods, while items with relatively low exchange rate pass-through also recorded noticeable price hikes.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities followed a similar pattern as in the previous month.
However, following the statements from the Fed and the European Central Bank, portfolio flows to emerging economies slowed in the last two weeks (7 January-19 January), with both bond and equity markets recorded portfolio inflows below USD 1 billion.
Card spending surged in the same period.
However, given the waning effects of the July turmoil, the significant rise in October’s PMI employment index boding well for industrial employment gains and the subsiding repercussions of the tourism slump, the climb in unemployment might come to a standstill.
Monthly inflation in the other core goods group stood at 3.94%.
Prices in the services group rose by 3.89%, while the group’s annual inflation decreased by 1.31 points to 58.62%.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of expansionary fiscal policy.
On the other hand, employment gains are more positive compared to peer economies when the post-pandemic period is examined.
It should be noted that the remaining impact of the mid-February increase of 15 percent in medicine prices caused by the reference exchange rate will also be felt in March.
Leading indicators regarding September hint at a prolonged downward correction in unprocessed food inflation.
In this respect, global inflation is expected to remain flat in 2020.
Although investment remains weak, survey indicators show that in addition to large firms in the manufacturing industry which have higher investment appetite, investment tendency in small and medium-sized firms have also started to recover after bottoming out.
Thus, prices of durable goods and other core goods posted sharp widespread increases.
Electricity prices used by the households, industry and businesses increased starting from October.
The impact of automatic tax increases is also visible in bottled gas prices.
Across main industrial categories, annual inflation was almost flat in intermediate goods, but was up in other subgroups, energy in particular.
Energy prices receded by 3.13% in July, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 22.06 points to 129.27%.
In order to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth trade-off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
After a downtrend for a while, the labor force participation rate remained flat.
The deteriorated pricing behavior, tight financial conditions and the financial state of the corporate sector have recently caused inflation dynamics to change and the uncertainty over inflation and forecasts to rise.
The Committee emphasized that the steps toward tighter monetary policy should be accompanied by an enhanced macro policy coordination to ensure a modest rebalancing of the economy.
In October, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index increased by 2% on a monthly basis.
Within the scope of liquidity measures taken in this regard, targeted additional liquidity facilities started to be gradually phased down.
The Committee anticipates to complete the tightening cycle as soon as possible.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is evaluated that there was a growth in the demand for Turkish lira denominated assets.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets.
Thus, the transmission of expectations regarding the disinflation process to long-term commercial loan interest rates is supported.
On the other hand, the credit card spending increased substantially on a monthly basis in February.
Data for the second quarter indicate that external demand maintains its strength.
Both global energy prices and non-energy commodity prices fell in this period.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down month-on-month in February 2016, due to the weakening labor supply and the moderate gain in nonfarm employment.
Indicators for the construction industry do not hint at a recovery for construction activity.
This fall was led by the favorable courses of unprocessed and processed food prices as well as the strong base effect.
In such a case, global financial markets may witness fluctuations as in early February, and emerging economies may face higher volatility in exchange rates and weakening portfolio flows.
In this period, the contribution of energy and services to annual inflation rose, while that of food, core goods and the alcohol-tobacco-gold group decreased.
The moderate course of aggregate demand conditions and the continued downtrend in import prices support disinflation as of the first quarter.
The lowering effect on industrial production of the contraction in the production of vehicles is expected to be compensated for in the coming months.
The current level of oil prices is below the levels of the pre-pandemic period.
While annual inflation fell by 11.49 points to 79.51% in unprocessed food, it increased by 2.36 points to 100.38% in processed food.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that, although losing momentum, the upward trend in employment is maintained.
In April, the retail sales volume index fell on a monthly and quarterly basis.
The baseline monetary policy stance for the upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
The upward trend in reserves has gained momentum recently and a significant increase of USD 8.1 billion has been recorded since the previous MPC meeting.
On the other hand, while continuing to rise throughout the second quarter, card spending indicated a slowdown in domestic demand towards the end of the quarter.
While annual inflation increased in clothing, footwear and durables goods, it remained flat in other core goods.
Overall, underlying trend of services inflation edged up in August.
Annual inflation in rents and transport, on the other hand, decreased.
To support the monetary transmission mechanism, the CBRT has taken policy measures to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-Protected Deposit Accounts.
Furthermore, the newly-restored relations with Russia translated into a boost for exports.
Despite the mild course in exchange rates, the commodity price increases that became more evident due to lingering supply-side problems and the geopolitical unrest affected producer prices negatively in February.
Leading indicators suggest that the significant monthly price increases coming through the channels of demand, wages, exchange rates, taxes and deteriorating pricing behavior will also continue in August.
Increased electricity prices for businesses are expected to have a negative impact on services prices through the cost channel in July and the upcoming months.
In the same period, although its growth slowed down to 7%, personal credit cards maintained its strong trend, and its annual growth remained flat at 184.2%.
As of July, seasonally adjusted employment was recorded at 31.7 million.
Consumption spending fuels the domestic demand, while investments remain relatively sluggish.
In addition to the adjustment in electricity prices, adjustments introduced to some items with administered prices like tobacco and alcoholic drinks in early January will have a direct effect on inflation close to 0.7 point.
In the first quarter, the maintained strength of economic activity supported the increase in employment and the decline in unemployment.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.76 points to 10.97 percent.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Türkiye.
Owing to the decelerating cumulative exchange rate effects, core goods excluding clothing saw a further decline in annual inflation, albeit limited.
In line with red meat prices, processed meat products recorded a decline.
The Committee will closely monitor the developments affecting inflation and take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Monthly increases in rents strengthened further and reached 9.52%.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 45 percent to 50 percent.
Although aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a steadily waning effect on inflation, the significant cost pressures from the recent Turkish lira depreciation and their potential second-round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.
Inflation is expected to hover around current levels for some time due to the effects of the exchange rates and start declining afterwards.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as they have recently.
Monthly increase in production spread across the sectors, while industrial production was stronger in exporting sectors.
Before the disaster of the century, leading indicators were pointing to a stronger domestic demand compared to foreign demand as well as an increase in the growth trend in the first quarter of 2023.
Overall, core inflation indicators continued to improve.
Excluding this effect, the underlying trend of industrial production remained strong.
In short, economic activity was robust in the third quarter.
On the unprocessed food front, rises in seasonally adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables were noticeable.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 3.02% in June, and annual inflation rose by 1.40 points to 53.92%.
Moreover, forecasts are based on the assumption that the year-end food inflation in 2016 and 2017 will be lower than the projections of the previous Report amid the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the actions taken by the Food Committee.
Along with the pandemic-related rise in unit costs, exchange rate and credit developments restrain the demand-side disinflationary effects, and the trends of core inflation indicators have increased.
Thus, annual services inflation declined by 0.26 points to 15.14%.
The outlook for energy inflation was largely dominated by changes in municipal water tariffs and fuel prices.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 93%.
Indicators for pressures on the global supply chain continued to hover below their historical trend, while international transportation costs remained mild in April.
Nevertheless, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
The course of inflation is considered to be broadly in line with the year-end inflation projection.
The rise in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods group.
The effects of rate hike scenarios on key macroeconomic variables such as inflation, loan growth, loan and market rates, economic activity and expectations were assessed from a holistic perspective.
With the easing of pandemic measures, restaurants-hotels prices increased significantly in March.
On the processed food front, annual inflation sustained the uptrend due to the price developments in the bread-cereals group but with a diminishing pace.
By sectors, employment picked up slightly in services and construction but declined in the industrial sector for the third period in a row.
Services inflation slightly increased in February while core goods inflation remained mild.
Besides, the upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost pressure on consumer inflation.
Given the low base effect from the second quarter of 2017, energy inflation is likely to remain on the rise in the short term.
In this period, as the three-month average increases in core indicators B and C remain flat, the underlying trend of inflation is not expected to display a significant change.
All in all, despite some deceleration, the underlying trend of services prices remained high.
The increased likelihood of the adoption of protective policies in the US following the elections poses a downside risk to the pace of growth and employment in emerging economies.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in July in line with the global risk appetite.
Moreover, the import volume index for non-gold intermediate goods grew strongly during October-November, while non-gold exports increased only modestly.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as it has recently.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in November parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to provide repayment flexibility for export rediscount credits and to reduce the quantity of foreign-exchange required reserves.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.78% and 8.49% respectively in February 2022, stood at 7.89% and 7.88 % respectively in September 2023.
Long-term interest rates fell to historic lows across advanced economies, and both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low-rate environment is likely to continue for a long period.
Meanwhile, in response to international agricultural commodity prices and exchange rate developments, the egg and poultry items that have a significant weight in the other unprocessed food group posted noticeable price increases.
Besides fresh fruits and vegetables prices, the red meat prices stood out with price increases, while prices of processed food items related to these products displayed a similar course.
Turkish lira deposit rates have increased by 1071 basis points since the previous MPC meeting week and reached 60.34% on .
Led by unprocessed food items, the food group adversely affected headline inflation in December.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which increased by 2.81 percentage points compared to the previous MPC meeting period due to macroprudential measures to support the monetary transmission mechanism, stood at 49.6% as of 15 March.
February discounts lagged well behind historical averages in the clothing industry despite weaker output and external demand, whereas temporary tax cuts put a lid on price hikes in durable goods.
Across non-farm industries, the previous quarter’s decline in construction employment came to a halt.
While these developments support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite, rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies pose downside risks to these portfolio flows towards emerging markets.
Thus, the unemployment rate continues to face upside risks for the period ahead.
On the other hand, slowing oil prices curbed services inflation through transport services.
The gloomy tourism industry continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
In the January-February period, industrial production edged down by 0.4% in quarterly terms.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of more robust external demand even some regional differences emerge.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding global monetary policies cause fluctuations in portfolio inflows.
In addition to soaring house prices and the backward-indexation behavior, imbalances between supply and demand in the real estate market affect consumer inflation negatively by pushing rent increases upwards.
Recent tightening in financial conditions is likely to have some slowing impact on loan growth in the upcoming period.
The durable goods sector, which is expected to be affected more rapidly by financial conditions, stands out in this respect.
Calendar and seasonally-adjusted industrial production dipped both monthly and annually due to the domestic turbulence of July and the extended Ramadan holiday.
It is expected that even though there is an appreciation in the Turkish lira, crude oil prices will increase at a higher rate in January and group inflation will continue to climb due to hikes in administered prices.
Prices of durable goods rose by 3.85% due to prices of white goods and automobiles, and annual inflation hit 84.93% in this subcategory.
In order to determine the developments in the underlying trend, the seasonally adjusted monthly changes and 3-month moving average changes of these core indicators are closely monitored.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 15.00 points to 17.85 points in the services group (2.86 points of increase), from 10.49 points to 12.95 points in the core goods group (2.46 points of increase), from -2.64 points to -0.39 points in the energy group (2.25 points of increase), from 13.56 points to 15.27 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (1.71 points of increase), and from 1.81 points to 2.15 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.34 points of increase).
A similar outlook is also evident in demand indicators.
In the July period, non-farm employment recorded an increase across sectors.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up by 0.3 percentage points, while the unemployment rate remained flat at 8.8% in quarterly terms.
In this period, there was significant divergence between the producer prices for PPI for agriculture and the consumer prices for food.
Consumer prices rose by 2.98% in May, while annual inflation increased by 3.53 points to 73.50%.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continue to support the current account balance.
In addition to the high level of and the stickiness in the services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, volatility in commodity prices and food prices keep inflationary pressures alive.
The Committee maintains the view that demand-driven disinflationary effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year, but risks to the end-year projection are considered to be on the upside due to recent realizations in inflation.
Across sectors, industrial and services employment remained almost flat, while employment in the construction sector continued to fall compared to the previous period.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production increased by 0.5% month-on-month and by 13.3% year-on-year in May.
Economies advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance in economic activity by easing the restrictions.
Domestic economic activity remained strong in the second quarter.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
As of , the retail loan balance increased by 81.1% in credit cards, 68.7% in vehicle loans, 30.6% in personal loans, and 22.1% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 44.6% in total.
Overall, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance, while the relatively weaker exports limit this improvement.
Therefore, simplification of the monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a reasonable schedule.
In this period, employment increased by 0.3% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased by 0.1 points.
In the recent period, oil prices have decreased notably driven by both supply and demand factors.
While unprocessed food prices remained flat, the rise in egg prices stood out, and pulse prices, which displayed a significant increase in the first half of the year, declined.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira stood at 6.4% and 18.7%, respectively, as of .
In this period, annual inflation receded in clothing-footwear and other core goods groups, but rose in durable goods.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the provisional foreign trade data for March and high frequency data for April, implies a flat trend in exports and an increase in imports.
Foreign direct investment, stable course of external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, the positive impact of rebalancing in demand on current account balance, and the increase in domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets will significantly contribute to price stability.
In February, annual core goods inflation increased by 5.89 points to 54.38%.
The index decreased by 28.7% compared to the highest level reached last year.
In January, consumer prices increased by 1.10 percent and annual inflation fell by 0.93 point to 7.24 percent.
The largest contribution to the decline in inflation came from energy and core goods groups.
In January, employment decreased by a mere 0.1% compared to the previous month.
Being more pronounced as of the third quarter, the slump in tourism revenues was a key driver of the slowing underlying output growth through its direct and indirect effects.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand.
On the other hand, high-frequency data for August imply that imports remained relatively flat as against the recovery in exports in seasonally adjusted terms.
This was mainly driven by fuel prices that dropped due to the fall in international oil prices notwithstanding the depreciation in the exchange rate.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, the sharp fall in international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affects inflation outlook favorably.
Thus, TL-denominated loans, consumer loans in particular, remained on the rise thanks to improved financing conditions and recovering domestic demand.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.31 points to 9.13 percent in June.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
The Committee highlighted that loan growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions recently.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat.
In October, short and medium-term inflation expectations continued to increase.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an almost flat course in September maintaining its high level.
Sales of home appliances fell marginally during April-May, whereas sales of automobiles remained on the rise.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus increased by USD 12.1 billion to USD 51.5 billion.
Food prices, which are still at high levels, remain as the main risk factor for inflation.
Annual food inflation continued to climb while exchange rate changes seemed to be passed through to all items, especially to core goods and energy.
Nevertheless, tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
In May, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.29% and the group’s annual inflation crept up by 0.06 points to 17.04%.
Energy prices increased by 2.09% in October, yet annual inflation in the energy group decreased by 2.79 points to 3.88%.
The energy group will have a marked impact on consumer inflation in May.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group increased by 11.19% in January, while annual inflation of the group decreased by 14.51 points to 50.60%.
Monthly inflation in this group decelerated but the consequences of wages and backward-indexation tendency continued, and price increases were seen across the group excluding transport services.
The composition of loans also continues to evolve in the desired direction.
In February, consumer prices increased by 4.81%, and annual inflation rose by 5.75 points to 54.44%.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a relatively mild increase in services prices.
In January, annual core goods inflation increased by 7.94 points to 48.49%.
Food prices, which rose significantly in the previous month also due to the Ramadan, posted a more moderate increase in this period owing to vegetable prices.
Industrial production recorded an increase in December compared to previous month.
Therefore, it is evaluated that the intense cost-push pressures in the third quarter have been largely reflected on prices.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 26 basis points to 74.59%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 43.48%.
The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is reached.
With the decisions taken accordingly, it is assessed that significant progress has been made in the simplification process.
To counteract their negative spillovers into exchange rates and lending standards, the CBRT maintains a stabilizing stance for FX liquidity and a supportive macroprudential policy stance.
Favorable external demand conditions impact the current account balance positively.
High-frequency data indicate that the recovery in the foreign trade volume continues, most visibly in exports.
Thus, unemployment rates registered an increase.
In September, inflation expectations continued to increase.
(1) Advanced Countries: Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Euro Area, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States of America.
When these items are excluded, the quarterly rate of change was 2%, which is more moderate than the change in the overall index.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 261 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 108 of these meetings.
Yet, recent data show that exports and imports of goods were largely affected by the July turbulence.
In short, economic activity is expected to post a quarterly fall in the third quarter.
In this category, prices of cheese and other dairy goods, fats and processed meat recorded sharp gains.
Ten years of experience in inflation targeting showed that combatting inflation requires joint efforts.
Presently, curbing risks to the inflation outlook is critical to the maintenance of a healthy and stable growth.
In this period, nonfarm employment was up on account of services.
The rise in transport prices was mainly led by price hikes in urban passenger transport by bus due to school bus fares as well as in passenger transport by air and railway, despite the decline in the fares of intercity passenger transport by road.
That may generate fluctuations in prices of securities in advanced economies and weaken the growth trend.
Driven by international commodity prices, exchange rate developments and supply constraints, producer prices recorded a high rate of increase also in May, which spread across the sectors.
Services prices rose by 5.27% in December and annual services inflation increased by 5.45 points to 22.33%.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to moderate.
On the other hand, while the rise in house prices is losing pace, micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) as well as the data for big cities monitored through online platforms indicate that the rate of increase in rents has slowed down in the recent period.
The relative stability in tourism revenues, the strengthened confidence channel, the favorable effect of the cumulative exchange rate depreciation on net exports, and the normalization of commercial relations with Russia will all contribute to growth.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, coupled with the acceleration in gold imports, the ongoing upward trend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
In this period, non-farm employment growth posted a slowdown, pushing unemployment rates upwards.
In the period between the previous MPC meeting when the policy rate was raised 5 percentage points and the latest MPC meeting, commercial and consumer loan rates displayed a flat outlook with a change of 0.2 and 0.92 percentage points, respectively.
Following the rise in January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index declined by 6% on a monthly basis in February due to the earthquake.
However, the re-emergence of downside risks to global growth due to the epidemic in China raises the uncertainties over the external demand outlook.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of recovery has started to pick up.
Inflation expectations, pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
(1) Advanced economies: USA, Czech Republic, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
The upward revision in last year’s national income data and the acceleration in credit indicate that the recovery in economic activity might be stronger than expected.
However, despite the positive developments regarding the vaccine, uncertainties surrounding the global economic activity prevail due to the recent increase in Covid-19 cases.
Indeed, the diffusion indices show evidence that the economic agents’ tendency to raise prices rose to quite high levels in the first quarter.
Food prices affected services inflation adversely through the catering services channel across the year, leading the restaurants-hotels group to register the highest increase, 13.23 percent, within the sub-groups.
In other services, amid reopening, annual inflation increased due to recreational and cultural services as well as maintenance and repair.
Prices in other core goods rose 2.66% in line with the last two months, and annual inflation crept up by 0.72 percentage points to 50.1%.
Consumer prices rose 2.93% in December, and annual inflation increased 2.79 percentage points to 64.8%.
In October, the global manufacturing industry PMI edged down 0.4 points on a monthly basis to 48.8, while the global services PMI decreased 0.3 points to 50.4.
Due to the robust increase in machinery-equipment investments, the downtrend in total investments came to a halt.
The recovery in international oil prices was the main driver of the rise in energy prices, which was accompanied by an increase in municipal water rates.
Although geopolitical developments continue to pose downside risks, the growing EU demand continues to support exports, and thus production.
Meanwhile, card spending further increased in the first quarter.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the current account is expected to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities.
Crude oil prices have been more volatile and risen significantly since the previous MPC meeting due to recent geopolitical developments.
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products and sales of heavy commercial vehicles, which are among the indicators for construction investment, registered a decline.
The impact of possible short-term volatilities in inflation on the underlying trend will be monitored closely for the monetary policy stance.
Goods and services exports continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook, indicating improved competitiveness.
Risks to global markets remain significant.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter.
In addition to these global developments, industrial electricity and natural gas tariffs and electricity producers' natural gas tariffs were raised by 20% in early October.
Meanwhile, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.92 percentage points to 43.0%.
Inflation expectations remain favorable.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in exports, the slowdown in credit growth, the significant fall in gold imports and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities are expected to accelerate the ongoing improvement in the current account balance.
Meanwhile, cumulative energy imports will continue to decline if the current low levels of oil prices are maintained.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 for advanced and emerging economies are 2.4% and 5.2%, respectively.
Global PMI indices indicate that the services sector activity remains robust, while the manufacturing industry continues to follow a flat course just below the threshold value since the last quarter of last year.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew annually 5.1 percent and quarterly 2.1 percent in the second quarter of 2017.
Oil prices and exchange rate developments favorably affected the energy group, while core goods prices were affected by both exchange rate developments and weaker domestic demand.
Among durable goods, price hikes were more prevalent in automobiles and home appliances, and monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
Leading indicators for the second half of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
Although accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the risk appetite slightly higher recently, portfolio flows to emerging markets remain weak.
In tandem with the recovery in expectations of growth in advanced economies, rising global inflation expectations and long-term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.
Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered points that the low interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
Ongoing price increases in this item also affected the prices of substitute white meat products, and pushed up the prices of processed meat products for which they constitute an input.
Annual inflation in these groups stood at 20.18% and 39.07%, respectively.
Despite rising commodity and energy prices amid solid growth outlook, consumer and core inflation rates are moderate across the globe.
In addition, due to the perceptions for a milder monetary tightening by the Fed, global risk appetite hit historically high levels, and emerging economies saw accelerated portfolio inflows as of March 2017.
Normalization of the measures taken to contain the adverse effects of the pandemic and the tightening steps in liquidity policies have led to an increase in loan and deposit rates, and loan growth has started to decelerate.
Overall, economic activity remains on a moderate growth path.
Housing loan rates and vehicle loan rates, which posted a limited increase in the same period, stood at 42.7% and 43.1%, respectively, as of .
Among indicators of private consumption, the production and imports of consumer goods rose in the January-February period.
On the other hand, the ongoing upward trend in international commodity prices, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook.
In August, annual inflation in this subgroup edged up by 1.81 points and reached 80.95%.
The spillovers of the tourism slump became more pervasive in the second quarter, causing net exports to have a heightened negative impact on growth.
Current account balance is expected to further improve in the upcoming period, owing to the lagged effects of the fall in oil prices and the slowdown in credit growth.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in December, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
The deceleration in annual clothing and footwear inflation also continued in December due to demand conditions.
The distribution of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations points to a shift of the distribution to the left, while indicators related to the dispersion of expectations, such as the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation, remained at a similar course to the previous month.
Forecasts are based on the assumption that despite the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the support from the actions taken by the Food Committee, the base effect from unprocessed food prices, the probable effects of the adverse weather conditions on the food supply and the exchange rate developments will push the end-2017 food inflation upwards compared to the figures of the previous report.
Adjustments in risk weights and minimum wages are considered to support loan growth in the forthcoming period through the loan supply and household income channels.
Moreover, the diffusion index for the services sector indicated that increases continued to spread across the sector.
In March, the industrial production index dropped by 0.3% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, yet increased by 4.3% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
The pass-through from these factors to consumer prices is particularly strong in times of deteriorating inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged down by 0.1 percentage points to 43.5% and 25.5%, respectively.
The production and imports of consumer goods declined in April.
It is judged that international agricultural commodity prices, which resumed the uptrend in April, will continue to affect food inflation.
Effects of the additional tightening steps on pricing behavior, expectations and the inflation outlook will continue to be closely monitored.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter of the year.
All subcategories were influenced by the spillovers from the depreciating Turkish lira.
Developments in inflation expectations and domestic demand conditions have contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators.
Communication services, which are subject to price rigidities arising from contracts, have a similar effect, and price increases in this subgroup remain strong.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained mild in September.
The current monetary policy stance continues to be tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive of financial stability.
Moreover, in April, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 40% above its historical average, indicating that increases continued to spread across the sector.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.31 points to 9.71 percent in May, mainly due to the temporary impact of the methodology change to weight system of the clothing category.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment has been maintained, albeit a slight deceleration after the earthquake.
Excluding communication, the trend of the services inflation remained high.
On the other hand, the weak course continues in services groups hardest hit by the pandemic, such as transportation, accommodation, and catering services.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 412 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period and to 385 basis points on .
Risk weight and minimum wage arrangements and improving financial conditions are likely to boost loan growth in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Likewise, the PMI’s new export orders rose above the neutral mark in the fourth quarter, while total orders posted a small quarterly gain.
Similarly, the quarterly increase in credit card spending lost momentum in the third quarter.
During this period, the annualized services balance surplus recorded a month-on-month increase.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Despite the recent rise, long-term interest rates in advanced economies are still at historically low levels.
In the third quarter, construction employment declined while the public sector and business activities across services and industrial sectors with relatively stronger external trade links continued to make a positive contribution to employment.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated due to pandemic restrictions, external demand remains strong.
As of September, seasonally adjusted employment recorded 31.7 million.
The lump-sum SCT amounts on fuel were increased.
Price increases spread across the services group due to the ongoing effects of the backward-indexation behavior and wage adjustments.
Meanwhile, the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend proved more remarkable in this period.
In fact, the significant increase in fuel prices in the third quarter of 2023 driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax arrangements have rapidly passed through to transport services prices within the same quarter.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 11.94 points to 35.12 percent in September.
Annual inflation in other core goods lost pace but still remained high.
In January, residential electricity and natural gas tariffs increased by 69.96% and 21.35%, respectively, and municipal water tariffs also increased by 11.87%.
In November, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 3.04 points to 15.78 percent in November.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 33% above its historical average, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.63% in May, while annual inflation rose by 2.53 points to 91.63% in this category.
Prices of services increased by 0.71 percent, and the annual services inflation fell by 0.46 points to 8.09 percent in August.
This change in the growth composition might lead to a widening in the non-energy current account deficit to some extent but the overall current account deficit is expected to narrow further down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade balance.
In June, the industrial production index decreased by 2.1% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and declined by 4.7% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
In March, the current account deficit stood at USD 4.5 billion on a monthly basis and decreased to USD 31.2 billion in annualized terms.
Accordingly, year-end inflation forecast was revised upwards by 1.1 points for 2017, and 0.6 points for 2018, compared to the 2017 July Inflation Report.
Despite the hikes in fuel and municipal water prices, annual energy inflation declined.
Housing loan rates which have remained flat in the same period stood at 41.4%.
The average of four-week growth rate of retail loans has declined from 4.12% to 3.28% since the previous MPC meeting period.
Compared to the previous Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting period, consumer inflation decreased from 3.71% to 3.36% in advanced economies and from 6.54% to 6.08% in emerging economies (1).
Annual inflation was relatively flat in transportation services, but was higher in other subcategories, with restaurants-hotels in the lead.
The decline in annual core goods inflation was largely driven by base effects.
In June, consumer prices decreased by 0.51 percent, bringing annual consumer inflation down by about 0.9 points to 7.20 percent.
In this period, non-farm employment receded further due to the services sector, while construction employment increased.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation decreased from 11.8% to 11.6%.
In sum, current global supply conditions remain favorable for inflation.
Annual core goods inflation climbed by 1.08 points to 21.92% in June.
Recently released data indicate a more significant rebalancing trend in the economic activity.
The nature and the pace of simplification steps will depend on the factors affecting the volatility in global and domestic markets.
In the upcoming period, both global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and required measures will continue to be taken.
The monthly price increase in the processed food group was of 7.53%, mostly driven by cheese and other dairy products, bread and cereals, nonalcoholic beverages, tea, and products related to sugar.
Annual inflation in core indicators recorded a slight increase, while the underlying trend continued to improve to a limited extent.
Having lost some momentum after mid-September, portfolio investments to Turkey have been picking up again recently amid reduced geopolitical risks.
The Committee noted that net exports is likely to contribute positively to quarterly growth under these circumstances.
Stronger increases in international commodity prices and supply chain disruptions continued to drive producer prices up.
In short, recently released data indicate that the recovery in economic activity has gained strength.
Annual inflation in core indicators registered a decline, while the underlying trends remained virtually unchanged.
As of September, the annual services balance surplus increased USD 0.3 billion month-on-month to USD 51.9 billion.
The lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements on annual inflation eased further.
Accordingly, the fall in industrial employment is likely to be temporary.
Current account balance ran a deficit of USD 2.7 billion in November while the current account deficit decreased by USD 0.9 billion to USD 14.3 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
In tandem with the subsided global economic activity, crude oil prices remained flat since the previous MPC meeting.
In the energy group, the rise in fuel prices is expected to be counterbalanced by the fall in natural gas prices reflected in the index following the seasonal decline in natural gas consumption.
Meanwhile, portfolio flows to EMEs slowed down due to decline in global risk appetite.
Due to the first half’s weaker exports and rising consumption demand, the current account balance ceased to improve.
In October, consumer prices rose by 2.13%, while annual inflation increased by 0.14 points to 11.89%.
While global inflation has decreased, it is still above the long-term averages.
Annual core goods inflation inched up by 0.84 points to 6.77 percent in December.
The rise in energy inflation is expected to continue in a pronounced manner in January.
Recently-released indicators confirm that downside risks to economic activity have abated and the economic rebound will prove more robust as of the second quarter of the year.
In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the inflation outlook.
Energy prices increased by 1.01 percent in June and annual energy inflation rose by 1.82 points to 16.99 percent.
In sum, domestic demand is likely to provide a modest contribution to growth in the last quarter.
The CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
In the first quarter of 2024, the continuing resilient course of domestic demand eased the pass-through of cost increases into prices.
Vehicle loan interest rates, which have followed a fluctuating course in the recent period due to sales campaigns, were 55.06% as of August 9.
The processed food group posted moderate price increases while annual inflation in this group declined.
The effects of rising global inflation and inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
After a decline in February, seasonally adjusted employment remained flat in March.
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in rents, which had been high for a while, slowed somewhat in July.
Due also to the policy rate decision taken in January, the Committee evaluates that alongwith monetary tightening, the regulations to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits will continue to strengthen the transmission mechanism and to improve the funding composition of the banking system.
The four-week average growth rate of retail loans has increased since the previous MPC meeting period and stood at 4.12%.
This decline became broad-based across subgroups, with the energy sub-index falling more noticeably.
With the help of falling food prices, headline inflation is expected to display a decline in the short term.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 14.62 points to 15.17 points in the services group (0.55 points of increase); rose from 9.80 points to 10.17 points in the core goods group (0.37 points of increase); dropped from 1.81 points to 1.50 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.31 points of decrease); dropped from 14.22 points to 13.64 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (0.58 points of decrease); dropped from 3.24 points to -0.88 points in the energy group (4.12 points of decrease).
On the other hand, the central banks of Brazil and Chile, which initiated their rate hike cycles with early and strong steps and implemented them decisively in a period when inflation started to rise, began to cut rates on the back of the decline in consumer inflation.
After a robust first quarter, economic activity started to converge to its underlying trend in the second quarter.
Being considered with other leading indicators, a moderate employment growth outlook is expected to continue in the upcoming period.
Global economic activity remains weak in both advanced and emerging market economies.
Regarding the cyclical state of the economy, the data released for the first quarter indicate that economic activity remains above the potential and aggregate demand conditions continue to be at inflationary levels.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs at a slower pace.
The CBRT will closely monitor the developments regarding inflation outlook and continue to take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Similarly, interviews with firms for April imply that consumption spending is losing momentum due to the demand brought forward in the previous quarter and the extended holiday.
Cost increases during the period when activities were interrupted passed through to prices, while the increasing demand, triggered by capacity constraints, was another factor that put pressure on prices.
Exchange rate developments continued to affect the other services group, and the repair and maintenance of personal transportation vehicles, basic hospital care services and dental services stood out with high price hikes.
While a simple policy framework enhances the effectiveness of transmission mechanism, it does not rule out these type of dynamic reactions.
Price increases spread across the group, while the deceleration in price increases in bread and cereals as well as fresh fruits and vegetables compared to past months limited the monthly group inflation.
Given the demand and supply-side factors no noticeable rebound is envisaged in loan growth rates in the short term.
This was driven by the expansion of the scope of the loan growth-based securities maintenance practice.
Inflation outlook continued to improve while inflation expectations displayed a wide-spread decline.
Noting that demand and cost-side inflationary effects persisted, the Committee maintained its assessment that the risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report were on the upside.
An analysis of unprocessed food price developments excluding fresh fruits and vegetables reveals that the rise in red meat and white meat prices continued.
There remain uncertainties regarding the global and domestic pace of the virus’ spread and the normalization process.
While the production of machinery-equipment, an indicator for investments, fell slightly, its imports increased significantly.
The improvement in the labor market continues in line with the economic activity outlook.
In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity remains strong in the first quarter, while it is converging to its underlying trend in the second quarter amid the balancing in domestic demand.
Annual inflation surged in transport services; rose by a more limited rate in restaurants-hotels, communication and rent; and declined somewhat in other services.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of the liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In the rents subgroup, in which the backward-indexation behavior is strong and the sector-specific supply-demand imbalances continue to be observed, the monthly increase was 7.91%, and annual inflation reached 100.7%.
In this period, lockdown measures led to interruptions in economic activity in certain sectors, which recorded only limited price increases, in turn.
While the indicator regarding the pressures on the global supply chain hovered below its historical trend, domestic problems faced after the earthquake were largely eliminated by March.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 3.2% and 3.4%, respectively, slightly up compared to the previous month.
In the period following the June MPC meeting, crude oil prices mildly increased due to the recovering global activity as well as OPEC+ countries’ tapering of supply cuts as part of the second phase of the agreement they reached in April.
The retreat in the energy sub-index was not limited to crude oil, but rather spread to products such as propane, butane and natural gas.
Nevertheless, sectoral diffusion of this improvement remained limited and underlying trend of economic activity registered a mild growth.
Leading indicators suggest that annual food inflation continued to fall in the first half of April.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 3.4% and 3.6%.
In October, international oil prices posted a limited decrease; however, depreciation of the Turkish lira led to a rise in fuel-oil prices and curbed a more favorable outlook in the energy group inflation.
In May, while energy prices increased by 0.25%, the decline in the municipal water tariff contained a further rise in prices.
Meanwhile, inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables has exhibited a favorable course lately.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.64 points to 12.73 percent and stood close to the assumptions made in the October Inflation Report.
However, the inflation forecast uncertainty moderately increased due to uncertainties regarding the course of the pandemic.
Prices in the bread and cereals group rose by 1.00%, while non-alcoholic beverages stood out among other processed food.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of Open Market Operations funding, to reduce the weight of swaps in the composition of funding, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
In June, annual inflation was recorded at 50.6% in core goods, and it was around 45 percentage points higher in services at 95.3%.
The Committee drew attention to the risks that a deterioration in price stability may pose to macroeconomic stability and especially to financial stability.
Provisional data suggest that imports increased in real terms along with price increases in March.
Indicators of inflation and the underlying inflation trend will be closely monitored and the CBRT will continue to decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
While exports remained strong thanks to favorable external demand conditions in the last quarter of the year, imports increased due to robust economic activity, the rise in commodity, particularly energy prices and the increase in energy demand.
In the third quarter, Turkey’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted by 1.1% quarter-on-quarter but grew by 1.6% at an annual basis.
Recent indicators suggest that the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the repercussions through confidence channel may lead to a slowdown in domestic demand in the first quarter of the year.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
When the provisional foreign trade data for August is evaluated together with the high frequency data for September, it is observed that uptrend in the first half of the year in seasonally adjusted exports is replaced by a limited decline in the third quarter.
Industrial production recorded a monthly decline of 1.4 percent in January.
Monthly price hikes were more pronounced for processed food items excluding bread and cereal due to fats-oils, tea-coffee, meat products, sugar and related products, and especially cheese and other dairy products.
Although the recovery in the European economy affects the external demand positively, ongoing geopolitical developments and the slowdown in global trade restrict the export growth.
In this period, annual inflation realized as -1.69% in energy group remaining in the negative territory, while it was relatively flat at high rates in other main groups.
In the communications subgroup, the 2.96% increase in prices was mainly due to telephone call and internet fees, and annual inflation in this subgroup climbed to 29.17%.
While the composite PMI indicator in China was 55.6 with an increase of 2 points compared to April, the index was above the 50-threshold level in both the manufacturing and services sectors in May.
Prices of services inched up by 0.35 percent, and annual services inflation fell by 0.39 points to 7.80 percent in October.
Accordingly, inflation continues to hover above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies (1).
In January, consumer prices increased by 11.10%, and annual inflation increased by 12.61 points to 48.69%.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Going ahead, industrial production and survey indicators signal a mild increase in employment.
On the manufacturing industry front, new orders and capacity utilization rates fell to record lows across main exporting sectors due to slumping external demand.
Early indicators reveal that, amid the increase in product supply, correction in food prices will be more prononunced in June.
Food inflation has recently seen a marked decline on the back of unprocessed food prices.
The trade tension between the US and China, the more-than-expected deceleration in growth rates of advanced economies and fluctuations in financial markets of some emerging economies have led to higher uncertainty in global economic policies, which feed into the downside risks to global economic activity.
While inflation in the bread and cereals group remained elevated, other groups driving processed food inflation up were fats and oils as well as non-alcoholic beverages due to the tax increase in this group.
This rise is mainly attributed to the rising fuel and bottled gas prices in tandem with exchange rates and the outlook for international oil prices.
Despite rising on the back of international crude oil prices, energy inflation continued to restrain consumer inflation.
As a result, underlying trend of services inflation remained flat at an elevated level.
As a result, in the nine weeks between the 6th of November and the 5th of January, USD 33.7 billion flowed into equity markets and USD 16.9 billion into bond markets of emerging economies.
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Pandemic-driven unit cost increases continued, albeit with a diminishing pace.
The current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
The Committee noted the important role of commodity prices in continuing inflationary pressures despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and reiterated the upside risks for the upcoming months.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect.
Recently released data indicate a strong economic activity.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index converged to its historical trend in November, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
In this period, as underlined in the May MPC meeting summary, food inflation increased due to unprocessed food prices.
In the other core goods category, prices saw large monthly increases due to the lagged exchange rate pass-through effects and the spillovers of the February increase in medicine prices caused by the updated reference exchange rate.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of the recovery continues to widen, while economic activity remains relatively weak in some sectors restrained by tourism and export outlook.
As a result of steps taken towards tightening financial conditions, Turkish lira commercial loan rates and general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 6.27 percentage points and 15.3 percentage points to 59.6% and 76.0%, respectively, since the previous MPC meeting.
In June, consumer prices rose by 2.61 percent and annual inflation increased by 3.24 points to 15.39 percent.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight stance of monetary policy at the June Meeting, and kept the lending rate at 12.25 percent under the Late Liquidity Window.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
In July, inflation in the energy group was notable due to the rise in residential electricity tariffs and the automatic tax arrangements in fuel and bottled gas.
In this period, annual inflation increased in rents and communication services, but decreased in other subgroups.
The recent growth trend of loans reveals that both consumer and commercial loans remained below historical averages; consumer loans throughout 2015, commercial loans only in the second half of the year.
To sum up, the moderate course of core goods inflation is attributed to weak domestic demand.
Underlying trend in industrial production is stronger after adjusting for temporary fluctuations in sectors with high historical volatility.
On the expenditures side, the main driver of annual growth was the final domestic demand led by private consumption, while the contribution of net exports was 3.5 points.
Production and imports of consumption goods were higher in the second quarter compared to their averages in the previous quarter.
These developments drove the industrial production down by 0.4 points in the first quarter.
On the other hand, the tax rise in fuel products curbed the improvement in inflation through direct and indirect effects.
The Committee emphasized the importance of growth and demand stability for a sustainable improvement in investment and employment.
In addition to commercial loans, consumer loans exhibit a milder course.
The acceleration in loans buoyed up domestic demand, while investments and employment showed signs of recovery but nevertheless remained weak.
The impact of free natural gas use on the group’s prices was the main driver of this development.
Data for the second quarter of the year confirm that economic activity remained robust, particularly driven by domestic demand.
Accordingly, the natural gas item pushed monthly headline inflation up 0.22 percentage points in October.
The consumer inflation diffusion index declined further in November, and its upward standard deviation from the historical average fell from 1.4 in October to 0.5.
International transportation costs remained on a downward trend in February, while the recent stable course of exchange rates was maintained.
The recovery in European economy affects external demand positively, whereas geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk to external demand.
In December, services prices increased by 0.59% and annual services inflation rose by 0.24 points to 11.66%.
Therefore, the current tight monetary stance should be maintained in order for the impending disinflation to be permanent.
The strong increase in unprocessed food prices also pushed headline inflation up.
In other unprocessed food, price hikes were notable for rice, eggs and nuts, while potato and red meat prices decreased.
It is noteworthy that the indicators monitored for global supply chain pressures reached their highest level in history.
In February, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 5.8 billion month-on-month to USD 31.8 billion.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 4.8% and 5.4%.
The rise in exports of goods slows the deterioration in the current account deficit and improves the core current account deficit indicators.
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 4.81% in December, and annual inflation increased 4.85 percentage points to 72.0%.
However, leading indicators imply that the significant slowdown in industrial production observed in July is not permanent.
When the provisional foreign trade data for July is considered along with the high frequency data for August, the three-month average trends imply a moderate fall in exports and a rise in imports.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.
Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance.
Nonetheless, producer inflation remained on the rise due to lagged effects and the ongoing disruptions in supply chains.
Thus, economic activity is likely to grow modestly over the upcoming period.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 2.47 billion since June, USD 0.81 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.66 billion to the equity market.
Business Tendency Survey data suggest that domestic orders registered an increase from the previous quarter’s average, while export orders were relatively weaker.
At the March meeting, the late liquidity window lending rate was raised from 11 percent to 11.75 percent, while the other CBRT rates were kept unchanged.
Developments in domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy support disinflation.
The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
However, exchange rate developments and other cost factors limit the improvement in inflation outlook.
The strong momentum in manufacturing industry activity has widely spread across sectors, being particularly significant in intermediate and durable consumer goods.
Thus, annual producer inflation continued to decline.
This composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures, but also helps to improve the current account balance.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data-sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
The simplification is believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism.
The escalating geopolitical risks were adversely realized in the first half of the year and caused a weakening in the worldwide economic activity.
Prices of services crept up by 0.18 percent and the group’s annual inflation receded by 0.22 points to 8.59 percent in the last month of the year.
In this period, price increases in processed meat products, fats and oils, and canned vegetables were noteworthy.