In non-clothing categories, annual inflation continued to climb because of the lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation.
Despite the energy-related developments, the seasonally-adjusted underlying trend indicators of producer prices pointed out that the cost-based pressures continued, albeit at a weaker rate.
GDP data confirmed our previous assessments that economic activity would remain strong in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Energy prices decreased by 2.12% in December, and annual inflation in this group dropped by 23.57 points to 94.43%.
Maintaining tight monetary policies to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are regarded as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
The Committee has therefore decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
In order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and an integrated macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
This was driven by annual unprocessed food inflation that climbed to 11.48 percent mostly due to rising prices of vegetables.
While the rapid rise in the demand for durable goods on the back of a strong credit impulse became the main determinant of the recovery in private consumption, services-related expenditures remained weak due to the pandemic.
In April, consumer prices rose by 3.18%, and annual inflation went up by 1.30 percentage points to 69.80%.
The decline in durable goods prices was mainly driven by the fall in automobile prices while the new season price hikes in the clothing group remained below those of the previous year.
Firms’ expectations for future investments increased slightly in July but remained sluggish.
The annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators recorded a small decrease, yet remained high.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the high level in producer and consumer inflation continues on an international scale.
Gold imports, which have increased due to monetary conditions and expectations, play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit.
Inflation continues to hover significantly above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
The contribution of this group to monthly consumer inflation stood at 0.12 points.
The Committee emphasized that the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections has gained relative importance for the disinflation process.
Underlying trends of core inflation indicators registered some increase in this period.
In recent months, the exchange rate pass-through to the consumer inflation has firmed, backward indexation has become more widespread, and pricing behavior has deteriorated considerably.
While this rise was observed across all subcategories, it was more pronounced in durable goods inflation.
Industrial production posted a quarterly growth in the fourth quarter of 2016.
The industrial production of sectors with higher export shares posted a strong growth in this period.
External demand indicators point to no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold, which ground to a halt in the third quarter.
Prices of core goods were up by 8.57% in August, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 7.72 points to 51.97%.
The pace of the recovery in economic activity will depend on the course of the normalization process in Turkey as well as in the global economy.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium dropped by 23 basis points to 294 basis points amid the improved global risk appetite as of .
Manufacturing industry firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that the decrease in export order expectations continued in the last quarter, albeit at a slower pace, while domestic market order expectations remained flat.
Annual inflation remained flat in rents, but decreased in other subgroups.
In October, the upward trend in catering services prices continued, while prices in accommodation services decreased.
Although the seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices increased in January following the decline in the last four months, the group’s inflation fell to 9.39 percent.
Indicators for March and April signal for a stronger economic activity and labor market.
Ongoing weakness in growth across European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports.
In this period, B and C indicators recorded a relatively flat annual inflation, but a slight increase in trends.
Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks in recent years.
On the energy front, prices increased on account of rising taxes on fuel products.
Prices of services increased by 0.38 percent, and the annual services inflation receded by 0.20 point to 8.86 percent in March.
Annual inflation came down in core goods and services, went up in food and energy.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5 percent target are reached.
Thus, the rise in automobile prices amounted to 34.01% in the first six months of 2023.
Commodity prices have registered some deceleration in the recent period.
Thus, the unemployment rate declined by 0.4 points compared to previous month and realized as 9.6%.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 0.21%.
Unless notable upside surprises occur in global inflation under the mentioned risk factors, it is considered that major central banks, the Fed and the ECB in particular, will continue to normalize monetary policy in line with expectations, and the impact on financial markets will remain limited.
This outlook is also confirmed by the declining figures in the diffusion index, Median and SATRIM indicators.
In the second quarter, signs of deceleration in domestic demand became more visible.
Preliminary data suggest that the price increases in durable goods that have relatively high exchange rate pass-through have decelerated significantly as a reflection of the recent mild course in exchange rates.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira confined the improvement in annual core goods inflation.
This period sees high price hikes as service items such as university tuition fees, student accomodation fees and school bus fares are priced at certain times of the year (time-dependent pricing).
However, adverse domestic developments may cause fluctuations in markets if accompanied by global volatilities and this may place extra pressure on financial conditions.
All in all, the seasonally-adjusted underlying trend of core goods inflation posted a significant increase mostly due to exchange rate pressures.
The Committee assesses that that the partial recovery in food prices accompanied by the cautious monetary policy will limit the deterioration in the inflation outlook and inflation will reach the target in the medium term.
The labor market outlook continued to deteriorate in August due to sluggish economic activity.
On the other hand, the gold trade deficit remained relatively flat compared to the previous month.
On the other hand, current indicators show that machinery-equipment investments have been improving since the third quarter.
Nevertheless, the outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies and the global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows towards emerging economies.
The non-gold exports volume index rose in the third quarter whereas the imports index fell in line with moderate domestic demand.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that the underlying recent trend of inflation slowed down, yet remained at high levels.
Moreover, the measures and incentive packages to boost consumption and investment expenditures, reduced uncertainty and improved financial conditions will continue to spur growth.
Accordingly, the inflation forecast for end-2018 was revised upwards by 0.5 points, while that for 2019 was kept intact.
Price increases were widespread across the food group.
In this framework, while the year-end inflation is projected to be close to the upper bound of the forecast range provided in the Inflation Report (Report), it is evaluated that the underlying trend in monthly inflation is on course to decline.
Meanwhile, services inflation went up due to items affected by normalization process.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures introduced to address the pandemic as well as the expansion of loan supply, mostly by state-owned banks, seem to have mitigated downside risks to loan growth and contributed to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector.
Nonetheless, with imports gaining remarkably in the first quarter due to increased consumption, net exports contributed negatively to quarterly growth.
The cumulative Turkish lira depreciation caused the annual core goods inflation to rise and the core inflation to deteriorate slightly.
Meanwhile, the monthly price increase in the food group stood close that in the previous month.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the developments on core inflation outlook continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Services prices were up 1.04% in February and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to 11.74%.
However, inflationary effects arising from disruptions in supply chains persist.
Price increases continue in other durables.
In sum, economic activity is expected to recede in the third quarter.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.09 points to 2.47 percent in May.
Accordingly, the gradual elimination of the effect of 2016 tax increases on annual inflation may support the disinflation process.
In response to the deterioration in the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to raise the policy rate.
In March, among the components of the B index, price increases strengthened in core goods with respect to the previous month, but decelerated in services and particularly in processed food.
Increases in exports of goods translate into a decelerated deterioration in the current account deficit and improvement in core current account deficit indicators.
Monthly energy inflation was driven by the fuel item, which posted a price hike of 29.04%.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.8 percentage points from 31.8% to 30.0%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.0 percentage point from 20.3% to 19.3%.
Annual inflation recorded some decline in the services group, but increased in other subgroups.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an uptick.
The last four months’ cumulative increase in prices of fats and oils exceeded 20%.
Aggregate demand conditions continue to curb inflation in certain sectors, while price increases are high for goods that are sensitive to financing conditions.
The substantial April-May price hikes were replaced by a slowdown in June across categories where exchange rate pass-through to prices is relatively faster, such as home appliances and automobiles.
Energy prices jumped by 2.03 percent in August amid price developments in oil and other inputs.
As the strong course of domestic demand and the stickiness of services inflation persist, the increase in oil prices and the ongoing deterioration in inflation expectations pose additional upside risks to inflation.
Recent indicators point to an increase in the underlying trend of inflation.
Services prices were up by 2.63% in October, and the group's annual inflation increased by 2.48 points to 60.24%.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affect inflation outlook favorably.
In addition, the propensity to save in public expenditures coupled with the rise in unemployment rates hint at a further deceleration in domestic demand.
Annual inflation in rents increased to 66.76% following the monthly increase of 4.37%.
In September 2015, non-farm unemployment rate recorded a limited decline upon the increase in employment.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities, and financial stability with a holistic approach.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5% target are reached.
The gradual rise continued in other core goods inflation in which the exchange rate pass-through is observed with a lag.
Therefore, the annual current account deficit is expected to narrow further in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, while enhancing flexibility in liquidity management and continuing with liquidity measures until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
Annual inflation was relatively flat in the capital goods item, whereas it rose in other subgroups.
In this group, price increases weakened in rents and restaurants-hotels, yet strengthened in transport and communication services.
The underlying trend of core inflation displayed a slight improvement.
In July, the minimum wage adjustment and the ongoing negative outlook for food prices as well as strong tourism demand led to an 11.92% rise in restaurants-hotels.
Annual inflation decreased in clothing, but increased in other subcategories.
While annual inflation increased across all subgroups, the energy group diverged negatively in line with international developments.
Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 3.91% in March due to the producer firms driven increases in cigarette prices, and annual inflation rose to 51.43%.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Global economic activity continued to slow down in the third quarter of the year.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages tumbled down to 6.19 percent due mainly to the decline in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Recent indicators and high-frequency data point that, in the third quarter, economic activity maintained its strength led by domestic demand, despite a quarterly slowdown in growth momentum.
Despite the improvement in the energy balance owing to the ongoing decline in energy prices on an annual basis, this increase was mainly driven by strong increases in imports of gold, investment goods and consumption goods.
In this period, non-farm employment continued to grow, while the rising participation rate restricted the decline in unemployment rates.
The slide in construction employment confirms the weakening construction industry.
The production of consumer goods posted a decline on a quarterly basis, while that of investment goods remained flat.
Employment grew across all sectors, and the labor force participation rate increased.
The outlook that the medium-term projections presented in the Inflation Report is based on the Monetary Policy Committee's judgments and assumptions.
The rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil and metals, and exchange rate changes have recently driven inflation higher through the cost channel.
Accordingly, annual inflation in this group went up by 18.77 points to 89.10%.
The PMI data for the services sector, which was the major driving force of global economic activity particularly in the first half of the year, significantly declined in the October-November period both in the advanced economies group and the emerging economies group.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation is 22.04%.
In fact, prices of educational services, which are largely inflation-indexed, surged by 2.79 percent, driving annual inflation up to 10.30 percent in this subcategory.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for January, implies a rise in exports and a decline in imports.
Strengthening of the improving trend in current account balance is important for price stability.
Across the groups making up the B index, monthly price increases are expected to lose pace in the services and more evidently in the core goods groups compared to the previous month.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, thanks to the increase in per capita tourist spending, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
Other items driving producer inflation higher include vegetable oils, animal feed, vehicles and electronic products.
Loan growth balanced at historical levels in the third quarter, as the loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund almost reached the pre-determined upper limit.
This loan outlook not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
The main driver of quarterly growth in this period was domestic demand, particularly construction investments and private consumption.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 2.53% in December but annual inflation in this group dropped by 0.47 points to 20.61% due to the base effect.
Although annual inflation in core indicators was up due to the base effect, the B and C indices maintained their mild trend thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira, the improvement in inflation expectations, and the developments in domestic demand conditions and producer prices.
According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year-end inflation expectations remained relatively flat at 67.78%, while 12-month ahead inflation expectations increased slightly by 0.60 points to 37.34%.
It has become even more important to keep financial conditions supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment after the earthquake.
Among sub-groups, annual inflation in durable consumption goods rose by around 2 points to 4.66 percent in this period.
Strengthening domestic demand due to the lagged effects of strong credit impulse during the pandemic, affects the current account balance adversely through the imports channel.
In this context, recent regulations targeting a rising share of Turkish lira deposits will strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism.
In durable goods, the furniture item stood out with price increases, while prices of white goods and automobiles rose relatively moderately.
Monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
The Committee maintains its position that the simplification should be completed within an appropriate time frame.
Driven also by the exchange rate developments, producer prices posted a strong widespread increase in March.
Global commodity prices, which started to decrease as of the second half of 2022, supported the fall in consumer inflation via the input prices channel.
It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group will be in an upward trend in the next two months due to the low base effects.
According to the provisional external trade data, in June, exports remained strong while imports continued to increase despite the partial decline in energy imports.
This rise in inflation is attributed to the increase in unprocessed food prices and the base effect in energy prices.
In this respect, considering the impact of wage developments and the uncertainties in global markets on inflation expectations and pricing behavior, and taking into account the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
The decline in inflation in fresh fruits and vegetables shaped the course of the unprocessed food inflation.
Prices of other core goods recorded an increase after the decline in August.
The total effect of adjustments in certain products with administered prices in early January amounted to 0.7 points, as projected.
Recently, weaker global economic activity and heightened downside risks to inflation have strengthened the possibility of advanced economy central banks to take expansionary monetary policy steps.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 20.8% above the average of the previous ten years.
Thus, annual energy inflation increased by a total of 5.70 points in the last four months to 8.67 percent.
Following the flat course in July, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.46 points to 9.71 percent in August.
Meanwhile, only half of the employment loss in the second quarter has been compensated for in seasonally adjusted terms.
Fuel prices can have a significant impact on consumer prices, particularly on transport services, through both production inputs and transportation costs.
The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
Strong recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors, and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Excess liquidity in the market due to residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets was mostly replaced by a liquidity deficit after May 24, with the imposed increase in required reserves.
The ongoing political uncertainty surrounding the EU, the current trade conflict between the US and China and geopolitical tensions have led to higher uncertainty over global economic policies and persistently fragile financial markets, which feeds into the downside risks to global economic activity.
Recent data show that economic activity in the earthquake zone continued to recover faster than expected, thereby largely compensating for the disaster-driven contraction.
In this period, prices of core goods excluding clothing and durables increased dramatically due to the exchange rate pass-through.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement, independent of base effects and temporary factors, and becomes consistent with the targets.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased by 10%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 15.2 points to 67.2%, which stem from was a company-led price hike of 11.1% in tobacco prices.
Financial conditions are likely to remain tight in the short term owing to domestic developments and weaker capital flows.
The Committee sees this decision as the first step of the monetary tightening process that was initiated to establish the disinflation course as soon as possible, to anchor inflation expectations, and to control the deterioration in pricing behavior.
Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the pandemic and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior.
The five-year ahead inflation expectation, on the other hand, was measured as 9.03%.
Meanwhile, food prices may see some volatility, especially in unprocessed food, due to weather conditions.
In May, consumer prices increased by 1.36% and annual inflation rose by 0.45 points to 11.39%.
The recent trend of upsurge in the clothing and footwear group lost sizeable momentum due to lockdown effects, and annual inflation declined by 5.40 points to 5.56%.
The interaction of risks posed by soaring commodity prices to the inflation outlook with the pricing behavior and inflation expectations will be closely monitored.
On the energy front, prices rose by 0.34 percent in line with international oil prices, while annual inflation sustained the mild outlook with 1.74 percent.
Taking into account the cumulative and lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will continue to determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
While industrial production increased by 2.4 percent in August, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, compared to the previous month, it increased by 4.1 percent on an annual basis.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding oil prices and global markets pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel.
However, the relatively weak outlook of exports and the likely fall in tourism revenues may dampen this improvement.
On the energy front, prices jumped in September amid price developments in oil and other inputs, and this trend continued in October.
Thus, industrial production increased by 2.6% quarterly as of January.
In the same period, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 1.46%.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 7.70 points to 9.52% in September.
In April, prices of durable goods rose by 5.11%, mainly driven by the rise in furniture prices, followed by automobiles and white goods prices.
The services PMI, in particular, remained on the decline in August and fell by 2.6 points to 48.3, below its threshold.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 25.6% above the average of the previous ten years.
To sum up, in the second quarter, external demand remained weak while domestic demand contributed to growth moderately.
The second-quarter downturn in industrial output deepened in the third quarter.
Food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 4.73% in March, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 5.86 points to 70.33%.
Non-energy commodity prices, which remained almost flat in recent months, also decreased in October before returning to their relatively flat course in November.
Hence, underlying trend of core goods inflation registered a small increase in June.
As of December, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months remain high.
As announced in the 2023 Monetary Policy and Liraization Strategy document, the Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism; and the entire policy toolset, particularly funding channels, will be aligned with liraization targets.
The monthly increase in the rents subgroup significantly decelerated compared to January and remained at 2.66%.
Stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflation pressures alive.
Against this background, the risks that the course of food prices may pose to the short-term inflation outlook are considered to be balanced.
In August, consumer prices rose by 0.86% and annual inflation remained flat at 11.77%.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.04 points to 8.89% in November.
These factors are closely monitored in terms of their potential impacts on financial markets and domestic economic activity through both capital flows and international trade.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
Following the expected, temporary monthly increase in inflation in January, which was also reflected in the Inflation Report forecasts, price increases are expected to slow down in February and beyond.
Coupled with international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments, the SCT adjustment brought about a significant increase in fuel prices.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to take one more measured step towards simplification by lowering the marginal funding rate.
When the sectors that contribute to the increase in employment are considered, it is seen that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains.
While the rise in food inflation stemmed from both unprocessed and processed food prices, the rise in core goods inflation was mainly driven by durable goods.
Consumer confidence indices declined in January and February yet remained above the October level.
Prices in the other services subgroup rose by 1.41% month-on-month, with maintenance-repair, recreational and sporting services, household services and insurance services in the lead.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in August, inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged up by 0.3 and 0.2 percentage points to 43.3% and 25.6%, respectively.
The current course of inflation expectations and the deterioration in pricing behavior keep the upside risks to the inflation outlook alive.
Consumer inflation in advanced economies decreased from 4.91% to 4.08% over the intermeeting period, whereas consumer inflation in emerging economies increased from 5.41% to 5.84% due to relatively large economies such as Russia, Türkiye and India.
This process is supported by the gradually falling demand for foreign exchange amid the improving current account balance and lower energy prices.
In sectors with relatively high export shares, industrial production growth was stronger on monthly and quarterly basis.
Gold imports play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit due to monetary conditions and expectations.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.28 points to 16.91 percent in May largely due to the annual fresh fruits and vegetables inflation that hit 48 percent.
In the first three weeks of January, the limited price increase in the energy group were offset by the fall in prices of non-energy commodities.
Although investment remains weak, tendencies for investment and employment including that of small and medium-sized firms are recovering.
Therefore, the outlook for 2019 has been revised down for both advanced and emerging economies.
The Committee also assesses that credit growth including long-term investment loans and the targeted use of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for financial stability.
In addition, rising international prices for oil and other commodities also affect the external balance.
In August, indicators for global supply chain pressures have remained mild while international transportation costs have increased.
PMI data for April point to a sustained rise in export orders and a partial deceleration in domestic orders.
As of February, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high.
In seasonally-adjusted terms, national income maintained its robust growth, posting an increase by 1.3 percent quarter-on-quarter.
As a result, cost factors are the main driver of the upsurge in inflation.
Meanwhile, with the increase in the maximum contractual interest rates on credit card transactions from 3.66% to 4.25% on , credit card expenditures have also started to contribute to the rebalancing process in credit growth.
The persistent trade tensions between the US and China coupled with the possibility of protectionist measures spreading across other countries, a more apparent slowdown in the euro area, lingering uncertainties regarding the Brexit and other geopolitical developments cause the uncertainty over global economic policies to remain elevated and the vulnerabilities in global financial markets to continue.
The impacts of these developments on the rebalancing process in domestic demand are closely monitored as a risk factor.
Industrial turnover indices suggest that this deceleration was driven by domestic demand due also to pandemic restrictions, while external demand was supportive of industrial production.
Yet, higher risk of deflation in developed countries increases the probability of postponement in the normalization of monetary policies.
In the first quarter of 2016, inflation remained below the projections of the January Inflation Report mainly due to unprocessed food prices.
The Committee underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and in terms of macrofinancial stability.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, current account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022.
In the following period, the US inflation decreased in two consecutive months in October and November to 3.1%, and the Fed’s communication at its December meeting led to a significant recovery in the global risk appetite.
On the other hand, rising protectionism and the uncertainty regarding global economic policies restrain capital flows to emerging markets and add to downside risks for the upcoming period.
Consumer prices rose by 4.53% in February, and annual inflation went up by 2.21 percentage points to 67.1%.
In November, price hikes were noteworthy in pulses, rice and white meat within the other unprocessed food group.
This fall in these two items continued in January.
Thus, demand conditions are likely to support disinflation.
Energy prices fell significantly by 21.00% in May, and annual inflation in this group declined by 28.16 points from 21.19% to -6.97%.
In seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms, October production figure was flat compared to the previous month, but 1.0 percent higher than the third-quarter average.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for March, implies a flat trend in exports and imports.
Net exports did not contribute to quarterly growth but their strong contribution to annual growth continued.
In line with projections, leading indicators point to a temporary rise in the underlying trend of inflation in January due to the minimum wage adjustment and price hikes in services items, which exhibit time-dependent pricing behavior, with administered prices in the lead.
The PMI production data have been hovering below 50 since the beginning of the year.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.78 points to 6.79 percent in February.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Meanwhile, industrial employment continued to drop slightly in February.
In this period, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 9.1% on an annual basis while it increased by 1.5% quarter-on-quarter in seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms.
Should this scenario be accompanied by portfolio outflows, the extent of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation to consumer prices and the potential impact on overall financial stability will shape the monetary policy response as well.
Meanwhile, monthly core goods inflation is projected to register some increase due to durable goods.
On the other hand, imports remain on a downward slide, largely due to consumption and investment goods, which led to historically high current account surplus in August – October period.
In sum, consumer prices in November reflect tax cuts, the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and falling oil prices as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity.
In this respect, inflation is projected to be 23.5 percent at end-2018, and then fall to 15.2 percent at end-2019 and 9.3 percent at end-2020 before stabilizing around 5 percent in the medium term.
In sum, looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth and the gradual recovery is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and the partial improvement in financial conditions.
Annual inflation increased in clothing and footwear and other core goods, but declined slightly in durable goods.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.42 points to 14.12 percent.
While annual inflation declined in durable goods and clothing-footwear groups, it increased in other core goods.
Annual services inflation maintained its high levels.
Meanwhile, firms’ investment and employment expectations for the future decreased slightly in the last quarter.
Besides the slowdown in global economic activity, the increased excess supply in crude oil points to a moderate course in crude oil prices in the period ahead, yet geopolitical risks remain significant.
In addition, global energy prices, which started to recede from the levels they hit towards the end of September, pose a risk with a re-increase amid geopolitical problems.
Meanwhile, monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long-term debt rollover ratio stood at 128% in May.
Leading indicators point to a continued moderate recovery trend in the third quarter and to a partial improvement in the sectoral diffusion of economic activity.
Tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
Economic activity is on a strong course.
The normalization in loan growth and composition continued.
While market interest rates have moved in tandem with the policy rate, retail loan growth has assumed a downtrend.
On the other hand, prices in the restaurants-hotels group surged in January as a result of the rise in the minimum wage accompanied by the recent surge in food prices, particularly red meat.
On the other hand, other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Business and household surveys indicate that the demand for durable goods is still higher than long-term averages.
In education services, high rates of increases are observed due to private school fees.
Household cleaning products were another item that came to the forefront in the subgroup with price increases in March.
In the bread and cereals item, where the effects of grain price developments were observed, annual inflation was realized at 90.69 percent, as prices increased by 3.65 percent.
The Committee envisages that unprocessed food prices, which saw notable increases in the last couple of months, may display a downward correction in the short term.
The Committee expects the disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
In the coming period, not only the lagged effects of the exchange rate developments but also the base effect from unprocessed food prices is projected to push inflation further upwards in the short term.
Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more widespread across sectors.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira, widespread wage increases and tax adjustments are expected to place additional cost-side pressure on inflation in the near term.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 608 basis points to 49.3%.
Prices in the services group increased by 3.08% while the group's annual inflation decreased by 1.71 points to 59.93%.
Meanwhile, the services and construction turnover indices, along with retail sales posted monthly and quarterly increases in July.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.38% in June, and annual inflation dropped by 7.59 percentage points to 50.09% also due to the low base effect.
The Committee has decided to keep the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) constant at 45 percent.
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and stimulus packages are likely to improve the positive outlook in portfolio flows to emerging economies in the upcoming period.
This production drop is largely attributed to the correction of June’s sharp increase and the reduced number of working days due to factors such as bridge days.
Leading indicators show that the slowdown in annual food inflation continues in September.
As of April, the annualized balance of payments-defined foreign trade deficit increased by USD 54.0 billion year-on-year to USD 100.2 billion.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Türkiye.
Annual producer inflation maintained its upward trend in January.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the improvement in the current account balance, which came to a standstill in June, is projected to resume in July, bolstered by travel revenues.
In fact, mid-July incidents and the loss of working days caused by extended religious holidays had far more implications than normal calendar effects.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices increased 2.81% driven mainly by catering services, while the decline in accommodation prices continued.
Domestic developments have recently led to fluctuations in markets.
On the other hand, the extension of VAT cuts on some items of the services sector affected the inflation outlook favorably.
Accordingly, the Committee evaluated the necessity of increasing the functionality of market mechanisms through the simplification process of the current micro and macro-prudential framework along with monetary tightening.
In January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index remained flat month-on-month, while adjusted for calendar effects, it rose by 1.1% year-on-year.
A sustained fall in inflation and a sizable adjustment in the current account were achieved.
Headline inflation edged up in November and remains in line with the outlook presented in the most recent Inflation Report.
On the other hand, gold prices rose due to exchange rate effects and international developments, keeping annual inflation in this group elevated.
Lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements eased further, underpinning the improvement in core goods inflation.
The uptrend in oil prices continued in March, however, the sliding scale system curbed the effects coming through this channel.
However, when the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022 is considered, a notable slowdown in foreign demand, on an annual basis, in 2023 is evident.
The contribution of net exports to annual growth was 2.7 points.
The retreat in natural gas prices continued in November as well.
As the limit for the free use of natural gas was exceeded (first 25 cubic metres), the impact of the natural gas item on the monthly consumer inflation rose to 1.01 percentage points, which is consistent with projections.
Increasing concern over global food security driven by trade restrictions, high course of commodity prices, the persistence of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly in food and energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
This outlook is preserved even when other transport vehicles that stimulate industrial production are excluded.
Accordingly, the global economic slowdown in the third quarter of the previous year continued in the last quarter as well, the global economic activity remained weak.
In this period, long-term interest rates increased in advanced economies, while capital flows towards emerging economies subsided.
The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and contributes to a benign outlook in cost factors.
However, stock and bond markets in advanced and emerging economies continue to fluctuate.
This rise in energy inflation was driven by oil prices, while the core goods inflation was affected by the mild course of the exchange rate as well as the subdued domestic demand.
However, it is observed that the spread between interest rates offered for low-amount savings deposits and high-amount saving deposits, the effects of which are closely monitored and which are important for the rebalancing process in domestic demand, continued to widen.
The growth in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates have diverged from TL commercial loans and increased from 2.89% to 4.88%.
Annual core goods inflation dropped 0.81 percentage points to 52.2%.
In case of a failure in implementing the macroeconomic rebalancing process rapidly and effectively enough to bring inflation down amid high inflation rates and risk premium levels, inflation and exchange rate expectations may feed each other and undermine the disinflation process.
Moreover, it was indicated that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale.
In this period, seasonally-adjusted monthly core goods inflation decelerated due to the moderate increase in automobile prices.
The effects on aggregate demand conditions, of production and employment incentives and measures to boost the credit market, will be closely monitored in the upcoming period.
The CBRT decided to keep a portion of the required reserve amount for Turkish lira liabilities, maintained as an average of a 14-day period, as blocked.
The Committee assessed that upside risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report rose significantly due to an increased credit impulse, especially since the end of January, and rising import costs.
Moreover, the plunging Turkish lira drove the annual inflation and underlying trend of core indicators higher.
The monetary tightening process will increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Substantial economic measures are introduced to avoid any permanent damage to employment, supply chains and output capacity.
The soaring annual inflation in vegetables pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by 2.15 points to 12.29%.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.04 points to 5.20 percent.
Yet, the robust sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles hint at an improvement in investments.
While the share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the tourism-led improvement in current account balance continues with a solid pace.
While the share of sustainable components in economic growth increases, the share of the contributions of machinery-equipment investments and net exports accounted for approximately 62% of the average annual growth in the first three quarters of the year.
That of vehicle loans fell by 0.59%, maintaining its weak course since the beginning of the year.
Automobile prices surged by 10.28% due to brisk domestic sales as well as exchange rate developments.
While the main driver of annual growth in the third quarter was the services sector, the contribution of the industrial sector to growth remained limited due to the weakening foreign demand.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 101%.
Recently obtained data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.
In parallel, Turkish lira deposits have started increasing while FX-protected and FX-denominated deposits have both declined.
Moreover, the developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans have lost further pace and their four-week average growth rate has dropped from 3.34% to 1.64%, while the same rate in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates has increased from 1.28% to 2.89%.
The recent strong uptrend in processed food prices somewhat weakened in February, and annual processed food inflation increased to a limited extent.
Developments in domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in inflation indicators.
Nonfarm employment rose month-on-month in January owing to construction and industrial sectors, whereas services employment fell slightly.
The Business Tendency Survey (BTS) and PMI indicators for manufacturing have shown a more robust growth in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter, while the BTS’ three-month-ahead expectation for production and question of three-month-ahead total orders continued to improve in the fourth quarter.
In sum, external demand remains weak whereas domestic demand contributes moderately to growth.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment is maintained.
The strong course of domestic demand, exchange rate developments and the stickiness of services inflation have been the main drivers.
With the effect of monetary and quantitative tightening and simplification decisions, lending rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3.1 billion in August 2022, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 4.2 billion to USD 40.9 billion.
The fall in risk premium and in exchange rate volatility were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 5.55 billion since June, USD 2.38 billion of which was directed towards government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 3.17 billion towards the equity market.
Firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that external demand remains strong in the second quarter.
Domestic demand conditions display a moderate improvement and demand from the European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports.
The Committee assessed that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth over the medium to long term.
The European region’s PMI indicators have recently signaled a partial improvement in the growth outlook, with Germany and the UK in the lead.
Fuel and bottled gas prices surged by 26.11% and 23.93%, respectively.
The base effect and cost factors are likely to continue to exert upward pressure on annual inflation in June.
Against this background, the seasonally adjusted monthly change in B and C indices decelerated somewhat while their annual inflation continued to increase.
Prospects for exports and tourism-linked activities seem relatively better, yet the stance for employment and investment has recorded an overall worsening.
The adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation is also tapering off.
In light of currently available data, economic activity is expected to post a significant improvement in the third quarter.
On the other hand, 24-month ahead and 5-year ahead inflation expectations receded by 0.41 points to 20.76% and 0.17 points to 9.49%, respectively.
In March, consumer prices were up 1.02 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.16 points to 11.29 percent.
Indeed, the strong backward-indexation tendency in these groups and rising labor costs led to a high monthly services inflation in January, given the labor-intensive nature of the sector.
Processed food prices posted a modest monthly increase and annual processed food inflation fell by 2.09 points to 13.41% amid base effects.
Prices of services rose by 0.84% in February and annual services inflation increased by 0.29 points to 12.49%.
While uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high, normalization steps taken by several countries are being watched.
The seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 2.91% and 3.22%, respectively in December.
Annual inflation decreased across all groups, being more pronounced in the energy group.
Having strengthened in the first four months, pressures led by external prices weakened to a limited extent in the last two months.
Volatilities in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables keep the domestic food prices-driven risks alive.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30% above the average of the last ten years.
While prices of furniture and white goods posted moderate increases, prices of automobiles decreased owing to the SCT tax base adjustment for automobiles.
Despite having receded from the readings at the end of September, global energy prices remain highly volatile due to geopolitical problems.
In the meantime, exports show an improvement across foreign trade partners, while the demand for imports has been increasing in line with the domestic demand.
Unprocessed food prices, led by fresh fruit and vegetable prices, had a decisive role in this development.
According to TURKSTAT’s data, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 2.3 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of 2015.
The high contribution from net exports to quarterly growth translates into a growth composition buoying up the current account balance.
On the other hand, following the minimum wage adjustment and the mainly tax-driven rise in fuel prices, leading indicators point to a surge in transport services prices in January.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira is expected to deteriorate the core goods inflation to some extent in the short term.
On the other hand, electricity and natural gas tariffs were increased in July, and LPG also recorded an uptick in prices.
Industrial production and survey indicators suggest that the industrial sector will contribute mildly to employment in the forthcoming period.
When the provisional foreign trade data for June is considered along with the high frequency data for July, the three-month average trends imply a decline in both exports and imports, with a milder fall in exports.
Moreover, it is assumed that administered prices, tax and wage adjustments will be formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward-indexation behavior.
As a matter of fact, as of the first quarter of the year, the share of machinery-equipment investments and net exports in GDP reached its highest level over the last decade.
Core inflation remained high due to the lagged effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira, yet the ongoing fall in import prices in the fourth quarter limited the rise in CPI inflation.
Prices of services increased by 0.17 percent, and annual services inflation rose by 0.16 points to 8.80 percent in November.
To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
Solid fuel, bottled gas and administered municipal water prices were up, whereas fuel prices remained flat due to the new sliding-scale tariff system.
In April-May period, industrial production increased by 0.4% over the previous quarter.
During this period, non-gold exports were weaker than their fourth-quarter average, while non-gold imports were flat.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) discussed the medium-term projections to be published in the January Inflation Report.
The consumer demand for categories subject to incentives remains robust while investments edged up in the second quarter after a subdued first quarter.
On the other hand, latest domestic developments constitute downside risks to demand and inflation through the confidence channel and the tourism sector.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in January, while international transportation costs increased due to the geopolitical developments concerning the Red Sea.
In addition, the inflation trend in other services followed a weaker course in the last two months.
In January, the production of consumer goods was lower than the previous quarter’s average, while the imports of consumer goods were on the rise.
Price increases in the food group are envisaged to decelerate somewhat in June.
Thus, in seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 11.2%.
Domestic demand stood out as the main driver of quarterly growth in the first quarter.
In the food group, monthly price increases were driven by unprocessed food prices, while the moderate trend in processed food inflation was retained.
Recent developments such as rising geopolitical risks, the course of energy prices, diverging economic growth outlooks across countries, increases in US long-term interest rates and portfolio outflows from emerging markets suggest that uncertainties regarding the global economy are increasing.
The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices.
Services prices rose by 7.89% in January, and annual services inflation increased by 7.23 points to 29.56%.
Annual inflation was slightly up in unprocessed food but continued to slow in processed food.
In this period, capital goods (11.67%), durable consumption goods (10.37%), and intermediate goods (8.93%) were the subgroups that stood out with high monthly price increases.
In transport services, increases in urban passenger transport, air passenger transport and cargo fees were notable, while the decline in intercity passenger transport by road kept subgroup’s price increase moderate, and annual inflation edged down by 0.42 points to 90.29%.
In this period, annual inflation remained relatively flat in durable goods, and decreased in other subcategories.
In this period, annual inflation slightly rose in transport and restaurants-hotels groups and remained flat in rents and communication, whereas it decelerated in other services group.
In February, prices of durable goods (excluding gold) rose by 2.49%, driven by automobiles and furniture, while prices of white goods remained flat as opposed to previous months.
In addition to the ongoing recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.
The sliding scale system limits the negative effects of crude oil prices.
In this period, annual inflation was up across all subcategories.
In December, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 11.2%.
In sum, data on the second quarter of 2015 suggest a mild course in economic activity.
Among indicators for investment goods, the production and imports of machinery‐equipment recorded a quarterly and yearly decline in the first quarter.
Compared to the previous period, non-agricultural employment increased driven by industrial sector in November period and unemployment rates continued to decrease.
In May, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 37.3 billion to USD 60 billion, from its May 2022 level of USD 22.6 billion, despite the decline in energy imports due to energy prices.
Still, the Committee noted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the strong upward trend in the labor force participation rate.
Similarly, 1-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which were 25.2 and 33.8 points in the previous MPC meeting period declined to 23.6 and 30.3 points, respectively.
Moreover, at its December meeting, the Committee decided to increase the LON lending rate from 12.25 to 12.75 percent.
In this period, the impact of the adjustments in natural gas prices proved evident, and fuel prices also increased in tandem with the developments in the exchange rate and oil prices.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
However, excluding China, inflows to bond markets continued with a limited pace, while those to equity markets remained relatively weak.
The low course of food inflation was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which was -4.22 percent.
Firms’ existing domestic and external orders as well as expectations for future orders reveal that external demand remains strong while domestic demand is expected to increase although it has declined slightly.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
Emerging economies have also taken expansionary monetary policy measures such as bond purchases.
Accordingly, while a partial recovery is observed in economic activity compared to the previous quarter, the contribution of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation continues.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective.
Moreover, the public sector is likely to provide an increased investment support for growth in the fourth quarter.
Prices of durable goods rose by 4.92% in this period triggered by automobiles, furniture and white goods.
Moreover, the increase in the volatility of oil prices triggered by geopolitical developments remains as a potential risk factor for inflation.
The other services group posted a large monthly increase that was mainly triggered by the rise in private university tuition fees.
The 3.61% rise in processed food prices was driven by bread-cereals, coffee-tea-cocoa, and non-alcoholic beverages.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased 11.8% year-on-year to 47 million in the first eleven months of the year.
Leading indicators suggest that the fall in the underlying trend of inflation, which started in September, strengthened further in October as cost shocks have been largely reflected in prices.
The BTS data on production over the last three months and the PMI indicators point to a moderate monthly growth for October.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the B and C indices rose significantly compared to the previous month, which is also confirmed by alternative core inflation indicators.
In this regard, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be further closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation on the back of rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand may last longer than previously anticipated.
The strong course of domestic demand, cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, stickiness of services inflation and tax regulations have been the main drivers of this development.
As projected in the Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting in the previous month, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages climbed to 6.63 percent in June due to unprocessed food prices.
In October, the USA, Japan and the United Kingdom displayed a more favorable outlook than in the previous month.
In addition, in order to be able to sustain price stability in the long-term, the CBRT will continue to support strategic investments that will improve the current account balance.
The weakening yet ongoing lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high levels of inflation expectations and wage developments restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
Field interviews conducted in this period also confirmed the strong course of domestic demand conditions.
The surge in prices of cheese and other dairy products in recent months turned flat due to the muted rise in raw milk prices.
The slower-than-expected economic recovery remains a downside risk to inflation, while exchange rate movements driven by heightened global uncertainty and volatility pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
The monthly price increase in the rents subgroup strengthened somewhat further and was measured at 7.90%.
Monthly price increases were shaped by the rise in municipal water tariffs and increased fuel prices due to exchange rate developments notwithstanding the fall in international oil prices.
Industrial and services employment grew in this period, whereas construction employment declined.
However, the possibility of accelerated inflation amid strong demand conditions accompanied by surging commodity prices in advanced economies may trigger a faster-than-projected tightening in these countries.
The manufacturing industry PMI of emerging economies decreased by 0.5 points compared to the previous month to 50.9 in September while the services PMI dropped by 1.2 points to 51.9.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined by 12.3% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 14.8% above the average of the last ten years.
Despite the third quarter’s higher crude oil prices driven by the benign global growth outlook, the OPEC output cut and the hurricanes that hit the US oil production, demand and supply-side factors specific to the oil market are containing the upward pressures on energy prices.
Compared to the previous period, industrial and construction employment posted an upsurge, while the rise in services employment remained limited.
Hence, economic activity is expected to maintain a stable growth trend.
Meanwhile, the October-November average of the Chinese composite PMI declined 0.7 points quarter-on-quarter to 50.8.
The lump-sum SCT increase of TRY 5 for gasoline and diesel, and TRY 4 for LPG will have a negative impact on consumer inflation both directly and indirectly.
This, in turn, may pose a downside risk to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Meanwhile, central banks of Brazil, Peru, and Chile continued with policy rate cuts on the back of the decline in consumer inflation, while the Central Bank of Hungary also reduced its policy rate both in October and November.
In February, the services item, which remained higher than expected, although slowed down on monthly basis, posted the largest price increase across subgroups, after the food item.
While this upsurge was driven by cereal, vegetable oil and meat prices, the prices of sugar and dairy products also increased substantially.
The sluggish outlook in tourism sector continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
While commercial loans have recently started to normalize, consumer loans have remained strong and supported domestic demand.
Meanwhile, other services group prices continued to display different trends across its sub-items.
Tightening in financial conditions along with the deceleration in loan growth and the sustained uptrend in the weighted average funding cost in the upcoming period will have a positive effect on the inflation outlook.
The negative impact of cumulative exchange rate developments since the beginning of the year on the inflation outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices.
Annual inflation declined across all groups, more visibly in energy and food groups.
Leading indicators show that the recovery in the global economy is sustained with some deceleration.
In the durable goods group, the automobile and furniture items stood out with an upsurge in prices following the depreciation in the Turkish lira, while the seasonal price increase in the clothing and footwear group proved quite limited compared to previous years.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group fell by 3.20 points to 1.38 percent.
In this period, annual inflation edged down in restaurants-hotels, but increased in other subcategories, more markedly in transport and rent.
In March, monthly headline inflation and the underlying trend decreased, yet remained above the path projected in the Inflation Report.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored and the Committee will decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The contribution of natural gas to monthly inflation is projected to weaken in December.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 70%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 89%.
Similarly, sales of automobiles were down from the fourth-quarter average during the January-February period.
A significant of the meeting focused on the simplification of the monetary policy framework.
Policy measures taken to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-protected deposit accounts (KKM) have led to a rapid decline in these accounts and accordingly, the demand for Turkish lira deposits continues.
Credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
While residential electricity tariffs decreased by 15% in this period, fuel (-1.24%) and bottled gas (-4.66%) prices also declined.
Travel revenues increased by USD 5.8 billion in the first eleven months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 45.1 billion.
Despite successive decreases in June and July, consumption goods imports remain elevated in seasonally adjusted terms.
The upward trend in card expenditures also continued in the first quarter.
On the other hand, the projected disinflationary effect of demand conditions may be higher, if economic activity recovers slower than expected in the period ahead.
Provisional foreign trade data for January indicate that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly decrease.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 29.2% year-on-year to 9.5 million in the first four months of the year.
However, the ongoing slump in the tourism sector poses a downside risk to economic activity and the current account balance.
As a result, the underlying trend of services recorded an increase in July.
The Committee noted that the rebound in tourism and transportation revenues remains rather brisk, and under these circumstances, net exports will provide positive contribution to quarterly growth in the second quarter as well.
Yet, energy prices are expected to have a less constraining effect on annual consumer inflation due to soaring prices of fuel and bottled gas amid the Turkish lira depreciation in March.
On the other hand, discounts and campaigns in the last quarter of 2023 and wage revisions in January 2024 have been the factors curbing the decline in demand.
In sum, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
Annual inflation rose to 39.83% in the unprocessed food group, and to 47.57% in the processed food group.
According to main industrial groupings, energy prices remained flat in February but prices of the durable and non-durable consumption goods groups increased significantly.
According to provisional foreign trade data for July, gold imports increased by USD 12.5 billion year-on-year to USD 19.4 billion in the first seven months of the year.
The Committee will make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven and transparent framework.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
Led by declines in refined petroleum product and base metal industry prices as well as in electricity and natural gas production prices, the monthly rate of increase in producer prices decelerated significantly.
Monthly inflation of bread and cereals increased somewhat in this period, reaching 1.41%.
Due to the minimum wage hike and exchange rate developments, prices in the other services subgroup were up by 10.27%.
In sum, the uncertainty in global markets and elevated food prices necessitate maintaining the cautious stance in monetary policy.
Inflation expectations obtained from the Survey of Market Participants are revised upwards in July.
However, due to stickiness in inflation, geopolitical developments and increased risks pertaining to commodity prices, market-implied future policy rates indicate a more cautious rate-cut path compared to the previous MPC meeting period.