In non-clothing categories, annual inflation continued to climb because of the lagged spillovers of the cumulative Turkish lira depreciation.
Despite the energy-related developments, the seasonally-adjusted underlying trend indicators of producer prices pointed out that the cost-based pressures continued, albeit at a weaker rate.
GDP data confirmed our previous assessments that economic activity would remain strong in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Energy prices decreased by 2.12% in December, and annual inflation in this group dropped by 23.57 points to 94.43%.
Maintaining tight monetary policies to ensure a permanent decline in inflation and geopolitical risks are regarded as prominent risk factors for the course of global economic activity in 2024.
The Committee has therefore decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
In order to achieve price stability, a strong policy coordination and an integrated macro policy mix involving all stakeholders are required.
This was driven by annual unprocessed food inflation that climbed to 11.48 percent mostly due to rising prices of vegetables.
While the rapid rise in the demand for durable goods on the back of a strong credit impulse became the main determinant of the recovery in private consumption, services-related expenditures remained weak due to the pandemic.
In April, consumer prices rose by 3.18%, and annual inflation went up by 1.30 percentage points to 69.80%.
The decline in durable goods prices was mainly driven by the fall in automobile prices while the new season price hikes in the clothing group remained below those of the previous year.
Firms’ expectations for future investments increased slightly in July but remained sluggish.
The annual inflation and the underlying trend of core indicators recorded a small decrease, yet remained high.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the high level in producer and consumer inflation continues on an international scale.
Gold imports, which have increased due to monetary conditions and expectations, play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit.
Inflation continues to hover significantly above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies.
The contribution of this group to monthly consumer inflation stood at 0.12 points.
The Committee emphasized that the alignment of inflation expectations and pricing behavior with projections has gained relative importance for the disinflation process.
Underlying trends of core inflation indicators registered some increase in this period.
In recent months, the exchange rate pass-through to the consumer inflation has firmed, backward indexation has become more widespread, and pricing behavior has deteriorated considerably.
While this rise was observed across all subcategories, it was more pronounced in durable goods inflation.
Industrial production posted a quarterly growth in the fourth quarter of 2016.
The industrial production of sectors with higher export shares posted a strong growth in this period.
External demand indicators point to no improvement for the fourth quarter of 2014 in the rebalancing process based on goods excluding gold, which ground to a halt in the third quarter.
Prices of core goods were up by 8.57% in August, and the group’s annual inflation increased by 7.72 points to 51.97%.
The pace of the recovery in economic activity will depend on the course of the normalization process in Turkey as well as in the global economy.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Türkiye's five-year credit default swap (CDS) premium dropped by 23 basis points to 294 basis points amid the improved global risk appetite as of .
Manufacturing industry firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that the decrease in export order expectations continued in the last quarter, albeit at a slower pace, while domestic market order expectations remained flat.
Annual inflation remained flat in rents, but decreased in other subgroups.
In October, the upward trend in catering services prices continued, while prices in accommodation services decreased.
Although the seasonally-adjusted unprocessed food prices increased in January following the decline in the last four months, the group’s inflation fell to 9.39 percent.
Indicators for March and April signal for a stronger economic activity and labor market.
Ongoing weakness in growth across European countries, the largest export market of Turkey, and geopolitical developments in neighboring countries limits the growth of exports.
In this period, B and C indicators recorded a relatively flat annual inflation, but a slight increase in trends.
Sustained fiscal discipline has become essential in reducing the sensitivity of the Turkish economy against external shocks in recent years.
On the energy front, prices increased on account of rising taxes on fuel products.
Prices of services increased by 0.38 percent, and the annual services inflation receded by 0.20 point to 8.86 percent in March.
Annual inflation came down in core goods and services, went up in food and energy.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5 percent target are reached.
Thus, the rise in automobile prices amounted to 34.01% in the first six months of 2023.
Commodity prices have registered some deceleration in the recent period.
Thus, the unemployment rate declined by 0.4 points compared to previous month and realized as 9.6%.
In the same period, Turkish lira commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 0.21%.
Unless notable upside surprises occur in global inflation under the mentioned risk factors, it is considered that major central banks, the Fed and the ECB in particular, will continue to normalize monetary policy in line with expectations, and the impact on financial markets will remain limited.
This outlook is also confirmed by the declining figures in the diffusion index, Median and SATRIM indicators.
In the second quarter, signs of deceleration in domestic demand became more visible.
Preliminary data suggest that the price increases in durable goods that have relatively high exchange rate pass-through have decelerated significantly as a reflection of the recent mild course in exchange rates.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira confined the improvement in annual core goods inflation.
This period sees high price hikes as service items such as university tuition fees, student accomodation fees and school bus fares are priced at certain times of the year (time-dependent pricing).
However, adverse domestic developments may cause fluctuations in markets if accompanied by global volatilities and this may place extra pressure on financial conditions.
All in all, the seasonally-adjusted underlying trend of core goods inflation posted a significant increase mostly due to exchange rate pressures.
The Committee assesses that that the partial recovery in food prices accompanied by the cautious monetary policy will limit the deterioration in the inflation outlook and inflation will reach the target in the medium term.
The labor market outlook continued to deteriorate in August due to sluggish economic activity.
On the other hand, the gold trade deficit remained relatively flat compared to the previous month.
On the other hand, current indicators show that machinery-equipment investments have been improving since the third quarter.
Nevertheless, the outlook for monetary policies in advanced economies and the global risk appetite heighten the risks to the portfolio flows towards emerging economies.
The non-gold exports volume index rose in the third quarter whereas the imports index fell in line with moderate domestic demand.
Seasonally adjusted data indicate that the underlying recent trend of inflation slowed down, yet remained at high levels.
Moreover, the measures and incentive packages to boost consumption and investment expenditures, reduced uncertainty and improved financial conditions will continue to spur growth.
Accordingly, the inflation forecast for end-2018 was revised upwards by 0.5 points, while that for 2019 was kept intact.
Price increases were widespread across the food group.
In this framework, while the year-end inflation is projected to be close to the upper bound of the forecast range provided in the Inflation Report (Report), it is evaluated that the underlying trend in monthly inflation is on course to decline.
Meanwhile, services inflation went up due to items affected by normalization process.
Monetary, financial and fiscal measures introduced to address the pandemic as well as the expansion of loan supply, mostly by state-owned banks, seem to have mitigated downside risks to loan growth and contributed to the uninterrupted flow of credit to the real sector.
Nonetheless, with imports gaining remarkably in the first quarter due to increased consumption, net exports contributed negatively to quarterly growth.
The cumulative Turkish lira depreciation caused the annual core goods inflation to rise and the core inflation to deteriorate slightly.
Meanwhile, the monthly price increase in the food group stood close that in the previous month.
In sum, current elevated levels of inflation and the developments on core inflation outlook continue to pose risks on the pricing behavior.
Services prices were up 1.04% in February and the group’s annual inflation increased by 0.22 points to 11.74%.
However, inflationary effects arising from disruptions in supply chains persist.
Price increases continue in other durables.
In sum, economic activity is expected to recede in the third quarter.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.09 points to 2.47 percent in May.
Accordingly, the gradual elimination of the effect of 2016 tax increases on annual inflation may support the disinflation process.
In response to the deterioration in the inflation outlook, the Committee decided to raise the policy rate.
In March, among the components of the B index, price increases strengthened in core goods with respect to the previous month, but decelerated in services and particularly in processed food.
Increases in exports of goods translate into a decelerated deterioration in the current account deficit and improvement in core current account deficit indicators.
Monthly energy inflation was driven by the fuel item, which posted a price hike of 29.04%.
The 12-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.8 percentage points from 31.8% to 30.0%, while the 24-month-ahead inflation expectation was revised down by 1.0 percentage point from 20.3% to 19.3%.
Annual inflation recorded some decline in the services group, but increased in other subgroups.
In this respect, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an uptick.
The last four months’ cumulative increase in prices of fats and oils exceeded 20%.
Aggregate demand conditions continue to curb inflation in certain sectors, while price increases are high for goods that are sensitive to financing conditions.
The substantial April-May price hikes were replaced by a slowdown in June across categories where exchange rate pass-through to prices is relatively faster, such as home appliances and automobiles.
Energy prices jumped by 2.03 percent in August amid price developments in oil and other inputs.
As the strong course of domestic demand and the stickiness of services inflation persist, the increase in oil prices and the ongoing deterioration in inflation expectations pose additional upside risks to inflation.
Recent indicators point to an increase in the underlying trend of inflation.
Services prices were up by 2.63% in October, and the group's annual inflation increased by 2.48 points to 60.24%.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affect inflation outlook favorably.
In addition, the propensity to save in public expenditures coupled with the rise in unemployment rates hint at a further deceleration in domestic demand.
Annual inflation in rents increased to 66.76% following the monthly increase of 4.37%.
In September 2015, non-farm unemployment rate recorded a limited decline upon the increase in employment.
Impact analyses of the CBRT's regulations are conducted for all components of the framework by assessing their impact on inflation, interest rates, exchange rates, reserves, expectations, securities, and financial stability with a holistic approach.
The balance between the monetary policy rate and actual/expected inflation will be sustained decisively to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until permanent price stability and the 5% target are reached.
The gradual rise continued in other core goods inflation in which the exchange rate pass-through is observed with a lag.
Therefore, the annual current account deficit is expected to narrow further in the upcoming period.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged, while enhancing flexibility in liquidity management and continuing with liquidity measures until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
Annual inflation was relatively flat in the capital goods item, whereas it rose in other subgroups.
In this group, price increases weakened in rents and restaurants-hotels, yet strengthened in transport and communication services.
The underlying trend of core inflation displayed a slight improvement.
In July, the minimum wage adjustment and the ongoing negative outlook for food prices as well as strong tourism demand led to an 11.92% rise in restaurants-hotels.
Annual inflation decreased in clothing, but increased in other subcategories.
While annual inflation increased across all subgroups, the energy group diverged negatively in line with international developments.
Prices of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products increased by 3.91% in March due to the producer firms driven increases in cigarette prices, and annual inflation rose to 51.43%.
A revision of the monetary policy stance may be considered, should the fiscal policy deviate significantly from this framework and have an adverse effect on the medium-term inflation outlook.
Global economic activity continued to slow down in the third quarter of the year.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages tumbled down to 6.19 percent due mainly to the decline in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Recent indicators and high-frequency data point that, in the third quarter, economic activity maintained its strength led by domestic demand, despite a quarterly slowdown in growth momentum.
Despite the improvement in the energy balance owing to the ongoing decline in energy prices on an annual basis, this increase was mainly driven by strong increases in imports of gold, investment goods and consumption goods.
In this period, non-farm employment continued to grow, while the rising participation rate restricted the decline in unemployment rates.
The slide in construction employment confirms the weakening construction industry.
The production of consumer goods posted a decline on a quarterly basis, while that of investment goods remained flat.
Employment grew across all sectors, and the labor force participation rate increased.
The outlook that the medium-term projections presented in the Inflation Report is based on the Monetary Policy Committee's judgments and assumptions.
The rise in commodity prices, particularly for oil and metals, and exchange rate changes have recently driven inflation higher through the cost channel.
Accordingly, annual inflation in this group went up by 18.77 points to 89.10%.
The PMI data for the services sector, which was the major driving force of global economic activity particularly in the first half of the year, significantly declined in the October-November period both in the advanced economies group and the emerging economies group.
The 24-month-ahead inflation expectation is 22.04%.
In fact, prices of educational services, which are largely inflation-indexed, surged by 2.79 percent, driving annual inflation up to 10.30 percent in this subcategory.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for January, implies a rise in exports and a decline in imports.
Strengthening of the improving trend in current account balance is important for price stability.
Across the groups making up the B index, monthly price increases are expected to lose pace in the services and more evidently in the core goods groups compared to the previous month.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, thanks to the increase in per capita tourist spending, the stronger than expected contribution of tourism revenues to the current account balance continues.
Other items driving producer inflation higher include vegetable oils, animal feed, vehicles and electronic products.
Loan growth balanced at historical levels in the third quarter, as the loans guaranteed by the Credit Guarantee Fund almost reached the pre-determined upper limit.
This loan outlook not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures but also contributes to the improvement in the current account balance.
The main driver of quarterly growth in this period was domestic demand, particularly construction investments and private consumption.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 2.53% in December but annual inflation in this group dropped by 0.47 points to 20.61% due to the base effect.
Although annual inflation in core indicators was up due to the base effect, the B and C indices maintained their mild trend thanks to the stable course of the Turkish lira, the improvement in inflation expectations, and the developments in domestic demand conditions and producer prices.
According to the October results of the Survey of Market Participants, current year-end inflation expectations remained relatively flat at 67.78%, while 12-month ahead inflation expectations increased slightly by 0.60 points to 37.34%.
It has become even more important to keep financial conditions supportive to preserve the growth momentum in industrial production and the positive trend in employment after the earthquake.
Among sub-groups, annual inflation in durable consumption goods rose by around 2 points to 4.66 percent in this period.
Strengthening domestic demand due to the lagged effects of strong credit impulse during the pandemic, affects the current account balance adversely through the imports channel.
In this context, recent regulations targeting a rising share of Turkish lira deposits will strengthen the monetary transmission mechanism.
In durable goods, the furniture item stood out with price increases, while prices of white goods and automobiles rose relatively moderately.
Monetary transmission mechanism will continue to be supported in case of unanticipated developments in credit growth and deposit rates.
The Committee maintains its position that the simplification should be completed within an appropriate time frame.
Driven also by the exchange rate developments, producer prices posted a strong widespread increase in March.
Global commodity prices, which started to decrease as of the second half of 2022, supported the fall in consumer inflation via the input prices channel.
It should be noted that annual inflation in the energy group will be in an upward trend in the next two months due to the low base effects.
According to the provisional external trade data, in June, exports remained strong while imports continued to increase despite the partial decline in energy imports.
This rise in inflation is attributed to the increase in unprocessed food prices and the base effect in energy prices.
In this respect, considering the impact of wage developments and the uncertainties in global markets on inflation expectations and pricing behavior, and taking into account the volatility in energy and unprocessed food prices, the Committee stated that the tight liquidity stance will be maintained as long as deemed necessary.
The decline in inflation in fresh fruits and vegetables shaped the course of the unprocessed food inflation.
Prices of other core goods recorded an increase after the decline in August.
The total effect of adjustments in certain products with administered prices in early January amounted to 0.7 points, as projected.
Recently, weaker global economic activity and heightened downside risks to inflation have strengthened the possibility of advanced economy central banks to take expansionary monetary policy steps.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 20.8% above the average of the previous ten years.
Thus, annual energy inflation increased by a total of 5.70 points in the last four months to 8.67 percent.
Following the flat course in July, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.46 points to 9.71 percent in August.
Meanwhile, only half of the employment loss in the second quarter has been compensated for in seasonally adjusted terms.
Fuel prices can have a significant impact on consumer prices, particularly on transport services, through both production inputs and transportation costs.
The acceleration of domestic vaccination rollout facilitates the recovery in services and tourism sectors, which have been adversely affected by the pandemic, and leads to a more balanced composition in economic activity.
Strong recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors, and the rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
Excess liquidity in the market due to residents' and non-residents' preference for Turkish lira assets was mostly replaced by a liquidity deficit after May 24, with the imposed increase in required reserves.
The ongoing political uncertainty surrounding the EU, the current trade conflict between the US and China and geopolitical tensions have led to higher uncertainty over global economic policies and persistently fragile financial markets, which feeds into the downside risks to global economic activity.
Recent data show that economic activity in the earthquake zone continued to recover faster than expected, thereby largely compensating for the disaster-driven contraction.
In this period, prices of core goods excluding clothing and durables increased dramatically due to the exchange rate pass-through.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement, independent of base effects and temporary factors, and becomes consistent with the targets.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco group increased by 10%, and annual inflation in this group rose by 15.2 points to 67.2%, which stem from was a company-led price hike of 11.1% in tobacco prices.
Financial conditions are likely to remain tight in the short term owing to domestic developments and weaker capital flows.
The Committee sees this decision as the first step of the monetary tightening process that was initiated to establish the disinflation course as soon as possible, to anchor inflation expectations, and to control the deterioration in pricing behavior.
Moreover, uncertainties remain regarding the possible effects of the pandemic and health measures on consumption habits and general spending behavior.
The five-year ahead inflation expectation, on the other hand, was measured as 9.03%.
Meanwhile, food prices may see some volatility, especially in unprocessed food, due to weather conditions.
In May, consumer prices increased by 1.36% and annual inflation rose by 0.45 points to 11.39%.
The recent trend of upsurge in the clothing and footwear group lost sizeable momentum due to lockdown effects, and annual inflation declined by 5.40 points to 5.56%.
The interaction of risks posed by soaring commodity prices to the inflation outlook with the pricing behavior and inflation expectations will be closely monitored.
On the energy front, prices rose by 0.34 percent in line with international oil prices, while annual inflation sustained the mild outlook with 1.74 percent.
Taking into account the cumulative and lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will continue to determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5% inflation target in the medium term.
While industrial production increased by 2.4 percent in August, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, compared to the previous month, it increased by 4.1 percent on an annual basis.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding oil prices and global markets pose an upside risk to inflation through the cost channel.
However, the relatively weak outlook of exports and the likely fall in tourism revenues may dampen this improvement.
On the energy front, prices jumped in September amid price developments in oil and other inputs, and this trend continued in October.
Thus, industrial production increased by 2.6% quarterly as of January.
In the same period, Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans remained on a mild growth path, at an average four-week growth rate of 1.46%.
In the food and non-alcoholic beverages group, annual inflation fell by 7.70 points to 9.52% in September.
In April, prices of durable goods rose by 5.11%, mainly driven by the rise in furniture prices, followed by automobiles and white goods prices.
The services PMI, in particular, remained on the decline in August and fell by 2.6 points to 48.3, below its threshold.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 25.6% above the average of the previous ten years.
To sum up, in the second quarter, external demand remained weak while domestic demand contributed to growth moderately.
The second-quarter downturn in industrial output deepened in the third quarter.
Food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 4.73% in March, and the group’s annual inflation rose by 5.86 points to 70.33%.
Non-energy commodity prices, which remained almost flat in recent months, also decreased in October before returning to their relatively flat course in November.
Hence, underlying trend of core goods inflation registered a small increase in June.
As of December, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months remain high.
As announced in the 2023 Monetary Policy and Liraization Strategy document, the Committee will continue to decisively use the tools supporting the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism; and the entire policy toolset, particularly funding channels, will be aligned with liraization targets.
The monthly increase in the rents subgroup significantly decelerated compared to January and remained at 2.66%.
Stickiness in services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, and food prices keep inflation pressures alive.
Against this background, the risks that the course of food prices may pose to the short-term inflation outlook are considered to be balanced.
In August, consumer prices rose by 0.86% and annual inflation remained flat at 11.77%.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose by 1.04 points to 8.89% in November.
These factors are closely monitored in terms of their potential impacts on financial markets and domestic economic activity through both capital flows and international trade.
Accordingly, the Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 19%.
Following the expected, temporary monthly increase in inflation in January, which was also reflected in the Inflation Report forecasts, price increases are expected to slow down in February and beyond.
Coupled with international crude oil prices and exchange rate developments, the SCT adjustment brought about a significant increase in fuel prices.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to take one more measured step towards simplification by lowering the marginal funding rate.
When the sectors that contribute to the increase in employment are considered, it is seen that the growth dynamics are supported by structural gains.
While the rise in food inflation stemmed from both unprocessed and processed food prices, the rise in core goods inflation was mainly driven by durable goods.
Consumer confidence indices declined in January and February yet remained above the October level.
Prices in the other services subgroup rose by 1.41% month-on-month, with maintenance-repair, recreational and sporting services, household services and insurance services in the lead.
According to the results of the Survey of Market Participants in August, inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged up by 0.3 and 0.2 percentage points to 43.3% and 25.6%, respectively.
The current course of inflation expectations and the deterioration in pricing behavior keep the upside risks to the inflation outlook alive.
Consumer inflation in advanced economies decreased from 4.91% to 4.08% over the intermeeting period, whereas consumer inflation in emerging economies increased from 5.41% to 5.84% due to relatively large economies such as Russia, Türkiye and India.
This process is supported by the gradually falling demand for foreign exchange amid the improving current account balance and lower energy prices.
In sectors with relatively high export shares, industrial production growth was stronger on monthly and quarterly basis.
Gold imports play an important role in the widening of the current account deficit due to monetary conditions and expectations.
Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.28 points to 16.91 percent in May largely due to the annual fresh fruits and vegetables inflation that hit 48 percent.
In the first three weeks of January, the limited price increase in the energy group were offset by the fall in prices of non-energy commodities.
Although investment remains weak, tendencies for investment and employment including that of small and medium-sized firms are recovering.
Therefore, the outlook for 2019 has been revised down for both advanced and emerging economies.
The Committee also assesses that credit growth including long-term investment loans and the targeted use of accessed funds for real economic activity is important for financial stability.
In addition, rising international prices for oil and other commodities also affect the external balance.
In August, indicators for global supply chain pressures have remained mild while international transportation costs have increased.
PMI data for April point to a sustained rise in export orders and a partial deceleration in domestic orders.
As of February, investment tendencies of manufacturing industry firms for the next twelve months were high.
In seasonally-adjusted terms, national income maintained its robust growth, posting an increase by 1.3 percent quarter-on-quarter.
As a result, cost factors are the main driver of the upsurge in inflation.
Meanwhile, with the increase in the maximum contractual interest rates on credit card transactions from 3.66% to 4.25% on , credit card expenditures have also started to contribute to the rebalancing process in credit growth.
The persistent trade tensions between the US and China coupled with the possibility of protectionist measures spreading across other countries, a more apparent slowdown in the euro area, lingering uncertainties regarding the Brexit and other geopolitical developments cause the uncertainty over global economic policies to remain elevated and the vulnerabilities in global financial markets to continue.
The impacts of these developments on the rebalancing process in domestic demand are closely monitored as a risk factor.
Industrial turnover indices suggest that this deceleration was driven by domestic demand due also to pandemic restrictions, while external demand was supportive of industrial production.
Yet, higher risk of deflation in developed countries increases the probability of postponement in the normalization of monetary policies.
In the first quarter of 2016, inflation remained below the projections of the January Inflation Report mainly due to unprocessed food prices.
The Committee underscored the importance of the course of the current account balance in terms of a lasting recovery in economic activity and in terms of macrofinancial stability.
While share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, current account balance is expected to post a surplus in 2022.
In the following period, the US inflation decreased in two consecutive months in October and November to 3.1%, and the Fed’s communication at its December meeting led to a significant recovery in the global risk appetite.
On the other hand, rising protectionism and the uncertainty regarding global economic policies restrain capital flows to emerging markets and add to downside risks for the upcoming period.
Consumer prices rose by 4.53% in February, and annual inflation went up by 2.21 percentage points to 67.1%.
In November, price hikes were noteworthy in pulses, rice and white meat within the other unprocessed food group.
This fall in these two items continued in January.
Thus, demand conditions are likely to support disinflation.
Energy prices fell significantly by 21.00% in May, and annual inflation in this group declined by 28.16 points from 21.19% to -6.97%.
In seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms, October production figure was flat compared to the previous month, but 1.0 percent higher than the third-quarter average.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the high frequency data for March, implies a flat trend in exports and imports.
Net exports did not contribute to quarterly growth but their strong contribution to annual growth continued.
In line with projections, leading indicators point to a temporary rise in the underlying trend of inflation in January due to the minimum wage adjustment and price hikes in services items, which exhibit time-dependent pricing behavior, with administered prices in the lead.
The PMI production data have been hovering below 50 since the beginning of the year.
Annual core goods inflation decreased by 1.78 points to 6.79 percent in February.
Inflation expectations, pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained, by keeping a flat yield curve, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5% target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
Meanwhile, industrial employment continued to drop slightly in February.
In this period, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose by 9.1% on an annual basis while it increased by 1.5% quarter-on-quarter in seasonally and calendar-adjusted terms.
Should this scenario be accompanied by portfolio outflows, the extent of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation to consumer prices and the potential impact on overall financial stability will shape the monetary policy response as well.
Meanwhile, monthly core goods inflation is projected to register some increase due to durable goods.
On the other hand, imports remain on a downward slide, largely due to consumption and investment goods, which led to historically high current account surplus in August – October period.
In sum, consumer prices in November reflect tax cuts, the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and falling oil prices as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity.
In this respect, inflation is projected to be 23.5 percent at end-2018, and then fall to 15.2 percent at end-2019 and 9.3 percent at end-2020 before stabilizing around 5 percent in the medium term.
In sum, looking forward, net exports are expected to contribute to economic growth and the gradual recovery is likely to continue with the help of the disinflation trend and the partial improvement in financial conditions.
Annual inflation increased in clothing and footwear and other core goods, but declined slightly in durable goods.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 0.42 points to 14.12 percent.
While annual inflation declined in durable goods and clothing-footwear groups, it increased in other core goods.
Annual services inflation maintained its high levels.
Meanwhile, firms’ investment and employment expectations for the future decreased slightly in the last quarter.
Besides the slowdown in global economic activity, the increased excess supply in crude oil points to a moderate course in crude oil prices in the period ahead, yet geopolitical risks remain significant.
In addition, global energy prices, which started to recede from the levels they hit towards the end of September, pose a risk with a re-increase amid geopolitical problems.
Meanwhile, monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
Regarding the financing of the current account deficit, the banking sector’s annualized long-term debt rollover ratio stood at 128% in May.
Leading indicators point to a continued moderate recovery trend in the third quarter and to a partial improvement in the sectoral diffusion of economic activity.
Tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
Economic activity is on a strong course.
The normalization in loan growth and composition continued.
While market interest rates have moved in tandem with the policy rate, retail loan growth has assumed a downtrend.
On the other hand, prices in the restaurants-hotels group surged in January as a result of the rise in the minimum wage accompanied by the recent surge in food prices, particularly red meat.
On the other hand, other cost factors limit the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Business and household surveys indicate that the demand for durable goods is still higher than long-term averages.
In education services, high rates of increases are observed due to private school fees.
Household cleaning products were another item that came to the forefront in the subgroup with price increases in March.
In the bread and cereals item, where the effects of grain price developments were observed, annual inflation was realized at 90.69 percent, as prices increased by 3.65 percent.
The Committee envisages that unprocessed food prices, which saw notable increases in the last couple of months, may display a downward correction in the short term.
The Committee expects the disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively pursued for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect and the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
In the coming period, not only the lagged effects of the exchange rate developments but also the base effect from unprocessed food prices is projected to push inflation further upwards in the short term.
Accordingly, economic recovery appears to be more widespread across sectors.
The depreciation in the Turkish lira, widespread wage increases and tax adjustments are expected to place additional cost-side pressure on inflation in the near term.
Meanwhile, Turkish lira commercial loan rates increased by 608 basis points to 49.3%.
Prices in the services group increased by 3.08% while the group's annual inflation decreased by 1.71 points to 59.93%.
Meanwhile, the services and construction turnover indices, along with retail sales posted monthly and quarterly increases in July.
Domestic producer prices rose by 1.38% in June, and annual inflation dropped by 7.59 percentage points to 50.09% also due to the low base effect.
The Committee has decided to keep the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) constant at 45 percent.
Reinforced perceptions that policy rates will remain low in advanced economies and stimulus packages are likely to improve the positive outlook in portfolio flows to emerging economies in the upcoming period.
This production drop is largely attributed to the correction of June’s sharp increase and the reduced number of working days due to factors such as bridge days.
Leading indicators show that the slowdown in annual food inflation continues in September.
As of April, the annualized balance of payments-defined foreign trade deficit increased by USD 54.0 billion year-on-year to USD 100.2 billion.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Türkiye.
Annual producer inflation maintained its upward trend in January.
Accordingly, on an annualized basis, the improvement in the current account balance, which came to a standstill in June, is projected to resume in July, bolstered by travel revenues.
In fact, mid-July incidents and the loss of working days caused by extended religious holidays had far more implications than normal calendar effects.
In the restaurants-hotels subgroup, prices increased 2.81% driven mainly by catering services, while the decline in accommodation prices continued.
Domestic developments have recently led to fluctuations in markets.
On the other hand, the extension of VAT cuts on some items of the services sector affected the inflation outlook favorably.
Accordingly, the Committee evaluated the necessity of increasing the functionality of market mechanisms through the simplification process of the current micro and macro-prudential framework along with monetary tightening.
In January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index remained flat month-on-month, while adjusted for calendar effects, it rose by 1.1% year-on-year.
A sustained fall in inflation and a sizable adjustment in the current account were achieved.
Headline inflation edged up in November and remains in line with the outlook presented in the most recent Inflation Report.
On the other hand, gold prices rose due to exchange rate effects and international developments, keeping annual inflation in this group elevated.
Lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements eased further, underpinning the improvement in core goods inflation.
The uptrend in oil prices continued in March, however, the sliding scale system curbed the effects coming through this channel.
However, when the 3.5% growth of the index in 2022 is considered, a notable slowdown in foreign demand, on an annual basis, in 2023 is evident.
The contribution of net exports to annual growth was 2.7 points.
The retreat in natural gas prices continued in November as well.
As the limit for the free use of natural gas was exceeded (first 25 cubic metres), the impact of the natural gas item on the monthly consumer inflation rose to 1.01 percentage points, which is consistent with projections.
Increasing concern over global food security driven by trade restrictions, high course of commodity prices, the persistence of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly in food and energy, and high transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally.
This outlook is preserved even when other transport vehicles that stimulate industrial production are excluded.
Accordingly, the global economic slowdown in the third quarter of the previous year continued in the last quarter as well, the global economic activity remained weak.
In this period, long-term interest rates increased in advanced economies, while capital flows towards emerging economies subsided.
The improvement in macroeconomic indicators, inflation in particular, supports the fall in country risk premium and contributes to a benign outlook in cost factors.
However, stock and bond markets in advanced and emerging economies continue to fluctuate.
This rise in energy inflation was driven by oil prices, while the core goods inflation was affected by the mild course of the exchange rate as well as the subdued domestic demand.
However, it is observed that the spread between interest rates offered for low-amount savings deposits and high-amount saving deposits, the effects of which are closely monitored and which are important for the rebalancing process in domestic demand, continued to widen.
The growth in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates have diverged from TL commercial loans and increased from 2.89% to 4.88%.
Annual core goods inflation dropped 0.81 percentage points to 52.2%.
In case of a failure in implementing the macroeconomic rebalancing process rapidly and effectively enough to bring inflation down amid high inflation rates and risk premium levels, inflation and exchange rate expectations may feed each other and undermine the disinflation process.
Moreover, it was indicated that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth.
While the negative consequences of supply constraints in some sectors, particularly basic food, have been alleviated by the strategic solutions facilitated by Türkiye, the upward trend in producer and consumer prices continues on an international scale.
In this period, seasonally-adjusted monthly core goods inflation decelerated due to the moderate increase in automobile prices.
The effects on aggregate demand conditions, of production and employment incentives and measures to boost the credit market, will be closely monitored in the upcoming period.
The CBRT decided to keep a portion of the required reserve amount for Turkish lira liabilities, maintained as an average of a 14-day period, as blocked.
The Committee assessed that upside risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report rose significantly due to an increased credit impulse, especially since the end of January, and rising import costs.
Moreover, the plunging Turkish lira drove the annual inflation and underlying trend of core indicators higher.
The monetary tightening process will increase the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Substantial economic measures are introduced to avoid any permanent damage to employment, supply chains and output capacity.
The soaring annual inflation in vegetables pushed annual unprocessed food inflation up by 2.15 points to 12.29%.
Annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 1.04 points to 5.20 percent.
Yet, the robust sales of light and heavy commercial vehicles hint at an improvement in investments.
While the share of sustainable components of economic growth increases, the tourism-led improvement in current account balance continues with a solid pace.
While the share of sustainable components in economic growth increases, the share of the contributions of machinery-equipment investments and net exports accounted for approximately 62% of the average annual growth in the first three quarters of the year.
That of vehicle loans fell by 0.59%, maintaining its weak course since the beginning of the year.
Automobile prices surged by 10.28% due to brisk domestic sales as well as exchange rate developments.
While the main driver of annual growth in the third quarter was the services sector, the contribution of the industrial sector to growth remained limited due to the weakening foreign demand.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 101%.
Recently obtained data indicate that moderate recovery in economic activity continues.
In parallel, Turkish lira deposits have started increasing while FX-protected and FX-denominated deposits have both declined.
Moreover, the developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance.
Turkish lira-denominated commercial loans have lost further pace and their four-week average growth rate has dropped from 3.34% to 1.64%, while the same rate in FX commercial loans adjusted for exchange rates has increased from 1.28% to 2.89%.
The recent strong uptrend in processed food prices somewhat weakened in February, and annual processed food inflation increased to a limited extent.
Developments in domestic demand conditions have led to some improvement in inflation indicators.
Nonfarm employment rose month-on-month in January owing to construction and industrial sectors, whereas services employment fell slightly.
The Business Tendency Survey (BTS) and PMI indicators for manufacturing have shown a more robust growth in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter, while the BTS’ three-month-ahead expectation for production and question of three-month-ahead total orders continued to improve in the fourth quarter.
In sum, external demand remains weak whereas domestic demand contributes moderately to growth.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment is maintained.
The strong course of domestic demand, exchange rate developments and the stickiness of services inflation have been the main drivers.
With the effect of monetary and quantitative tightening and simplification decisions, lending rates are assessed to be in line with the targeted level of financial tightness.
While the current account balance posted a deficit of USD 3.1 billion in August 2022, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 4.2 billion to USD 40.9 billion.
The fall in risk premium and in exchange rate volatility were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 5.55 billion since June, USD 2.38 billion of which was directed towards government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 3.17 billion towards the equity market.
Firms’ registered domestic and external orders and future order expectations reveal that external demand remains strong in the second quarter.
Domestic demand conditions display a moderate improvement and demand from the European Union economies continues to contribute positively to exports.
The Committee assessed that the implementation of the announced structural reforms would contribute significantly to potential growth over the medium to long term.
The European region’s PMI indicators have recently signaled a partial improvement in the growth outlook, with Germany and the UK in the lead.
Fuel and bottled gas prices surged by 26.11% and 23.93%, respectively.
The base effect and cost factors are likely to continue to exert upward pressure on annual inflation in June.
Against this background, the seasonally adjusted monthly change in B and C indices decelerated somewhat while their annual inflation continued to increase.
Prospects for exports and tourism-linked activities seem relatively better, yet the stance for employment and investment has recorded an overall worsening.
The adverse impact of cumulative exchange rate developments on annual inflation is also tapering off.
In light of currently available data, economic activity is expected to post a significant improvement in the third quarter.
On the other hand, 24-month ahead and 5-year ahead inflation expectations receded by 0.41 points to 20.76% and 0.17 points to 9.49%, respectively.
In March, consumer prices were up 1.02 percent and annual inflation increased by 1.16 points to 11.29 percent.
Indeed, the strong backward-indexation tendency in these groups and rising labor costs led to a high monthly services inflation in January, given the labor-intensive nature of the sector.
Processed food prices posted a modest monthly increase and annual processed food inflation fell by 2.09 points to 13.41% amid base effects.
Prices of services rose by 0.84% in February and annual services inflation increased by 0.29 points to 12.49%.
While uncertainties on global economic recovery remain high, normalization steps taken by several countries are being watched.
The seasonally adjusted rates of increase in the B and C indices were measured at 2.91% and 3.22%, respectively in December.
Annual inflation decreased across all groups, being more pronounced in the energy group.
Having strengthened in the first four months, pressures led by external prices weakened to a limited extent in the last two months.
Volatilities in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables keep the domestic food prices-driven risks alive.
The current level of the Commodity Price Index is 30% above the average of the last ten years.
While prices of furniture and white goods posted moderate increases, prices of automobiles decreased owing to the SCT tax base adjustment for automobiles.
Despite having receded from the readings at the end of September, global energy prices remain highly volatile due to geopolitical problems.
In the meantime, exports show an improvement across foreign trade partners, while the demand for imports has been increasing in line with the domestic demand.
Unprocessed food prices, led by fresh fruit and vegetable prices, had a decisive role in this development.
According to TURKSTAT’s data, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 2.3 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of 2015.
The high contribution from net exports to quarterly growth translates into a growth composition buoying up the current account balance.
On the other hand, following the minimum wage adjustment and the mainly tax-driven rise in fuel prices, leading indicators point to a surge in transport services prices in January.
However, the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira is expected to deteriorate the core goods inflation to some extent in the short term.
On the other hand, electricity and natural gas tariffs were increased in July, and LPG also recorded an uptick in prices.
Industrial production and survey indicators suggest that the industrial sector will contribute mildly to employment in the forthcoming period.
When the provisional foreign trade data for June is considered along with the high frequency data for July, the three-month average trends imply a decline in both exports and imports, with a milder fall in exports.
Moreover, it is assumed that administered prices, tax and wage adjustments will be formulated in a way that will help reduce the backward-indexation behavior.
As a matter of fact, as of the first quarter of the year, the share of machinery-equipment investments and net exports in GDP reached its highest level over the last decade.
Core inflation remained high due to the lagged effects of the cumulative depreciation in the Turkish lira, yet the ongoing fall in import prices in the fourth quarter limited the rise in CPI inflation.
Prices of services increased by 0.17 percent, and annual services inflation rose by 0.16 points to 8.80 percent in November.
To create an institutional basis for sustainable price stability, the comprehensive review of the policy framework continues with the aim of encouraging permanent and strengthened liraization in all policy tools of the CBRT.
Solid fuel, bottled gas and administered municipal water prices were up, whereas fuel prices remained flat due to the new sliding-scale tariff system.
In April-May period, industrial production increased by 0.4% over the previous quarter.
During this period, non-gold exports were weaker than their fourth-quarter average, while non-gold imports were flat.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) discussed the medium-term projections to be published in the January Inflation Report.
The consumer demand for categories subject to incentives remains robust while investments edged up in the second quarter after a subdued first quarter.
On the other hand, latest domestic developments constitute downside risks to demand and inflation through the confidence channel and the tourism sector.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in January, while international transportation costs increased due to the geopolitical developments concerning the Red Sea.
In addition, the inflation trend in other services followed a weaker course in the last two months.
In January, the production of consumer goods was lower than the previous quarter’s average, while the imports of consumer goods were on the rise.
Price increases in the food group are envisaged to decelerate somewhat in June.
Thus, in seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 11.2%.
Domestic demand stood out as the main driver of quarterly growth in the first quarter.
In the food group, monthly price increases were driven by unprocessed food prices, while the moderate trend in processed food inflation was retained.
Recent developments such as rising geopolitical risks, the course of energy prices, diverging economic growth outlooks across countries, increases in US long-term interest rates and portfolio outflows from emerging markets suggest that uncertainties regarding the global economy are increasing.
The first-round effects of the decline in oil prices on energy prices appeared in fuel and bottled gas prices.
Services prices rose by 7.89% in January, and annual services inflation increased by 7.23 points to 29.56%.
Annual inflation was slightly up in unprocessed food but continued to slow in processed food.
In this period, capital goods (11.67%), durable consumption goods (10.37%), and intermediate goods (8.93%) were the subgroups that stood out with high monthly price increases.
In transport services, increases in urban passenger transport, air passenger transport and cargo fees were notable, while the decline in intercity passenger transport by road kept subgroup’s price increase moderate, and annual inflation edged down by 0.42 points to 90.29%.
In this period, annual inflation remained relatively flat in durable goods, and decreased in other subcategories.
In this period, annual inflation slightly rose in transport and restaurants-hotels groups and remained flat in rents and communication, whereas it decelerated in other services group.
In February, prices of durable goods (excluding gold) rose by 2.49%, driven by automobiles and furniture, while prices of white goods remained flat as opposed to previous months.
In addition to the ongoing recovery in tourism, the uptrend in exports of goods is envisaged to contribute further to the current account balance.
The sliding scale system limits the negative effects of crude oil prices.
In this period, annual inflation was up across all subcategories.
In December, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 11.2%.
In sum, data on the second quarter of 2015 suggest a mild course in economic activity.
Among indicators for investment goods, the production and imports of machinery‐equipment recorded a quarterly and yearly decline in the first quarter.
Compared to the previous period, non-agricultural employment increased driven by industrial sector in November period and unemployment rates continued to decrease.
In May, the annualized current account deficit increased by USD 37.3 billion to USD 60 billion, from its May 2022 level of USD 22.6 billion, despite the decline in energy imports due to energy prices.
Still, the Committee noted that employment gains failed to fully pass through to unemployment rates due to the strong upward trend in the labor force participation rate.
Similarly, 1-month and 12-month exchange rate volatilities of the Turkish lira, which were 25.2 and 33.8 points in the previous MPC meeting period declined to 23.6 and 30.3 points, respectively.
Moreover, at its December meeting, the Committee decided to increase the LON lending rate from 12.25 to 12.75 percent.
In this period, the impact of the adjustments in natural gas prices proved evident, and fuel prices also increased in tandem with the developments in the exchange rate and oil prices.
Taking into account the lagged effects of monetary tightening, the Committee will determine its policy decisions in a way that will create monetary and financial conditions necessary to ensure a decline in the underlying trend of inflation and to reach the 5 percent inflation target in the medium term.
However, excluding China, inflows to bond markets continued with a limited pace, while those to equity markets remained relatively weak.
The low course of food inflation was mainly driven by unprocessed food prices, the annual inflation of which was -4.22 percent.
Firms’ existing domestic and external orders as well as expectations for future orders reveal that external demand remains strong while domestic demand is expected to increase although it has declined slightly.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to keep the interest rates at current levels.
Emerging economies have also taken expansionary monetary policy measures such as bond purchases.
Accordingly, while a partial recovery is observed in economic activity compared to the previous quarter, the contribution of aggregate demand conditions to disinflation continues.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective.
Moreover, the public sector is likely to provide an increased investment support for growth in the fourth quarter.
Prices of durable goods rose by 4.92% in this period triggered by automobiles, furniture and white goods.
Moreover, the increase in the volatility of oil prices triggered by geopolitical developments remains as a potential risk factor for inflation.
The other services group posted a large monthly increase that was mainly triggered by the rise in private university tuition fees.
The 3.61% rise in processed food prices was driven by bread-cereals, coffee-tea-cocoa, and non-alcoholic beverages.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased 11.8% year-on-year to 47 million in the first eleven months of the year.
Leading indicators suggest that the fall in the underlying trend of inflation, which started in September, strengthened further in October as cost shocks have been largely reflected in prices.
The BTS data on production over the last three months and the PMI indicators point to a moderate monthly growth for October.
Seasonally adjusted monthly increases in the B and C indices rose significantly compared to the previous month, which is also confirmed by alternative core inflation indicators.
In this regard, inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors that affect inflation will be further closely monitored and the tight monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
While the effects of high global inflation on inflation expectations and international financial markets are closely monitored, central banks in advanced economies assess that the rise in inflation on the back of rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand may last longer than previously anticipated.
The strong course of domestic demand, cost pressures stemming from wages and exchange rates, stickiness of services inflation and tax regulations have been the main drivers of this development.
As projected in the Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting in the previous month, annual inflation in food and non-alcoholic beverages climbed to 6.63 percent in June due to unprocessed food prices.
In October, the USA, Japan and the United Kingdom displayed a more favorable outlook than in the previous month.
In addition, in order to be able to sustain price stability in the long-term, the CBRT will continue to support strategic investments that will improve the current account balance.
The weakening yet ongoing lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements, high levels of inflation expectations and wage developments restrain the improvement in the underlying trend of inflation.
Field interviews conducted in this period also confirmed the strong course of domestic demand conditions.
The surge in prices of cheese and other dairy products in recent months turned flat due to the muted rise in raw milk prices.
The slower-than-expected economic recovery remains a downside risk to inflation, while exchange rate movements driven by heightened global uncertainty and volatility pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
The monthly price increase in the rents subgroup strengthened somewhat further and was measured at 7.90%.
Monthly price increases were shaped by the rise in municipal water tariffs and increased fuel prices due to exchange rate developments notwithstanding the fall in international oil prices.
Industrial and services employment grew in this period, whereas construction employment declined.
However, the possibility of accelerated inflation amid strong demand conditions accompanied by surging commodity prices in advanced economies may trigger a faster-than-projected tightening in these countries.
The manufacturing industry PMI of emerging economies decreased by 0.5 points compared to the previous month to 50.9 in September while the services PMI dropped by 1.2 points to 51.9.
Similarly, the Agricultural Commodity Price Index, which has declined by 12.3% compared to the peak it reached last year, is 14.8% above the average of the last ten years.
Despite the third quarter’s higher crude oil prices driven by the benign global growth outlook, the OPEC output cut and the hurricanes that hit the US oil production, demand and supply-side factors specific to the oil market are containing the upward pressures on energy prices.
Compared to the previous period, industrial and construction employment posted an upsurge, while the rise in services employment remained limited.
Hence, economic activity is expected to maintain a stable growth trend.
Meanwhile, the October-November average of the Chinese composite PMI declined 0.7 points quarter-on-quarter to 50.8.
The lump-sum SCT increase of TRY 5 for gasoline and diesel, and TRY 4 for LPG will have a negative impact on consumer inflation both directly and indirectly.
This, in turn, may pose a downside risk to portfolio flows to emerging economies.
Meanwhile, central banks of Brazil, Peru, and Chile continued with policy rate cuts on the back of the decline in consumer inflation, while the Central Bank of Hungary also reduced its policy rate both in October and November.
In February, the services item, which remained higher than expected, although slowed down on monthly basis, posted the largest price increase across subgroups, after the food item.
While this upsurge was driven by cereal, vegetable oil and meat prices, the prices of sugar and dairy products also increased substantially.
The sluggish outlook in tourism sector continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
While commercial loans have recently started to normalize, consumer loans have remained strong and supported domestic demand.
Meanwhile, other services group prices continued to display different trends across its sub-items.
Tightening in financial conditions along with the deceleration in loan growth and the sustained uptrend in the weighted average funding cost in the upcoming period will have a positive effect on the inflation outlook.
The negative impact of cumulative exchange rate developments since the beginning of the year on the inflation outlook is partly offset by lower oil prices.
Annual inflation declined across all groups, more visibly in energy and food groups.
Leading indicators show that the recovery in the global economy is sustained with some deceleration.
In the durable goods group, the automobile and furniture items stood out with an upsurge in prices following the depreciation in the Turkish lira, while the seasonal price increase in the clothing and footwear group proved quite limited compared to previous years.
Annual inflation in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group fell by 3.20 points to 1.38 percent.
In this period, annual inflation edged down in restaurants-hotels, but increased in other subcategories, more markedly in transport and rent.
In March, monthly headline inflation and the underlying trend decreased, yet remained above the path projected in the Inflation Report.
Indicators of inflation and underlying trend of inflation will be closely monitored and the Committee will decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
The contribution of natural gas to monthly inflation is projected to weaken in December.
Annual inflation in the C index, which includes the core goods and services groups, is around 70%, while annual inflation in the services sector is around 89%.
Similarly, sales of automobiles were down from the fourth-quarter average during the January-February period.
A significant of the meeting focused on the simplification of the monetary policy framework.
Policy measures taken to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-protected deposit accounts (KKM) have led to a rapid decline in these accounts and accordingly, the demand for Turkish lira deposits continues.
Credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
While residential electricity tariffs decreased by 15% in this period, fuel (-1.24%) and bottled gas (-4.66%) prices also declined.
Travel revenues increased by USD 5.8 billion in the first eleven months of the year compared to the same period of the previous year, and reached USD 45.1 billion.
Despite successive decreases in June and July, consumption goods imports remain elevated in seasonally adjusted terms.
The upward trend in card expenditures also continued in the first quarter.
On the other hand, the projected disinflationary effect of demand conditions may be higher, if economic activity recovers slower than expected in the period ahead.
Provisional foreign trade data for January indicate that seasonally adjusted exports and imports posted a monthly decrease.
Similarly, the number of foreign visitors increased by 29.2% year-on-year to 9.5 million in the first four months of the year.
However, the ongoing slump in the tourism sector poses a downside risk to economic activity and the current account balance.
As a result, the underlying trend of services recorded an increase in July.
The Committee noted that the rebound in tourism and transportation revenues remains rather brisk, and under these circumstances, net exports will provide positive contribution to quarterly growth in the second quarter as well.
Yet, energy prices are expected to have a less constraining effect on annual consumer inflation due to soaring prices of fuel and bottled gas amid the Turkish lira depreciation in March.
On the other hand, discounts and campaigns in the last quarter of 2023 and wage revisions in January 2024 have been the factors curbing the decline in demand.
In sum, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
Annual inflation rose to 39.83% in the unprocessed food group, and to 47.57% in the processed food group.
According to main industrial groupings, energy prices remained flat in February but prices of the durable and non-durable consumption goods groups increased significantly.
According to provisional foreign trade data for July, gold imports increased by USD 12.5 billion year-on-year to USD 19.4 billion in the first seven months of the year.
The Committee will make its decisions in a predictable, data-driven and transparent framework.
The Committee assesses that maintaining a sustained disinflation process is a key factor for achieving lower sovereign risk, lower long-term interest rates, and stronger economic recovery.
Led by declines in refined petroleum product and base metal industry prices as well as in electricity and natural gas production prices, the monthly rate of increase in producer prices decelerated significantly.
Monthly inflation of bread and cereals increased somewhat in this period, reaching 1.41%.
Due to the minimum wage hike and exchange rate developments, prices in the other services subgroup were up by 10.27%.
In sum, the uncertainty in global markets and elevated food prices necessitate maintaining the cautious stance in monetary policy.
Inflation expectations obtained from the Survey of Market Participants are revised upwards in July.
However, due to stickiness in inflation, geopolitical developments and increased risks pertaining to commodity prices, market-implied future policy rates indicate a more cautious rate-cut path compared to the previous MPC meeting period.
Having weakened after the first quarter of 2014, nonfarm employment posted notable gains during August-October period.
Nevertheless, the Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures might cause an earlier-than-projected tightening in monetary policies, and maintained its assessment that a period marked by increased data-sensitivity and related volatilities in global financial markets was entered.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 are 2.4% in the USA and 2.3% in the euro area, while the core inflation expectation is 2.3% for both the USA and the euro area.
Firms' investment and employment expectations, although being high, declined as of July.
Given the inflation outlook and the upside risks, the Committee evaluated strengthening the monetary policy framework in line with the price stability objective.
Exchange rate developments, soaring commodity prices and the disruptions in supply chains shaped the prices of durable goods and other core goods.
The headline PMI and the PMI production indices fell in January, despite staying above neutral levels.
Although energy price developments continue to affect inflation favorably, cumulative exchange rate movements delay the improvement in the core inflation trend.
Meanwhile, in February, tobacco prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group registered a decline.
The group’s annual inflation plummeted by 4.22 points to -1.54 percent, hitting the lowest level of the index history.
When the rent subgroup is excluded, annual inflation proves almost unchanged.
Accordingly, the effects of liquidity and distribution developments of the Turkish lira on deposits and loan pricing, the effects of exchange rate developments on inflation, and the impact of the developments regarding FX-protected deposit products on reverse currency substitution, the depth and stability of the foreign exchange market, and price stability are being analyzed, and necessary policy measures are being taken.
Taking into account the high levels of inflation and inflation expectations, the current tight monetary policy stance will be maintained decisively until the significant fall in the Inflation Report’s forecast path is achieved.
Weak global economic activity coupled with more apparent downside risks repress commodity prices and lead to a mild course in oil prices despite supply-side problems stemming from geopolitical developments.
Prices of services edged up by 0.38 percent, while annual services inflation rose by 0.17 points to 8.11 percent in December.
This period was marked by escalating vegetable prices caused by adverse weather conditions and supply-related upsurges in meat prices.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs.
Effects of exchange rate developments were apparent in many items, particularly on core goods, while items with relatively low exchange rate pass-through also recorded noticeable price hikes.
Accordingly, external financing opportunities followed a similar pattern as in the previous month.
However, following the statements from the Fed and the European Central Bank, portfolio flows to emerging economies slowed in the last two weeks (7 January-19 January), with both bond and equity markets recorded portfolio inflows below USD 1 billion.
Card spending surged in the same period.
However, given the waning effects of the July turmoil, the significant rise in October’s PMI employment index boding well for industrial employment gains and the subsiding repercussions of the tourism slump, the climb in unemployment might come to a standstill.
Monthly inflation in the other core goods group stood at 3.94%.
Prices in the services group rose by 3.89%, while the group’s annual inflation decreased by 1.31 points to 58.62%.
The room provided by fiscal discipline facilitated the implementation of expansionary fiscal policy.
On the other hand, employment gains are more positive compared to peer economies when the post-pandemic period is examined.
It should be noted that the remaining impact of the mid-February increase of 15 percent in medicine prices caused by the reference exchange rate will also be felt in March.
Leading indicators regarding September hint at a prolonged downward correction in unprocessed food inflation.
In this respect, global inflation is expected to remain flat in 2020.
Although investment remains weak, survey indicators show that in addition to large firms in the manufacturing industry which have higher investment appetite, investment tendency in small and medium-sized firms have also started to recover after bottoming out.
Thus, prices of durable goods and other core goods posted sharp widespread increases.
Electricity prices used by the households, industry and businesses increased starting from October.
The impact of automatic tax increases is also visible in bottled gas prices.
Across main industrial categories, annual inflation was almost flat in intermediate goods, but was up in other subgroups, energy in particular.
Energy prices receded by 3.13% in July, and the group’s annual inflation fell by 22.06 points to 129.27%.
In order to support the effectiveness of monetary policy and minimize a likely inflation-growth trade-off, it will be crucial that macro-financial policies are determined with a focus on reducing financial volatility and risk premium, and that the predictability of fiscal policy continues to be reinforced.
After a downtrend for a while, the labor force participation rate remained flat.
The deteriorated pricing behavior, tight financial conditions and the financial state of the corporate sector have recently caused inflation dynamics to change and the uncertainty over inflation and forecasts to rise.
The Committee emphasized that the steps toward tighter monetary policy should be accompanied by an enhanced macro policy coordination to ensure a modest rebalancing of the economy.
In October, adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, the retail sales volume index increased by 2% on a monthly basis.
Within the scope of liquidity measures taken in this regard, targeted additional liquidity facilities started to be gradually phased down.
The Committee anticipates to complete the tightening cycle as soon as possible.
Owing to the policy rate hike and the recent steps taken as part of the simplification of the macroprudential framework, it is evaluated that there was a growth in the demand for Turkish lira denominated assets.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement and becomes consistent with the targets.
Thus, the transmission of expectations regarding the disinflation process to long-term commercial loan interest rates is supported.
On the other hand, the credit card spending increased substantially on a monthly basis in February.
Data for the second quarter indicate that external demand maintains its strength.
Both global energy prices and non-energy commodity prices fell in this period.
Seasonally-adjusted unemployment rates were down month-on-month in February 2016, due to the weakening labor supply and the moderate gain in nonfarm employment.
Indicators for the construction industry do not hint at a recovery for construction activity.
This fall was led by the favorable courses of unprocessed and processed food prices as well as the strong base effect.
In such a case, global financial markets may witness fluctuations as in early February, and emerging economies may face higher volatility in exchange rates and weakening portfolio flows.
In this period, the contribution of energy and services to annual inflation rose, while that of food, core goods and the alcohol-tobacco-gold group decreased.
The moderate course of aggregate demand conditions and the continued downtrend in import prices support disinflation as of the first quarter.
The lowering effect on industrial production of the contraction in the production of vehicles is expected to be compensated for in the coming months.
The current level of oil prices is below the levels of the pre-pandemic period.
While annual inflation fell by 11.49 points to 79.51% in unprocessed food, it increased by 2.36 points to 100.38% in processed food.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that, although losing momentum, the upward trend in employment is maintained.
In April, the retail sales volume index fell on a monthly and quarterly basis.
The baseline monetary policy stance for the upcoming period is formulated under the assumption that fiscal discipline will be maintained and there will be no unanticipated hikes in administered prices.
The upward trend in reserves has gained momentum recently and a significant increase of USD 8.1 billion has been recorded since the previous MPC meeting.
On the other hand, while continuing to rise throughout the second quarter, card spending indicated a slowdown in domestic demand towards the end of the quarter.
While annual inflation increased in clothing, footwear and durables goods, it remained flat in other core goods.
Overall, underlying trend of services inflation edged up in August.
Annual inflation in rents and transport, on the other hand, decreased.
To support the monetary transmission mechanism, the CBRT has taken policy measures to accelerate the unwinding process of FX-Protected Deposit Accounts.
Furthermore, the newly-restored relations with Russia translated into a boost for exports.
Despite the mild course in exchange rates, the commodity price increases that became more evident due to lingering supply-side problems and the geopolitical unrest affected producer prices negatively in February.
Leading indicators suggest that the significant monthly price increases coming through the channels of demand, wages, exchange rates, taxes and deteriorating pricing behavior will also continue in August.
Increased electricity prices for businesses are expected to have a negative impact on services prices through the cost channel in July and the upcoming months.
In the same period, although its growth slowed down to 7%, personal credit cards maintained its strong trend, and its annual growth remained flat at 184.2%.
As of July, seasonally adjusted employment was recorded at 31.7 million.
Consumption spending fuels the domestic demand, while investments remain relatively sluggish.
In addition to the adjustment in electricity prices, adjustments introduced to some items with administered prices like tobacco and alcoholic drinks in early January will have a direct effect on inflation close to 0.7 point.
In the first quarter, the maintained strength of economic activity supported the increase in employment and the decline in unemployment.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.76 points to 10.97 percent.
Emerging Economies: Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Africa, India, Colombia, Hungary, Mexico, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Chile, Thailand, Türkiye.
Owing to the decelerating cumulative exchange rate effects, core goods excluding clothing saw a further decline in annual inflation, albeit limited.
In line with red meat prices, processed meat products recorded a decline.
The Committee will closely monitor the developments affecting inflation and take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Monthly increases in rents strengthened further and reached 9.52%.
The Committee has decided to raise the policy rate (the one-week repo auction rate) from 45 percent to 50 percent.
Although aggregate demand conditions are likely to have a steadily waning effect on inflation, the significant cost pressures from the recent Turkish lira depreciation and their potential second-round effects weigh on the inflation outlook.
Inflation is expected to hover around current levels for some time due to the effects of the exchange rates and start declining afterwards.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as they have recently.
Monthly increase in production spread across the sectors, while industrial production was stronger in exporting sectors.
Before the disaster of the century, leading indicators were pointing to a stronger domestic demand compared to foreign demand as well as an increase in the growth trend in the first quarter of 2023.
Overall, core inflation indicators continued to improve.
Excluding this effect, the underlying trend of industrial production remained strong.
In short, economic activity was robust in the third quarter.
On the unprocessed food front, rises in seasonally adjusted prices of fresh fruits and vegetables were noticeable.
Prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 3.02% in June, and annual inflation rose by 1.40 points to 53.92%.
Moreover, forecasts are based on the assumption that the year-end food inflation in 2016 and 2017 will be lower than the projections of the previous Report amid the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the actions taken by the Food Committee.
Along with the pandemic-related rise in unit costs, exchange rate and credit developments restrain the demand-side disinflationary effects, and the trends of core inflation indicators have increased.
Thus, annual services inflation declined by 0.26 points to 15.14%.
The outlook for energy inflation was largely dominated by changes in municipal water tariffs and fuel prices.
In the non-bank corporate sector, this ratio was around 93%.
Indicators for pressures on the global supply chain continued to hover below their historical trend, while international transportation costs remained mild in April.
Nevertheless, the current elevated levels of inflation and inflation expectations continue to pose risks on pricing behavior.
The course of inflation is considered to be broadly in line with the year-end inflation projection.
The rise in inflation was mainly driven by the core goods group.
The effects of rate hike scenarios on key macroeconomic variables such as inflation, loan growth, loan and market rates, economic activity and expectations were assessed from a holistic perspective.
With the easing of pandemic measures, restaurants-hotels prices increased significantly in March.
On the processed food front, annual inflation sustained the uptrend due to the price developments in the bread-cereals group but with a diminishing pace.
By sectors, employment picked up slightly in services and construction but declined in the industrial sector for the third period in a row.
Services inflation slightly increased in February while core goods inflation remained mild.
Besides, the upward trend in commodity prices excluding energy, specifically industrial metals and agricultural commodities, increases the upward cost pressure on consumer inflation.
Given the low base effect from the second quarter of 2017, energy inflation is likely to remain on the rise in the short term.
In this period, as the three-month average increases in core indicators B and C remain flat, the underlying trend of inflation is not expected to display a significant change.
All in all, despite some deceleration, the underlying trend of services prices remained high.
The increased likelihood of the adoption of protective policies in the US following the elections poses a downside risk to the pace of growth and employment in emerging economies.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets have both continued to register outflows in July in line with the global risk appetite.
Moreover, the import volume index for non-gold intermediate goods grew strongly during October-November, while non-gold exports increased only modestly.
On the other hand, the pace of recovery in tourism revenues, uncertainties regarding monetary policies of advanced economies, the course of capital flows and geopolitical developments constitute a downside risk to growth also in 2017, as it has recently.
Regarding portfolio flows to emerging economies, bond and equity markets saw inflows in November parallel to the improved global risk appetite.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to provide repayment flexibility for export rediscount credits and to reduce the quantity of foreign-exchange required reserves.
The three-month average increases in the seasonally adjusted B and C indices, which peaked at 8.78% and 8.49% respectively in February 2022, stood at 7.89% and 7.88 % respectively in September 2023.
Long-term interest rates fell to historic lows across advanced economies, and both central bank statements and market expectations suggest that the low-rate environment is likely to continue for a long period.
Meanwhile, in response to international agricultural commodity prices and exchange rate developments, the egg and poultry items that have a significant weight in the other unprocessed food group posted noticeable price increases.
Besides fresh fruits and vegetables prices, the red meat prices stood out with price increases, while prices of processed food items related to these products displayed a similar course.
Turkish lira deposit rates have increased by 1071 basis points since the previous MPC meeting week and reached 60.34% on .
Led by unprocessed food items, the food group adversely affected headline inflation in December.
Turkish lira deposit rates, which increased by 2.81 percentage points compared to the previous MPC meeting period due to macroprudential measures to support the monetary transmission mechanism, stood at 49.6% as of 15 March.
February discounts lagged well behind historical averages in the clothing industry despite weaker output and external demand, whereas temporary tax cuts put a lid on price hikes in durable goods.
Across non-farm industries, the previous quarter’s decline in construction employment came to a halt.
While these developments support the demand for emerging market assets and the risk appetite, rising protectionism and uncertainty regarding global economic policies pose downside risks to these portfolio flows towards emerging markets.
Thus, the unemployment rate continues to face upside risks for the period ahead.
On the other hand, slowing oil prices curbed services inflation through transport services.
The gloomy tourism industry continues to have a negative impact on the current account balance, which, however, is alleviated by the lagged pass-through of terms-of-trade developments and the moderate course of loans.
In the January-February period, industrial production edged down by 0.4% in quarterly terms.
Level of capacity utilization and other leading indicators show that domestic economic activity remains strong, with the help of more robust external demand even some regional differences emerge.
On the other hand, uncertainties regarding global monetary policies cause fluctuations in portfolio inflows.
In addition to soaring house prices and the backward-indexation behavior, imbalances between supply and demand in the real estate market affect consumer inflation negatively by pushing rent increases upwards.
Recent tightening in financial conditions is likely to have some slowing impact on loan growth in the upcoming period.
The durable goods sector, which is expected to be affected more rapidly by financial conditions, stands out in this respect.
Calendar and seasonally-adjusted industrial production dipped both monthly and annually due to the domestic turbulence of July and the extended Ramadan holiday.
It is expected that even though there is an appreciation in the Turkish lira, crude oil prices will increase at a higher rate in January and group inflation will continue to climb due to hikes in administered prices.
Prices of durable goods rose by 3.85% due to prices of white goods and automobiles, and annual inflation hit 84.93% in this subcategory.
In order to determine the developments in the underlying trend, the seasonally adjusted monthly changes and 3-month moving average changes of these core indicators are closely monitored.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 15.00 points to 17.85 points in the services group (2.86 points of increase), from 10.49 points to 12.95 points in the core goods group (2.46 points of increase), from -2.64 points to -0.39 points in the energy group (2.25 points of increase), from 13.56 points to 15.27 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (1.71 points of increase), and from 1.81 points to 2.15 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.34 points of increase).
A similar outlook is also evident in demand indicators.
In the July period, non-farm employment recorded an increase across sectors.
In this period, the labor force participation rate went up by 0.3 percentage points, while the unemployment rate remained flat at 8.8% in quarterly terms.
In this period, there was significant divergence between the producer prices for PPI for agriculture and the consumer prices for food.
Consumer prices rose by 2.98% in May, while annual inflation increased by 3.53 points to 73.50%.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, the ongoing uptrend in services revenues continue to support the current account balance.
In addition to the high level of and the stickiness in the services inflation, inflation expectations, geopolitical risks, volatility in commodity prices and food prices keep inflationary pressures alive.
The Committee maintains the view that demand-driven disinflationary effects will become more prevalent in the second half of the year, but risks to the end-year projection are considered to be on the upside due to recent realizations in inflation.
Across sectors, industrial and services employment remained almost flat, while employment in the construction sector continued to fall compared to the previous period.
Adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, industrial production increased by 0.5% month-on-month and by 13.3% year-on-year in May.
Economies advancing in their vaccination programs exhibit a stronger performance in economic activity by easing the restrictions.
Domestic economic activity remained strong in the second quarter.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
As of , the retail loan balance increased by 81.1% in credit cards, 68.7% in vehicle loans, 30.6% in personal loans, and 22.1% in housing loans compared to end-2022, amounting to an increase of 44.6% in total.
Overall, the favorable developments in the terms of trade and the moderate course of consumer loans contribute to the improvement in the current account balance, while the relatively weaker exports limit this improvement.
Therefore, simplification of the monetary policy is planned to be finalized within a reasonable schedule.
In this period, employment increased by 0.3% quarter-on-quarter, while the labor force participation rate decreased by 0.1 points.
In the recent period, oil prices have decreased notably driven by both supply and demand factors.
While unprocessed food prices remained flat, the rise in egg prices stood out, and pulse prices, which displayed a significant increase in the first half of the year, declined.
The 1-month and 12-month implied exchange rate volatility of the Turkish lira stood at 6.4% and 18.7%, respectively, as of .
In this period, annual inflation receded in clothing-footwear and other core goods groups, but rose in durable goods.
The three-month average trend, considered along with the provisional foreign trade data for March and high frequency data for April, implies a flat trend in exports and an increase in imports.
Foreign direct investment, stable course of external financing conditions, continued increase in foreign exchange reserves, the positive impact of rebalancing in demand on current account balance, and the increase in domestic and foreign demand for Turkish lira denominated assets will significantly contribute to price stability.
In February, annual core goods inflation increased by 5.89 points to 54.38%.
The index decreased by 28.7% compared to the highest level reached last year.
In January, consumer prices increased by 1.10 percent and annual inflation fell by 0.93 point to 7.24 percent.
The largest contribution to the decline in inflation came from energy and core goods groups.
In January, employment decreased by a mere 0.1% compared to the previous month.
Being more pronounced as of the third quarter, the slump in tourism revenues was a key driver of the slowing underlying output growth through its direct and indirect effects.
Moreover, central banks in advanced economies emphasize that the rise in inflation may last longer than previously anticipated due to rising energy prices and imbalances between supply and demand.
On the other hand, high-frequency data for August imply that imports remained relatively flat as against the recovery in exports in seasonally adjusted terms.
This was mainly driven by fuel prices that dropped due to the fall in international oil prices notwithstanding the depreciation in the exchange rate.
Despite the recent depreciation in the Turkish lira due to global developments, the sharp fall in international commodity prices, especially crude oil and metal prices, affects inflation outlook favorably.
Thus, TL-denominated loans, consumer loans in particular, remained on the rise thanks to improved financing conditions and recovering domestic demand.
Annual core goods inflation increased by 0.31 points to 9.13 percent in June.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken and decisively implemented for strengthening sustainable price and financial stability along with the resolution of the ongoing regional conflict.
The Committee highlighted that loan growth has displayed a notable deceleration due to tighter financial conditions recently.
The global growth index, which is weighted with the export shares of Türkiye’s foreign trade partners, remained flat.
In October, short and medium-term inflation expectations continued to increase.
Against this background, the underlying trend of services inflation exhibited an almost flat course in September maintaining its high level.
Sales of home appliances fell marginally during April-May, whereas sales of automobiles remained on the rise.
In the same period, the annualized services surplus increased by USD 12.1 billion to USD 51.5 billion.
Food prices, which are still at high levels, remain as the main risk factor for inflation.
Annual food inflation continued to climb while exchange rate changes seemed to be passed through to all items, especially to core goods and energy.
Nevertheless, tightening steps through liquidity management have been taken since August in order to contain the adverse effects of the rapid rebound in domestic demand, led by strong credit impulse, on external balance and inflation.
In May, prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages increased by 0.29% and the group’s annual inflation crept up by 0.06 points to 17.04%.
Energy prices increased by 2.09% in October, yet annual inflation in the energy group decreased by 2.79 points to 3.88%.
The energy group will have a marked impact on consumer inflation in May.
Prices in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group increased by 11.19% in January, while annual inflation of the group decreased by 14.51 points to 50.60%.
Monthly inflation in this group decelerated but the consequences of wages and backward-indexation tendency continued, and price increases were seen across the group excluding transport services.
The composition of loans also continues to evolve in the desired direction.
In February, consumer prices increased by 4.81%, and annual inflation rose by 5.75 points to 54.44%.
Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a relatively mild increase in services prices.
In January, annual core goods inflation increased by 7.94 points to 48.49%.
Food prices, which rose significantly in the previous month also due to the Ramadan, posted a more moderate increase in this period owing to vegetable prices.
Industrial production recorded an increase in December compared to previous month.
Therefore, it is evaluated that the intense cost-push pressures in the third quarter have been largely reflected on prices.
On the retail loans side, general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 26 basis points to 74.59%, while housing loan rates remained flat at 43.48%.
The policy rate will continue to be determined at a level above inflation to maintain a strong disinflationary effect until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is reached.
With the decisions taken accordingly, it is assessed that significant progress has been made in the simplification process.
To counteract their negative spillovers into exchange rates and lending standards, the CBRT maintains a stabilizing stance for FX liquidity and a supportive macroprudential policy stance.
Favorable external demand conditions impact the current account balance positively.
High-frequency data indicate that the recovery in the foreign trade volume continues, most visibly in exports.
Thus, unemployment rates registered an increase.
In September, inflation expectations continued to increase.
(1) Advanced Countries: Australia, Canada, Czechia, Denmark, Euro Area, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States of America.
When these items are excluded, the quarterly rate of change was 2%, which is more moderate than the change in the overall index.
During the same period, 15 emerging countries' central banks held a total of 261 meetings, and policy rates were increased in 108 of these meetings.
Yet, recent data show that exports and imports of goods were largely affected by the July turbulence.
In short, economic activity is expected to post a quarterly fall in the third quarter.
In this category, prices of cheese and other dairy goods, fats and processed meat recorded sharp gains.
Ten years of experience in inflation targeting showed that combatting inflation requires joint efforts.
Presently, curbing risks to the inflation outlook is critical to the maintenance of a healthy and stable growth.
In this period, nonfarm employment was up on account of services.
The rise in transport prices was mainly led by price hikes in urban passenger transport by bus due to school bus fares as well as in passenger transport by air and railway, despite the decline in the fares of intercity passenger transport by road.
That may generate fluctuations in prices of securities in advanced economies and weaken the growth trend.
Driven by international commodity prices, exchange rate developments and supply constraints, producer prices recorded a high rate of increase also in May, which spread across the sectors.
Services prices rose by 5.27% in December and annual services inflation increased by 5.45 points to 22.33%.
Recent indicators suggest that domestic demand continues to moderate.
On the other hand, while the rise in house prices is losing pace, micro data from the Retail Payment System (RPS) as well as the data for big cities monitored through online platforms indicate that the rate of increase in rents has slowed down in the recent period.
The relative stability in tourism revenues, the strengthened confidence channel, the favorable effect of the cumulative exchange rate depreciation on net exports, and the normalization of commercial relations with Russia will all contribute to growth.
Despite the increase in the foreign trade deficit led by the surge in commodity prices, mainly energy prices, coupled with the acceleration in gold imports, the ongoing upward trend in services revenues continues to support the current account balance.
In this period, non-farm employment growth posted a slowdown, pushing unemployment rates upwards.
In the period between the previous MPC meeting when the policy rate was raised 5 percentage points and the latest MPC meeting, commercial and consumer loan rates displayed a flat outlook with a change of 0.2 and 0.92 percentage points, respectively.
Following the rise in January, the seasonally and calendar adjusted industrial production index declined by 6% on a monthly basis in February due to the earthquake.
However, the re-emergence of downside risks to global growth due to the epidemic in China raises the uncertainties over the external demand outlook.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of recovery has started to pick up.
Inflation expectations, pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation will be monitored closely and the cautious monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping the yield curve flat, until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.
(1) Advanced economies: USA, Czech Republic, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
The upward revision in last year’s national income data and the acceleration in credit indicate that the recovery in economic activity might be stronger than expected.
However, despite the positive developments regarding the vaccine, uncertainties surrounding the global economic activity prevail due to the recent increase in Covid-19 cases.
Indeed, the diffusion indices show evidence that the economic agents’ tendency to raise prices rose to quite high levels in the first quarter.
Food prices affected services inflation adversely through the catering services channel across the year, leading the restaurants-hotels group to register the highest increase, 13.23 percent, within the sub-groups.
In other services, amid reopening, annual inflation increased due to recreational and cultural services as well as maintenance and repair.
Prices in other core goods rose 2.66% in line with the last two months, and annual inflation crept up by 0.72 percentage points to 50.1%.
Consumer prices rose 2.93% in December, and annual inflation increased 2.79 percentage points to 64.8%.
In October, the global manufacturing industry PMI edged down 0.4 points on a monthly basis to 48.8, while the global services PMI decreased 0.3 points to 50.4.
Due to the robust increase in machinery-equipment investments, the downtrend in total investments came to a halt.
The recovery in international oil prices was the main driver of the rise in energy prices, which was accompanied by an increase in municipal water rates.
Although geopolitical developments continue to pose downside risks, the growing EU demand continues to support exports, and thus production.
Meanwhile, card spending further increased in the first quarter.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the current account is expected to post a surplus in the rest of the year due to the strong upward trend in exports, and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities.
Crude oil prices have been more volatile and risen significantly since the previous MPC meeting due to recent geopolitical developments.
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products and sales of heavy commercial vehicles, which are among the indicators for construction investment, registered a decline.
The impact of possible short-term volatilities in inflation on the underlying trend will be monitored closely for the monetary policy stance.
Goods and services exports continue to display an upward trend despite the weakening in the global economic outlook, indicating improved competitiveness.
Risks to global markets remain significant.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter.
In addition to these global developments, industrial electricity and natural gas tariffs and electricity producers' natural gas tariffs were raised by 20% in early October.
Meanwhile, the current year-end inflation expectation rose by 0.92 percentage points to 43.0%.
Inflation expectations remain favorable.
Despite the rise in commodity prices, the strong upward trend in exports, the slowdown in credit growth, the significant fall in gold imports and the strong progress in the vaccination program stimulating tourism activities are expected to accelerate the ongoing improvement in the current account balance.
Meanwhile, cumulative energy imports will continue to decline if the current low levels of oil prices are maintained.
Average annual inflation expectations for the last quarter of 2024 for advanced and emerging economies are 2.4% and 5.2%, respectively.
Global PMI indices indicate that the services sector activity remains robust, while the manufacturing industry continues to follow a flat course just below the threshold value since the last quarter of last year.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew annually 5.1 percent and quarterly 2.1 percent in the second quarter of 2017.
Oil prices and exchange rate developments favorably affected the energy group, while core goods prices were affected by both exchange rate developments and weaker domestic demand.
Among durable goods, price hikes were more prevalent in automobiles and home appliances, and monthly price increases in core goods excluding clothing and durable goods gained momentum.
Leading indicators for the second half of the year continue pointing to a slowdown in growth due to the weakening foreign demand.
Although accommodative policy measures and steps towards normalization have driven the risk appetite slightly higher recently, portfolio flows to emerging markets remain weak.
In tandem with the recovery in expectations of growth in advanced economies, rising global inflation expectations and long-term bond rates lead to uncertainties about advanced economy monetary policies, and volatility in global financial markets.
Even though central banks announce in their statements that inflation is likely to increase temporarily in the post-pandemic normalization process, the forward guidance delivered points that the low interest environment would continue for an extended period in advanced economies.
Ongoing price increases in this item also affected the prices of substitute white meat products, and pushed up the prices of processed meat products for which they constitute an input.
Annual inflation in these groups stood at 20.18% and 39.07%, respectively.
Despite rising commodity and energy prices amid solid growth outlook, consumer and core inflation rates are moderate across the globe.
In addition, due to the perceptions for a milder monetary tightening by the Fed, global risk appetite hit historically high levels, and emerging economies saw accelerated portfolio inflows as of March 2017.
Normalization of the measures taken to contain the adverse effects of the pandemic and the tightening steps in liquidity policies have led to an increase in loan and deposit rates, and loan growth has started to decelerate.
Overall, economic activity remains on a moderate growth path.
Housing loan rates and vehicle loan rates, which posted a limited increase in the same period, stood at 42.7% and 43.1%, respectively, as of .
Among indicators of private consumption, the production and imports of consumer goods rose in the January-February period.
On the other hand, the ongoing upward trend in international commodity prices, supply constraints intensifying in some sectors, and the adjustments in wage and administered prices maintain their importance for the medium-term inflation outlook.
In August, annual inflation in this subgroup edged up by 1.81 points and reached 80.95%.
The spillovers of the tourism slump became more pervasive in the second quarter, causing net exports to have a heightened negative impact on growth.
Current account balance is expected to further improve in the upcoming period, owing to the lagged effects of the fall in oil prices and the slowdown in credit growth.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index was close to its historical trend in December, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
The deceleration in annual clothing and footwear inflation also continued in December due to demand conditions.
The distribution of 12-month-ahead inflation expectations points to a shift of the distribution to the left, while indicators related to the dispersion of expectations, such as the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation, remained at a similar course to the previous month.
Forecasts are based on the assumption that despite the tourism-induced slowdown in food demand and the support from the actions taken by the Food Committee, the base effect from unprocessed food prices, the probable effects of the adverse weather conditions on the food supply and the exchange rate developments will push the end-2017 food inflation upwards compared to the figures of the previous report.
Adjustments in risk weights and minimum wages are considered to support loan growth in the forthcoming period through the loan supply and household income channels.
Moreover, the diffusion index for the services sector indicated that increases continued to spread across the sector.
In March, the industrial production index dropped by 0.3% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, yet increased by 4.3% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
The pass-through from these factors to consumer prices is particularly strong in times of deteriorating inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations for the current year-end and the end of the next year edged down by 0.1 percentage points to 43.5% and 25.5%, respectively.
The production and imports of consumer goods declined in April.
It is judged that international agricultural commodity prices, which resumed the uptrend in April, will continue to affect food inflation.
Effects of the additional tightening steps on pricing behavior, expectations and the inflation outlook will continue to be closely monitored.
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) stated that economic activity lost some momentum in the first quarter of the year.
All subcategories were influenced by the spillovers from the depreciating Turkish lira.
Developments in inflation expectations and domestic demand conditions have contributed to a mild trend in core inflation indicators.
Communication services, which are subject to price rigidities arising from contracts, have a similar effect, and price increases in this subgroup remain strong.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index remained mild in September.
The current monetary policy stance continues to be tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX liquidity, and supportive of financial stability.
Moreover, in April, the diffusion index for the services sector hovered around 40% above its historical average, indicating that increases continued to spread across the sector.
Annual core goods inflation dropped by 0.31 points to 9.71 percent in May, mainly due to the temporary impact of the methodology change to weight system of the clothing category.
Survey indicators and high-frequency data indicate that the upward trend in employment has been maintained, albeit a slight deceleration after the earthquake.
Excluding communication, the trend of the services inflation remained high.
On the other hand, the weak course continues in services groups hardest hit by the pandemic, such as transportation, accommodation, and catering services.
Türkiye's five-year CDS premium, which peaked this year with 703 basis points on amid domestic uncertainties, declined to 412 basis points in the previous MPC meeting period and to 385 basis points on .
Risk weight and minimum wage arrangements and improving financial conditions are likely to boost loan growth in the upcoming period via loan supply and household income channels.
Likewise, the PMI’s new export orders rose above the neutral mark in the fourth quarter, while total orders posted a small quarterly gain.
Similarly, the quarterly increase in credit card spending lost momentum in the third quarter.
During this period, the annualized services balance surplus recorded a month-on-month increase.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Despite the recent rise, long-term interest rates in advanced economies are still at historically low levels.
In the third quarter, construction employment declined while the public sector and business activities across services and industrial sectors with relatively stronger external trade links continued to make a positive contribution to employment.
While domestic demand has slightly decelerated due to pandemic restrictions, external demand remains strong.
As of September, seasonally adjusted employment recorded 31.7 million.
The lump-sum SCT amounts on fuel were increased.
Price increases spread across the services group due to the ongoing effects of the backward-indexation behavior and wage adjustments.
Meanwhile, the improvement in the underlying core inflation trend proved more remarkable in this period.
In fact, the significant increase in fuel prices in the third quarter of 2023 driven by exchange rates, crude oil prices and tax arrangements have rapidly passed through to transport services prices within the same quarter.
Annual core goods inflation rose by 11.94 points to 35.12 percent in September.
Annual inflation in other core goods lost pace but still remained high.
In January, residential electricity and natural gas tariffs increased by 69.96% and 21.35%, respectively, and municipal water tariffs also increased by 11.87%.
In November, annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 3.04 points to 15.78 percent in November.
Additionally, the diffusion index for the services sector is hovering approximately 33% above its historical average, indicating that the increases continue to spread across the sector.
Prices of food and nonalcoholic beverages increased by 1.63% in May, while annual inflation rose by 2.53 points to 91.63% in this category.
Prices of services increased by 0.71 percent, and the annual services inflation fell by 0.46 points to 8.09 percent in August.
This change in the growth composition might lead to a widening in the non-energy current account deficit to some extent but the overall current account deficit is expected to narrow further down thanks to the improvement in the energy trade balance.
In June, the industrial production index decreased by 2.1% month-on-month when adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects, and declined by 4.7% year-on-year when adjusted for calendar effects.
In March, the current account deficit stood at USD 4.5 billion on a monthly basis and decreased to USD 31.2 billion in annualized terms.
Accordingly, year-end inflation forecast was revised upwards by 1.1 points for 2017, and 0.6 points for 2018, compared to the 2017 July Inflation Report.
Despite the hikes in fuel and municipal water prices, annual energy inflation declined.
Housing loan rates which have remained flat in the same period stood at 41.4%.
The average of four-week growth rate of retail loans has declined from 4.12% to 3.28% since the previous MPC meeting period.
Compared to the previous Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting period, consumer inflation decreased from 3.71% to 3.36% in advanced economies and from 6.54% to 6.08% in emerging economies (1).
Annual inflation was relatively flat in transportation services, but was higher in other subcategories, with restaurants-hotels in the lead.
The decline in annual core goods inflation was largely driven by base effects.
In June, consumer prices decreased by 0.51 percent, bringing annual consumer inflation down by about 0.9 points to 7.20 percent.
In this period, non-farm employment receded further due to the services sector, while construction employment increased.
Meanwhile, the five-year-ahead inflation expectation decreased from 11.8% to 11.6%.
In sum, current global supply conditions remain favorable for inflation.
Annual core goods inflation climbed by 1.08 points to 21.92% in June.
Recently released data indicate a more significant rebalancing trend in the economic activity.
The nature and the pace of simplification steps will depend on the factors affecting the volatility in global and domestic markets.
In the upcoming period, both global and domestic volatilities will be monitored closely and required measures will continue to be taken.
The monthly price increase in the processed food group was of 7.53%, mostly driven by cheese and other dairy products, bread and cereals, nonalcoholic beverages, tea, and products related to sugar.
Annual inflation in core indicators recorded a slight increase, while the underlying trend continued to improve to a limited extent.
Having lost some momentum after mid-September, portfolio investments to Turkey have been picking up again recently amid reduced geopolitical risks.
The Committee noted that net exports is likely to contribute positively to quarterly growth under these circumstances.
Stronger increases in international commodity prices and supply chain disruptions continued to drive producer prices up.
In short, recently released data indicate that the recovery in economic activity has gained strength.
Annual inflation in core indicators registered a decline, while the underlying trends remained virtually unchanged.
As of September, the annual services balance surplus increased USD 0.3 billion month-on-month to USD 51.9 billion.
The lagged effects of cumulative exchange rate movements on annual inflation eased further.
Accordingly, the fall in industrial employment is likely to be temporary.
Current account balance ran a deficit of USD 2.7 billion in November while the current account deficit decreased by USD 0.9 billion to USD 14.3 billion in 12-month cumulative terms.
In tandem with the subsided global economic activity, crude oil prices remained flat since the previous MPC meeting.
In the energy group, the rise in fuel prices is expected to be counterbalanced by the fall in natural gas prices reflected in the index following the seasonal decline in natural gas consumption.
Meanwhile, portfolio flows to EMEs slowed down due to decline in global risk appetite.
Due to the first half’s weaker exports and rising consumption demand, the current account balance ceased to improve.
In October, consumer prices rose by 2.13%, while annual inflation increased by 0.14 points to 11.89%.
While global inflation has decreased, it is still above the long-term averages.
Annual core goods inflation inched up by 0.84 points to 6.77 percent in December.
The rise in energy inflation is expected to continue in a pronounced manner in January.
Recently-released indicators confirm that downside risks to economic activity have abated and the economic rebound will prove more robust as of the second quarter of the year.
In the upcoming period, the monetary policy stance will be conditional on the inflation outlook.
Energy prices increased by 1.01 percent in June and annual energy inflation rose by 1.82 points to 16.99 percent.
In sum, domestic demand is likely to provide a modest contribution to growth in the last quarter.
The CBRT will continue to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the Turkish economy and use the tools at its disposal in pursuit of its price stability and financial stability objectives.
In the first quarter of 2024, the continuing resilient course of domestic demand eased the pass-through of cost increases into prices.
Vehicle loan interest rates, which have followed a fluctuating course in the recent period due to sales campaigns, were 55.06% as of August 9.
The processed food group posted moderate price increases while annual inflation in this group declined.
The effects of rising global inflation and inflation expectations on international financial markets remain significant.
After a decline in February, seasonally adjusted employment remained flat in March.
Meanwhile, the monthly rate of increase in rents, which had been high for a while, slowed somewhat in July.
Due also to the policy rate decision taken in January, the Committee evaluates that alongwith monetary tightening, the regulations to increase the share of Turkish lira deposits will continue to strengthen the transmission mechanism and to improve the funding composition of the banking system.
The four-week average growth rate of retail loans has increased since the previous MPC meeting period and stood at 4.12%.
This decline became broad-based across subgroups, with the energy sub-index falling more noticeably.
With the help of falling food prices, headline inflation is expected to display a decline in the short term.
Contributions of subgroups to annual inflation rose from 14.62 points to 15.17 points in the services group (0.55 points of increase); rose from 9.80 points to 10.17 points in the core goods group (0.37 points of increase); dropped from 1.81 points to 1.50 points in the total of alcohol, tobacco and gold groups (0.31 points of decrease); dropped from 14.22 points to 13.64 points in the food and non-alcoholic beverages group (0.58 points of decrease); dropped from 3.24 points to -0.88 points in the energy group (4.12 points of decrease).
On the other hand, the central banks of Brazil and Chile, which initiated their rate hike cycles with early and strong steps and implemented them decisively in a period when inflation started to rise, began to cut rates on the back of the decline in consumer inflation.
After a robust first quarter, economic activity started to converge to its underlying trend in the second quarter.
Being considered with other leading indicators, a moderate employment growth outlook is expected to continue in the upcoming period.
Global economic activity remains weak in both advanced and emerging market economies.
Regarding the cyclical state of the economy, the data released for the first quarter indicate that economic activity remains above the potential and aggregate demand conditions continue to be at inflationary levels.
Accordingly, while monetary policy communication of central banks in advanced economies varies with their diverse outlook for economic activity, labor market and inflation expectations, they still continue their supportive monetary stances and asset purchase programs at a slower pace.
The CBRT will closely monitor the developments regarding inflation outlook and continue to take necessary policy measures to achieve price stability.
Similarly, interviews with firms for April imply that consumption spending is losing momentum due to the demand brought forward in the previous quarter and the extended holiday.
Cost increases during the period when activities were interrupted passed through to prices, while the increasing demand, triggered by capacity constraints, was another factor that put pressure on prices.
Exchange rate developments continued to affect the other services group, and the repair and maintenance of personal transportation vehicles, basic hospital care services and dental services stood out with high price hikes.
While a simple policy framework enhances the effectiveness of transmission mechanism, it does not rule out these type of dynamic reactions.
Price increases spread across the group, while the deceleration in price increases in bread and cereals as well as fresh fruits and vegetables compared to past months limited the monthly group inflation.
Given the demand and supply-side factors no noticeable rebound is envisaged in loan growth rates in the short term.
This was driven by the expansion of the scope of the loan growth-based securities maintenance practice.
Inflation outlook continued to improve while inflation expectations displayed a wide-spread decline.
Noting that demand and cost-side inflationary effects persisted, the Committee maintained its assessment that the risks to the year-end forecast target announced in the January Inflation Report were on the upside.
An analysis of unprocessed food price developments excluding fresh fruits and vegetables reveals that the rise in red meat and white meat prices continued.
There remain uncertainties regarding the global and domestic pace of the virus’ spread and the normalization process.
While the production of machinery-equipment, an indicator for investments, fell slightly, its imports increased significantly.
The improvement in the labor market continues in line with the economic activity outlook.
In sum, recently released data indicate that economic activity remains strong in the first quarter, while it is converging to its underlying trend in the second quarter amid the balancing in domestic demand.
Annual inflation surged in transport services; rose by a more limited rate in restaurants-hotels, communication and rent; and declined somewhat in other services.
The CBRT will continue to use all available instruments decisively within the framework of the liraization strategy until strong indicators point to a permanent fall in inflation and the medium-term 5 percent target is achieved in pursuit of the primary objective of price stability.
In the rents subgroup, in which the backward-indexation behavior is strong and the sector-specific supply-demand imbalances continue to be observed, the monthly increase was 7.91%, and annual inflation reached 100.7%.
In this period, lockdown measures led to interruptions in economic activity in certain sectors, which recorded only limited price increases, in turn.
While the indicator regarding the pressures on the global supply chain hovered below its historical trend, domestic problems faced after the earthquake were largely eliminated by March.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rates of increase in the B and C indices were realized as 3.2% and 3.4%, respectively, slightly up compared to the previous month.
In the period following the June MPC meeting, crude oil prices mildly increased due to the recovering global activity as well as OPEC+ countries’ tapering of supply cuts as part of the second phase of the agreement they reached in April.
The retreat in the energy sub-index was not limited to crude oil, but rather spread to products such as propane, butane and natural gas.
Nevertheless, sectoral diffusion of this improvement remained limited and underlying trend of economic activity registered a mild growth.
Leading indicators suggest that annual food inflation continued to fall in the first half of April.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 3.4% and 3.6%.
In October, international oil prices posted a limited decrease; however, depreciation of the Turkish lira led to a rise in fuel-oil prices and curbed a more favorable outlook in the energy group inflation.
In May, while energy prices increased by 0.25%, the decline in the municipal water tariff contained a further rise in prices.
Meanwhile, inflation in food items excluding fresh fruits and vegetables has exhibited a favorable course lately.
Annual food inflation decreased by 1.64 points to 12.73 percent and stood close to the assumptions made in the October Inflation Report.
However, the inflation forecast uncertainty moderately increased due to uncertainties regarding the course of the pandemic.
Prices in the bread and cereals group rose by 1.00%, while non-alcoholic beverages stood out among other processed food.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of Open Market Operations funding, to reduce the weight of swaps in the composition of funding, and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
In June, annual inflation was recorded at 50.6% in core goods, and it was around 45 percentage points higher in services at 95.3%.
The Committee drew attention to the risks that a deterioration in price stability may pose to macroeconomic stability and especially to financial stability.
Provisional data suggest that imports increased in real terms along with price increases in March.
Indicators of inflation and the underlying inflation trend will be closely monitored and the CBRT will continue to decisively use all the tools at its disposal in line with its main objective of price stability.
While exports remained strong thanks to favorable external demand conditions in the last quarter of the year, imports increased due to robust economic activity, the rise in commodity, particularly energy prices and the increase in energy demand.
In the third quarter, Turkey’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted by 1.1% quarter-on-quarter but grew by 1.6% at an annual basis.
Recent indicators suggest that the depreciation in the Turkish lira and the repercussions through confidence channel may lead to a slowdown in domestic demand in the first quarter of the year.
The focus of this process will be on developing policy instruments to support the improvement of Turkish lira deposits, to increase the Turkish lira-denominated assets in the collateral structure of OMO funding, to gradually reduce the volume of swaps and to strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
When the provisional foreign trade data for August is evaluated together with the high frequency data for September, it is observed that uptrend in the first half of the year in seasonally adjusted exports is replaced by a limited decline in the third quarter.
Industrial production recorded a monthly decline of 1.4 percent in January.
Monthly price hikes were more pronounced for processed food items excluding bread and cereal due to fats-oils, tea-coffee, meat products, sugar and related products, and especially cheese and other dairy products.
Although the recovery in the European economy affects the external demand positively, ongoing geopolitical developments and the slowdown in global trade restrict the export growth.
In this period, annual inflation realized as -1.69% in energy group remaining in the negative territory, while it was relatively flat at high rates in other main groups.
In the communications subgroup, the 2.96% increase in prices was mainly due to telephone call and internet fees, and annual inflation in this subgroup climbed to 29.17%.
While the composite PMI indicator in China was 55.6 with an increase of 2 points compared to April, the index was above the 50-threshold level in both the manufacturing and services sectors in May.
Prices of services inched up by 0.35 percent, and annual services inflation fell by 0.39 points to 7.80 percent in October.
Accordingly, inflation continues to hover above the average target rate of 2% in advanced economies and 3.5% in emerging economies (1).
In January, consumer prices increased by 11.10%, and annual inflation increased by 12.61 points to 48.69%.
(1) Advanced Economies: The USA, Czechia, Denmark, the Euro Area, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Japan, Canada, Norway.
Going ahead, industrial production and survey indicators signal a mild increase in employment.
On the manufacturing industry front, new orders and capacity utilization rates fell to record lows across main exporting sectors due to slumping external demand.
Early indicators reveal that, amid the increase in product supply, correction in food prices will be more prononunced in June.
Food inflation has recently seen a marked decline on the back of unprocessed food prices.
The trade tension between the US and China, the more-than-expected deceleration in growth rates of advanced economies and fluctuations in financial markets of some emerging economies have led to higher uncertainty in global economic policies, which feed into the downside risks to global economic activity.
While inflation in the bread and cereals group remained elevated, other groups driving processed food inflation up were fats and oils as well as non-alcoholic beverages due to the tax increase in this group.
This rise is mainly attributed to the rising fuel and bottled gas prices in tandem with exchange rates and the outlook for international oil prices.
Despite rising on the back of international crude oil prices, energy inflation continued to restrain consumer inflation.
As a result, underlying trend of services inflation remained flat at an elevated level.
As a result, in the nine weeks between the 6th of November and the 5th of January, USD 33.7 billion flowed into equity markets and USD 16.9 billion into bond markets of emerging economies.
Increase in inflation is driven by rising energy costs resulting from geopolitical developments, temporary effects of pricing formations that are not supported by economic fundamentals, strong negative supply shocks caused by the rise in global energy, food and agricultural commodity prices.
Pandemic-driven unit cost increases continued, albeit with a diminishing pace.
The current elevated levels of inflation and developments in core inflation indicators continue to pose risks to the pricing behavior.
The Committee noted the important role of commodity prices in continuing inflationary pressures despite the appreciation in the Turkish lira, and reiterated the upside risks for the upcoming months.
The Committee expects disinflation process to start on the back of measures taken for sustainable price and financial stability along with the decline in inflation owing to the base effect.
Recently released data indicate a strong economic activity.
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index converged to its historical trend in November, while international transportation costs remained low in this period.
In this period, as underlined in the May MPC meeting summary, food inflation increased due to unprocessed food prices.
In the other core goods category, prices saw large monthly increases due to the lagged exchange rate pass-through effects and the spillovers of the February increase in medicine prices caused by the updated reference exchange rate.
Turnover indices showed that sectoral diffusion of the recovery continues to widen, while economic activity remains relatively weak in some sectors restrained by tourism and export outlook.
As a result of steps taken towards tightening financial conditions, Turkish lira commercial loan rates and general-purpose loan rates (excluding overdraft accounts) increased by 6.27 percentage points and 15.3 percentage points to 59.6% and 76.0%, respectively, since the previous MPC meeting.
In June, consumer prices rose by 2.61 percent and annual inflation increased by 3.24 points to 15.39 percent.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to maintain the tight stance of monetary policy at the June Meeting, and kept the lending rate at 12.25 percent under the Late Liquidity Window.
The tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until the inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.
In July, inflation in the energy group was notable due to the rise in residential electricity tariffs and the automatic tax arrangements in fuel and bottled gas.
In this period, annual inflation increased in rents and communication services, but decreased in other subgroups.
The recent growth trend of loans reveals that both consumer and commercial loans remained below historical averages; consumer loans throughout 2015, commercial loans only in the second half of the year.
To sum up, the moderate course of core goods inflation is attributed to weak domestic demand.
Underlying trend in industrial production is stronger after adjusting for temporary fluctuations in sectors with high historical volatility.
On the expenditures side, the main driver of annual growth was the final domestic demand led by private consumption, while the contribution of net exports was 3.5 points.
Production and imports of consumption goods were higher in the second quarter compared to their averages in the previous quarter.
These developments drove the industrial production down by 0.4 points in the first quarter.
On the other hand, the tax rise in fuel products curbed the improvement in inflation through direct and indirect effects.
The Committee emphasized the importance of growth and demand stability for a sustainable improvement in investment and employment.
In addition to commercial loans, consumer loans exhibit a milder course.
The acceleration in loans buoyed up domestic demand, while investments and employment showed signs of recovery but nevertheless remained weak.
The impact of free natural gas use on the group’s prices was the main driver of this development.
Data for the second quarter of the year confirm that economic activity remained robust, particularly driven by domestic demand.
Accordingly, the natural gas item pushed monthly headline inflation up 0.22 percentage points in October.
The consumer inflation diffusion index declined further in November, and its upward standard deviation from the historical average fell from 1.4 in October to 0.5.
International transportation costs remained on a downward trend in February, while the recent stable course of exchange rates was maintained.
The recovery in European economy affects external demand positively, whereas geopolitical tensions pose a downside risk to external demand.
In December, services prices increased by 0.59% and annual services inflation rose by 0.24 points to 11.66%.
Therefore, the current tight monetary stance should be maintained in order for the impending disinflation to be permanent.
The strong increase in unprocessed food prices also pushed headline inflation up.
In other unprocessed food, price hikes were notable for rice, eggs and nuts, while potato and red meat prices decreased.
It is noteworthy that the indicators monitored for global supply chain pressures reached their highest level in history.
In February, the annualized current account deficit fell by USD 5.8 billion month-on-month to USD 31.8 billion.
The seasonally adjusted three-month average increases in the B and C indices were measured at 4.8% and 5.4%.
The rise in exports of goods slows the deterioration in the current account deficit and improves the core current account deficit indicators.
Prices of the food and non-alcoholic beverages group rose 4.81% in December, and annual inflation increased 4.85 percentage points to 72.0%.
However, leading indicators imply that the significant slowdown in industrial production observed in July is not permanent.
When the provisional foreign trade data for July is considered along with the high frequency data for August, the three-month average trends imply a moderate fall in exports and a rise in imports.
Global growth forecasts for the upcoming period are being revised downwards and recession is increasingly assessed as an inevitable risk factor.
Keeping the disinflation process in track with the targeted path requires the continuation of a cautious monetary stance.
Nonetheless, producer inflation remained on the rise due to lagged effects and the ongoing disruptions in supply chains.
Thus, economic activity is likely to grow modestly over the upcoming period.
Falling figures in the risk premium and exchange rate volatilities were accompanied by net portfolio inflows totaling USD 2.47 billion since June, USD 0.81 billion of which went to the government domestic debt securities (GDDS) market and USD 1.66 billion to the equity market.
Business Tendency Survey data suggest that domestic orders registered an increase from the previous quarter’s average, while export orders were relatively weaker.
At the March meeting, the late liquidity window lending rate was raised from 11 percent to 11.75 percent, while the other CBRT rates were kept unchanged.
Developments in domestic demand conditions and the tight monetary policy support disinflation.
The rate of credit growth and allocation of funds for real economic activity purposes are closely monitored.
However, exchange rate developments and other cost factors limit the improvement in inflation outlook.
The strong momentum in manufacturing industry activity has widely spread across sectors, being particularly significant in intermediate and durable consumer goods.
Thus, annual producer inflation continued to decline.
This composition not only limits medium-term inflationary pressures, but also helps to improve the current account balance.
The Committee maintained its assessment that global inflationary pressures increase data-sensitivity in monetary policies and global financial markets in turn, which may lead to volatilities.
The simplification is believed to contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism.
The escalating geopolitical risks were adversely realized in the first half of the year and caused a weakening in the worldwide economic activity.
Prices of services crept up by 0.18 percent and the group’s annual inflation receded by 0.22 points to 8.59 percent in the last month of the year.
In this period, price increases in processed meat products, fats and oils, and canned vegetables were noteworthy.