Most members coincided that during the third quarter of 2018 the world economy continued to grow, albeit at a more moderate pace. Some members pointed out that the world economy is expected to continue growing, although mentioning that such forecasts have been revised downwards. Some members stated that this situation is due to the materialization of several risks that have been mentioned on previous occasions and which still persist. In this regard, most members agreed that world economic growth is subject to a high level of uncertainty and to the following risks: i) the intensification of international trade disputes; i) a further tightening of financial conditions; and, iii) several political and geopolitical problems in some economies of systemic importance at the global and regional level. One member added the vulnerability of some emerging economies and oil price volatility as risk factors to world economic growth. As for the first aforementioned risk, one member referred to the adverse effects of world trade disputes, both those immediate and those in the medium and long terms, on world economic activity and trade. The same member stated that the probability that new tariffs between China and the United States come into effect at the onset of 2019 is still high. Another member emphasized the lower rate of growth of world trade, the fall in the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Indexes (PMIs), and that in recent quarters such trade disputes have included regions and countries whose economic slowdown might have systemic implications. As for the second risk, the majority of members highlighted that a tightening of financial conditions is possible in case of a stronger-than-expected cycle of monetary policy tightening in the main advanced economies, particularly in the United States. The latter, in view of the possibility of an excessive tightening of the U.S. economy's slack conditions. Nevertheless, one member highlighted the contrary; that is, the possibility of the Federal Reserve increasing its interest rate at a slower rate, or to a lesser extent, given that inflation seems to be decelerating. As to the third risk, one member mentioned the Brexit negotiations, which although appear to be in their final stage after having reached preliminary agreements, they are still subject to new delays and setbacks. The same member also stated the existence of prevailing concerns about the situation of Italy's public finances and financing in the short and medium terms and the sanctions the European Union authorities may impose on that country. Finally, one member highlighted the complexity and fragility characterizing the current environment, both because of the unprecedented factors that are present in the global economy as well as because of the significant cyclical and structural risks the world economy is facing. Most members pointed out that the main advanced economies have continued to exhibit a divergent performance. Such members mentioned that in contrast to the economies of the Euro, Japan and United Kingdom, which have continued to grow below expectations, the economy of the United States continues to grow at high rates. In this regard, one member stated that both the mature cycle that the U.S. economy is undergoing as well as the procyclical fiscal policy implemented in that country were factors that contributed to the high growth rate during the third quarter of the year. Such member added that expectations of above-potential-growth rates for this year and 2019 prevail. One member pointed out that, as the effects of the fiscal stimulus have gradually dissipated, the U.S. economy may undergo a strong deceleration. As to the labor market in advanced economies, one member mentioned that the unemployment rate has continued to decline, reaching levels close to or below those registered prior to the crisis, while wages remained on an upward trend. As to the labor market in the U.S., some members pointed out that wage pressures have continued to intensify. One member emphasized that the unemployment rate has reached a historical low and that the outlook for wages and inflation has become highly uncertain, especially given the significant fiscal stimulus adopted. Nevertheless, one member stated that given the prevailing accommodative monetary policy stance and the fiscal stimulus implemented, what is surprising is that wages have not registered a greater dynamism, making reference as to how flat the Philipps curve currently is in that country. As for emerging economies, some members stated that growth in these countries weakened during the third quarter of the year. The majority of members warned about the vulnerabilities that persist in some of these economies. One member drew attention to the fact that, especially for these economies, international financial volatility is a factor of pressure for macroeconomic and financial stability. In the case of the Chinese economy, some members stated that, as a consequence of the trade tensions with the U.S., several policies have been adopted to revamp economic growth and continue an orderly rebalancing of this economy. Nevertheless, one member highlighted that, under the current conditions, the risk of these measures being insufficient or implemented too late has increased, which could lead to a greater-than-expected slowdown in this economy's rate of growth. Another member stated that forecasts for growth for Latin American economies have been revised downwards, in response to the tighter financing conditions the region is facing, to the slowdown of world trade, and to the presence of idiosyncratic factors that have deteriorated growth expectations. The majority of members warned that despite the evolution of international prices remaining relatively stable during the referred period, the balance of risks is biased to the upside. They also emphasized that in recent weeks a sharp reduction in energy prices was observed, as a result of the loosening of sanctions imposed by the U.S. on Iran, and to Saudi Arabia's difficulty to impose cuts on crude oil production. In this regard, one member added that if this situation continues, some of the pressures that have affected headline inflation worldwide could be mitigated. Some members pointed out that U.S inflation seems to be decelerating and remaining close to the Federal Reserve's target. However, one member noted that although no significant inflationary pressures are considered in the central bank's baseline scenario and, at the margin, such pressures have been smaller in response to the further strengthening of the U.S. dollar and the recent fall in energy prices, and despite the presence of structural factors supporting lower inflationary and wage pressures, such pressures cannot be ruled out. On the other hand, the same member also mentioned that in other advanced economies like Japan and the Eurozone, core inflation is still below their central bank's targets. Finally, another member stated that risks to inflation persist in emerging economies. Most members mentioned that, as expected, in November the Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged and reiterated its forecast of increasing it gradually. One member pointed out that the Fed's conduction of monetary policy has been supported by significant communication efforts. Another member added that monetary conditions in the U.S. are further tightening via two channels: raises in the reference rate and U.S. dollar appreciation. The same member stated that inflation in the U.S. appears to be slowing down and, in this context, markets are anticipating only three additional increases in the federal funds rate from this date to the end of 2019: one in December 2018 and two during 2019. Nevertheless, some members noted that the possibility of unexpected increases cannot be ruled out. One member explained that such risk may have diminished due to the results of the recent mid-term elections in that country, considering that the opposition's majority in the U.S. House of Representatives may hold up the adoption of additional fiscal stimulus measures. Another member stated that both the strengthening of the dollar and expectations of greater inflationary pressures in the U.S. than in other advanced economies, have contributed to the significant divergence in monetary policy stances among these group of countries. In this environment, most members noted that, in recent weeks, international financial markets underwent episodes of volatility, and the prices of emerging economies' assets posted negative results, differentiated according to each country's macroeconomic fundamentals and idiosyncratic factors. One member mentioned that such volatility further increased as a result of the sharp downward adjustment in crude oil prices and, to a lesser extent, to the reduction in other commodity prices. The same member added that a restructuring of investment portfolios towards lower risk assets has been reflected in capital outflows from emerging economies' fixed income markets and, in general, in the economies' exchange rates and other financial assets exhibiting negative results. Another member pointed out that the increase in the entire U.S. yield curve along with expectations of corporate profits having already reached their highest levels and the outlook of a downturn in sales, led to a significant adjustment in stock markets. The same member explained that U.S. interest rates increased markedly for all terms, reflecting not only the effects of the increase in the federal funds target range in September, but also the announcement by the Federal Reserve's Chairman that the interest rate increase could exceed its neutral level. In particular, such member stated that the spreads of long-term interest rates between the U.S. and the Eurozone had reached their highest levels in decades. The same member also warned about the evolution of international financial markets being subject to risks associated mainly with the process of monetary policy normalization in the U.S., which may lead to a disorderly adjustment in interest rates and, in turn, to capital flows readjustments with major adverse effects on emerging economies. From a longer-term perspective, one member pointed out that, in response to the financial crisis of 2008, the Federal Reserve has adopted a highly accommodative monetary policy stance for a long time. The same member stated that, apart from its effects on aggregate demand in the U.S., the monetary stimulus also contributed to a greater diversification of portfolios, with an increasing exposure to emerging economies and a higher leveraging of companies in these economies. Such member pointed out that, given the above and considering both the magnitude and long timeframe under which the monetary stimulus has been in place in addition to certain financial vulnerabilities, the Federal Reserve established a strategy of gradual and preannounced monetary policy normalization. The same member stated that, nevertheless, adopting a significant fiscal stimulus through both tax cuts and higher government spending since the end of 2017 has made the U.S. economy's performance more complex and uncertain. All Governing Board members highlighted that the latest information shows that the Mexican economy rebounded during the third quarter of 2018, after having contracted in the second quarter. As for aggregate demand, most members stated that the boost in economic activity has stemmed from the greater dynamism of manufacturing exports and from the upward trend followed by consumption. Nevertheless, the board warned about the persisting negative trend of investment. One member regarded such trend as one of the most worrying features of growth composition in Mexico. The same member mentioned that gross fixed investment has remained practically stagnant since the second half of 2015 and that, as a share of GDP, it currently exhibits levels that are around the lowest in the last 12 years. Such member argued that this represents one of the main factors behind the economy's modest potential growth rate, which such member estimates to be around 2.5% in annual terms, and which may be decreasing further due to the weakening of investment. As for production by sector of economic activity, most members stated that the growth of production resulted from the dynamism of the services sector. Some members added the improved performance of industrial activity vis-a-vis the previous quarter, highlighting the recovery of manufacturing. One of the members emphasized the continuing deterioration of mining, quarrying and oil and gas extraction, particularly the downward trend of oil and gas extraction. As to the forecasts for economic activity, one member stated that gross fixed investment is expected to fall once again during the quarter due to the negative performance of both construction and machinery and equipment of domestic origin. Another member added that consumption is anticipated to decelerate, while other members mentioned that public spending is expected to decrease. Some members pointed out that the forecast for Mexico's GDP growth for 2018 and 2019 remains within the ranges published in Banco de México's last Quarterly Report. Nevertheless, one member noted that the growth environment for 2019 is highly uncertain since there is no available information on the details of the economic package or the specific public policy strategies of the incoming administration for next year. Another member argued that both relevant international entities and private sector experts have revised downwards the growth forecasts for Mexico and some of whom have revised their estimate for 2019 to even below 2.0%. Most members pointed out that, from a cyclical perspective, the balance of risks for growth continues biased to the downside and has deteriorated at the margin, due mainly to both the complex external environment faced by the Mexican economy and the abovementioned domestic uncertainty factors. Some members added that this bias to the downside appears in both the short- and medium-term timeframe. One of the members noted that, although this bias may have decreased given the trade agreement reached between Mexico, Canada and the U.S., other elements of uncertainty persist. In addition to the abovementioned global risks, most members mentioned possible obstacles to the ratification of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), due mainly to the recent change in the U.S. Congress membership composition. In this regard, one member further elaborated that several leaders of the U.S. Democratic Party have declared their intention of modifying the USMCA. As an additional risk, most members pointed out the downward adjustment cycle of public spending that is generally observed during the transition process and the installment of a new administration. Some members also mentioned the risk of the persistence and intensification of the factors that have contributed to an environment of uncertainty and reduced confidence in the outlook for the Mexican economy as a result of the public policy actions the incoming administration may adopt or of the lack of clarity about such policy actions. Additionally, one member argued that there are significant medium-term risks, such as: i) the possible adoption of public policies that could affect the macroeconomic environment, the economy's price formation process, and the growth potential; ii) the greater uncertainty regarding the actions that will be adopted in the next years to increase Mexico's productivity and the adequate use of production factors; and, i) the public insecurity, corruption, impunity, and the absence of rule of law which affect negatively investment and economic growth forecasts. Most members estimated that slack conditions tightened slightly as compared to those of the previous quarter, although they remain less tight than those observed at the beginning of the year. Some members considered that the economy's cyclical position have not changed significantly since the previous monetary policy decision. Nevertheless, one member noted that perhaps the most relevant consideration is that such conditions have become less tight, at a slower and lower rate than expected, which has contributed to the persistence exhibited by core inflation. In this regard, one member pointed out that, although slack conditions remain neutral, except for the labor market, this situation has not been sufficient to make inflation resume its downward trajectory. Particularly, as to the output gap, one member stated that, given the recent evolution of economic activity, its estimates are currently around zero, regardless of whether oil production is included or not in such estimates. The same member noted that this conclusion is also supported by information drawn from a wide set of slack indicators across diverse economic sectors. On the other hand, in regards to labor market conditions, most members emphasized that these remain tight. One member pointed out that the unemployment rate measured by different indicators stabilized at low levels and also that the indicator with national coverage remains below the estimates of its long term level. Another member explained that wages have increased slightly, although one member considered that no excessive upward pressures on wages are observed so far. The same member also noted that. since the Mexican economy is expected to grow slightly below potential during the next two years, no demand-related pressures are anticipated. Nevertheless, the same member stated that labor market conditions must be monitored closely. Another member also emphasized the importance of evaluating the labor market conditions, their effects on the price formation process, and the policies that are to be adopted in this regard by the incoming administration. The same member highlighted that it is particularly important that wage negotiations are associated with productivity gains and do not imply a generalized cost pressure on the economy or affect the price formation process. One member insisted that, in his/her viewpoint, although assessing the stage of the business cycle that the economy is undergoing continues to be relevant, it has lost importance for monetary policy decisions, in the context of a significant increase in uncertainty and of role monetary policy must play in coping with such uncertainty. Most members stated that, in October, headline inflation registered 4.90%, reflecting the increments in energy prices that have prevailed since June, mainly those of gasoline and LP gas. One member underlined that annual headline inflation remains above the 3% target. Another member pointed out that headline inflation has begun to decrease but remains high and continues above Banco de México's forecasts. The same member specified that the recent decrease of headline inflation is explained by the behavior of non-core inflation. Most members agreed that the increasing energy prices -arising from the evolution of their international references and, in the case of gasoline, from a decrease in the fiscal stimulus applicable to their domestic prices-have contributed to the high levels of non-core inflation that have persisted for a long period. Nevertheless, the majority stated that it has begun to decrease. One member explained that non-core inflation decreased from 8.90 to 8.50% between the first half of September and the first half of October due once more to the variation in energy prices and the effect of a high base of comparison in the prices of these commodities. As for core inflation, most members considered that it has exhibited a high degree of resistance to decline, even increasing from 3.67% in September to 3.73% in October. The same members pointed out that the shocks on energy prices have also affected core inflation, due to the indirect effects that these shocks have had on the production costs of some core inflation components. One member underlined that core inflation has been further affected by the behavior of the peso exchange rate and has begun to exceed Banco de Mexico's forecasts. Some members noted that the rise in food merchandise prices further contributed to the increase in core inflation. Most members explained that, in addition to energy prices, the core component has been affected by the price increases of services other than education and housing. In this regard, one member pointed out that the component of services sector, which reflects the prices of non-tradable goods, has remained above the 3% target and exhibits an upward trend. Most members underlined that expectations for headline inflation for the end of 2018 drawn from surveys have been revised from 4.50% to 4.61% between September and October, while those for the end of 2019 continue at around the same level. Most members agreed that expectations for headline inflation for the medium and long terms remain around 3.50%. Nevertheless, one member highlighted that these remain above the target. Most members added that expectations for core inflation for the end of 2018 were also adjusted upwards, from 3.53 to 3.59% during the same months, while those for the end of 2019remained practically unchanged. On the other hand, the majority of members noted that the spreads between nominal and real yields on government securities suggest a considerable increase in inflationary risks in the medium- and long-terms. In this regard, one member pointed out that the compensation for inflation and inflationary risk implied in the spreads between nominal and real rates for different tenors has increased between 21 and 43 basis points. Another member mentioned that, since the last monetary policy decision, the spread for 30-year instruments picked up by 78 basis points. Such member stated that such spread is volatile and comprises. besides inflation expectations, several risk factors. Nevertheless, the same member mentioned that the higher spread reflects a significant increase in risk perception by markets, regarding the path to be followed by inflation in the medium and long terms. One member made clear that the increase in inflationary risk premia reflects the increase in the risks that affect inflation in the short, medium, and long run as, indeed, such risks affect inflation and its expectations since they emerge and up to the long run. Most members pointed out that inflation forecasts were revised upwards. Some members also mentioned that in the absence of an adjustment in monetary policy, the process of convergence of inflation to its target would be further delayed. These members noted that the upward revision of the forecasts is due to the higher-than-expected increases in both core and non-core inflation. Most members also highlighted that this revision includes a higher expected trajectory for both the exchange rate and energy prices. One member underlined that the higher-than-expected price increases observed in the different services other than education and housing, are tilting inflation projections upwards. All Governing Board members considered that the balance of risks to the expected trajectory of inflation has deteriorated and exhibits a significant upward bias, in an environment of high uncertainty. One member noted that some upward risks to inflation have materialized in recent months, in an adverse external environment with significant factors of domestic uncertainty. Another member mentioned that the balance of risks for inflation may be in the process of becoming even more adverse. The same member argued that some of the risks are of a cyclical nature, while others are structural. As to the main upward cyclical risks, most members highlighted that the peso exchange rate may continue to be subject to pressures stemming from external and domestic factors; a possible escalation of protectionist measures worldwide; the risk of additional pressures on energy prices or increases in the prices of agricultural products; that public finances deteriorate; and, that wage negotiations are not consistent with productivity gains. Another member underlined that wage pressures could arise due to the persisting tightness of labor market conditions. Regarding the shock to the peso exchange rate, the same member mentioned that, although both its persistence and final magnitude are still uncertain, the factors that triggered it suggest an adjustment in the equilibrium real exchange rate that will have an impact on prices. Finally, some members expressed their concern that, given the magnitude of the observed shocks and the level of inflation, there is also the risk of second-round effects affecting the price formation process insofar as new shocks continue to arise. As for factors of a more structural nature, most members agreed that inflation faces significant risks related to the possible adoption of policies that could affect the economy's price formation process. One member added that the adoption of such policies could also have an impact on the attainment of the inflation target within the expected timeframe. Another member stated that, in his/her opinion, currently there is no sense in assessing each of the balances of risks to growth and inflation independently because both are strongly intertwined. In this context, the same member highlighted that diverse risks have been present for several years. Nevertheless, the same member noted that, in the last months, three specific risks that may have considerable and deep adverse effects on inflation and, in general, on the economy's operating conditions are emerging at an increasing speed: i) an adverse shock to potential growth; i) a strong and fast deterioration in the conditions of access to international market financing; and, iii) the possible unanchoring of inflation expectations that may even lead to a situation of fiscal dominance. The same member stated that the above-mentioned risks interact and mutually reinforce each other. The member also listed the factors that he/she deems are affecting these risks to a greater extent: i) the uncertainty regarding the direction that economic policy will take in general in the next years; i) the management and structural vulnerability of public finances; iii) the possible indexation of wages to inflation; iv) the goals and guidelines on energy policy outlined so far; v) the possibility of implementing selected investment requirements for Retirement Funds Administrators (Afores) and their impact on public finances; vi) the uncertainty as to the effectiveness of the policies that will be implemented to fight the serious problems of corruption and insecurity; vi) the discussion regarding the impossibility of monetary policy affecting the economy's potential output; viii) the serious impact of using international reserves to finance public spending may have; and, ix) the possibility that the trade agreement between the three North American countries is reverted given the new membership composition of the U.S. House of Representatives. As for the indexation of wages to observed inflation, the same member explained that this type of policies give rise to a large inflationary inertia. The same member stated that there is wide evidence in the economic history of Mexico and of other countries, showing that the implementation of formal or informal indexation mechanisms on the economy propitiate the risk of losing control on inflation, affecting the target population that such mechanisms seek especially to protect. The same member concluded that besides the fact that the economy has shown for several years numerous characteristics that make the attainment of the 3% inflation target difficult -which is reflected in long-term inflation expectations being persistently around 3.5%- looking forward, the economy faces in his/her opinion, a major risk of de-anchoring of such expectations. Such member ended his/her intervention by expressing his/her concern about the materialization of such risks and how this would make the economy operate indefinitely with a higher inflationary bias and smaller growth. Some members said that after the presidential elections last July, there were clear signs of tranquility in the national financial markets. They mentioned that the transition team's speech, which emphasized the intention to maintain macroeconomic equilibria, as well as the announcement of the trade agreement reached in North America, contributed to such environment. However, most members considered that since the last monetary policy meeting such markets were subject to significant pressures due to both external and domestic factors. Among the external factors, the majority mentioned the high volatility registered in the international financial markets during recent weeks. In this respect, a member emphasized the widespread risk aversion feeling in such markets, as well as the observed strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Most members noted that within the internal factors that affected national financial markets are: i) the announcement regarding the cancellation of the New Mexico International Airport; i) concerns about Pemex' business model; iii) uncertainty associated with certain legislative projects, and, iv) the impact of several of these measures, as well as of some public spending projects and of uncertainty in financial markets, on public finances. Some members considered that internal factors were the main ones affecting the recent evolution of markets, emphasizing one of them that, instead of alleviating the greater tensions in the external environment, several of the actions considered or implemented had the opposite effect. The majority highlighted that, as a result of all the aforementioned factors, the exchange rate registered an important depreciation and an increase in its volatility, medium- and long-term interest rates in domestic and foreign currencies increased, and sovereign risk indicators deteriorated. Some members added that the stock market registered a significant fall. A member pointed out that, within emerging economies, Mexico presented the worst performance in the four mentioned indicators from October 17 to date. In this regard, another member expressed that the recent movements in the exchange rate reverted the appreciation that had been registered along the year, and that the Mexican peso stopped differentiating itself with respect to other emerging economies. Some members mentioned that despite the latter, trading conditions in the foreign exchange market remained stable during the period. With respect to interest rates, some highlighted that medium- and long-term ones reached their highest levels in the last 10 years. One of them added that recent increases in the yield curve are comparable to those observed after the US presidential election in 2016 and during the episode known as Taper Tantrum in 2013. Another member pointed out that, unlike in the foreign exchange market, there were significant effects in the fixed income market, emphasizing that interest rates moved abruptly under low liquidity conditions. With respect to the stock market, one member said that since the consultation regarding the possible cancellation of the New Mexico International Airport was announced, the Mexican stock market has accumulated a 10% fall. Likewise, such member noted that as a result of the legislative project about banking commissions, financial groups have presented the greatest adjustment within the stock market. Finally, regarding sovereign risk indicators, such member mentioned that CFE and Pemex bonds have also been affected, and concluded that local risk premia have increased significantly. The majority of the members argued that under the circumstances described, an environment of greater uncertainty for the country's macroeconomic framework has been generated. Some members emphasized that such environment entails important medium- and long-term risks that may affect the country's macroeconomic conditions, its growth capacity and the economy's price formation. The majority considered that investors' confidence on the domestic economy has deteriorated as a consequence of the abovementioned. One member noted that there is uncertainty regarding infrastructure projects, the rule of law, and the fulfillment of existing contractual commitments while another one highlighted doubts about the basis for decision making in the new administration. In this context, the majority of members stressed that rating agencies have expressed concern about the management of public finances and about the energy policy of the incoming administration, prompting some of them to change the sovereign debt's perspective from stable to negative. One member argued that the latter has impacted the country's competitive position since it could lead to reduced access to sources of financing. Moreover, some members mentioned that foreign investors have reduced their exposure to domestic assets. One member highlighted that while the Mexican financial system has enough capital and liquidity to face adverse shocks, the environment of external and domestic uncertainty, the increase in the cost of financing, and the prospect of weaker economic activity could pose significant challenges to the country's financial institutions. The majority of the members agreed that it is necessary to undertake public policy actions aimed at strengthening confidence on the domestic economy and providing certainty to investors. One member highlighted that, otherwise, the market deterioration observed during the last days could lead to a much more complex situation. The same member expressed that in an economy as open to external capital flows as the Mexican, the margin of error is extremely narrow, given that the markets' response is immediate and that the potential consequences can be considerable. Another member mentioned that maintaining appropriate public policies would contribute to avoid vulnerabilities that could lead to a restructuring of portfolios and capital outflows. The majority pointed out that among the aforementioned policies, it is necessary to maintain healthy public finances and establish policies oriented towards increasing the country's productivity, strengthening the rule of law, and fighting corruption, impunity, and public insecurity. The majority also indicated that it is essential to have an environment with clear rules of the game and solid institutions that encourage private investment. A member pointed out that, only in this way will it be possible to increase the potential growth rate of the economy, indicating that currently the maximum growth rates that are compatible with an environment of stability are modest and may even be declining. A member expressed that achieving healthy public finances is not only a matter of willingness, but also implies confronting the scarce margins that are available for its management. The same member mentioned that the unavoidable government expenditures must be considered, which include transfers to the states, pension payments, and the cost of public debt. In this respect, the member added that the recent deterioration of financial markets has resulted in an increase in the cost of financing for the government, reducing even more the scope of action. Such member also considered that if taxes in the border zone were reduced, it would undermine fiscal revenues, generating additional pressures on public finances. In addition, the same member stated that the details of the fiscal program to be approved will be crucial to reinforce the confidence in the Mexican public sector. Other member noted that additional concerns exist with regard to the financing of public expenditure and cautioned that if policies that may cause an additional deterioration of the public finances were implemented, this would generate an environment of slow growth and high inflation, and in such an environment monetary policy would lose its effectiveness. Regarding the factors that influenced the monetary policy decision, the majority of the members emphasized that the outlook of inflation has deteriorated significantly in both the short and medium terms. Concerning the more adverse environment that inflation faces on the short-term, the majority stated that core inflation has shown high resistance to diminish. The majority mentioned that, in addition to the above, there is the possibility of public policy actions that hamper the process of reduction of inflation, and also that there are new shocks arising from the depreciation of the peso, which will continue to be subject to pressures. Regarding the medium term outlook, the majority affirmed that the current environment of uncertainty presents risks for the nominal functioning of the economy and for its growth capacity. One member added that the depth and duration of the shock to national financial markets -including the exchange rate shock- is still uncertain, and that such shock interacts simultaneously with other adverse factors, such as the fall of the oil production platform and its consequences on the trade balance and public finances, the slow growth of the Mexican economy, as well as the uncertainty that still prevails over the formalization of the new trade agreement with the United States and Canada. The majority agreed that in case that this environment prevails, a period of weak economic growth and possible persistent inflationary pressures could occur. In this situation, monetary policy effectiveness is lower and its conduct is considerably more complicated. Most members noted that monetary policy should respond prudently in case that economic uncertainty increases significantly due to various reasons. In this regard, one member argued that monetary policy plays a fundamental role in managing such uncertainty, which possibly implies acting even more prudently than Banco de México has been doing up to now. In this context, such member pointed out that under the current conditions, cyclical considerations -on which central banks' decisions are usually based- have a lower weight. Such member added that structural factors have instilled a strong persistence on headline and core inflation, and that many of such factors are being reflected in the unfavorable evolution of total factor productivity. The same member highlighted that under the current economic conditions, the real exchange rate shows a strong pressure to depreciate, while medium- and long-term interest rates face upward pressures. Such member warned that the upward pressures on interest rates appear through two channels: an increase in inflation expectations and a rise in the term premium demanded by investors on Mexican financial assets. The same member indicated that the inflation risk premia increase as inflation expectations deteriorate, which would cause the economy to present a higher inflation bias. Such member concluded that an environment such as the one described should be accompanied by a tighter monetary policy stance by the central bank over time. In this context, all of the members agreed that it is essential to adjust the monetary policy stance in order to allow inflation to converge to the target during the forecast horizon, considering that in the current environment the possibility of headline inflation delaying its convergence to its target has increased. One member warned that achieving the inflation target seems complicated, even considering a decline in core inflation. All the members highlighted that the adjustment should be done in order to preserve the central bank's credibility and send a clear signal of its commitment to the attainment of the inflation objective. One member emphasized that adjusting monetary policy fundamental considering that under an inflation targeting regime the economy's anchor is the credibility in the inflation target itself, which depends on the confidence in the sustainability of public finances and on the conduct of prudent monetary policy. Such member pointed out that the significant adjustments in domestic markets, in magnitudes larger than those in other emerging economies, are a response to a shock whose depth and duration is still uncertain, which in his/her opinion the reference rate must be raised by 50 basis points in order to attain inflation's convergence during the forecast horizon, taking into account the risks that have materialized as well as the possibility that such risks deteriorate in the near future. Likewise, the same member considered that the current conditions justify a response from Banco de México equivalent to those implemented when facing similar financial tensions, such as those in 2016 and in the beginning of 2017. Such member underscored that, in a situation as the one described, the risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations exists and, thus, a forceful response from the central bank is needed. Another member concurred that monetary policy faces a complex environment characterized by an inflation rate above the central bank's forecasts, a persistently elevated core inflation, a significant exchange rate depreciation, an upward biased balance of risks to inflation that has deteriorated, and a greater risk of second-round effects, which would justify considering a 50 basis point adjustment to the monetary policy rate. Nonetheless, such member concluded that a 25 basis point increase is more convenient taking into account the decline that inflation is showing, that announcements on key decisions on fiscal and wage matters are still pending during the next weeks, that demand-side pressures on prices are not anticipated, and that the outlook of a rate of growth below potential with a balance of risks to the downside would contribute to mitigate inflationary pressures. Another member stated that, in his/her opinion, although it is convenient to modify the objective for the reference rate, currently a single 25 basis point increase is far from being sufficient to realign the expected trajectory of inflation to its target of 3% in general, not only within the forecast horizon. Finally, all members noted that Banco de México's communication should point out that the Mexican economy faces additional risks that could imply considerable challenges for the inflation reduction process, affecting the price determination process, and that, consequently, additional adjustments of the reference rate may be required, even in the short run according to one member. Another member emphasized that the Board must be prepared to observe higher interest rates along the yield curve. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México's Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its anticipated trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and long-term inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. Monetary policy must also respond prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by the Mexican economy increases considerably. In this context, and considering that the balance of risks for inflation is biased upwards and that it has deteriorated significantly, Banco de México's Governing Board has decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest by 25 basis points to 8.00%. One member voted for increasing the rate by 50 basis points. Considering the challenges that have been faced to consolidate a low and stable inflation, as well as the risks that the economy's price formation process is subject to, the Governing Board will take the necessary actions, specifically, maintaining or possibly strengthening the current monetary policy stance, so that headline inflation converges to Banco de México's target within monetary policy's period of influence. Banco de México's Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target.