All members agreed that during the second quarter of 2018, the world economy continued to grow at a moderate pace, and that the divergence among the main advanced economies’ performance increased. In this context, some members mentioned that the outlook for world economic activity has deteriorated due partly to the materialization of some risks, such as the intensification of trade disputes. Some members agreed that the balance of risks to the world economy continues biased to the downside. All members agreed that the world economy is subject to a high degree of uncertainty and that the following are major risks: I) a further escalation of international trade disputes; ii) a further tightening of financial conditions; and, iii) political and geopolitical factors. As for the risks of greater protectionist measures, some members pointed out that the number and intensity of these actions has been increasing significantly. They also stated that evidence shows that such measures are already affecting world trade volume and capital expenditure, as well as indicators of production, business confidence and household confidence. One member mentioned that available indicators suggest that the effect of these measures has started to be evidenced in economies and regions other than those directly involved in such disputes. Most members noted that the intensity of the trade disputes has differed across countries. In some cases, such intensity seems to have eased, as in the case of the trade negotiations between Mexico, the U.S. and Canada; whereas in other cases, like the trade dispute between China and the U.S., it has worsened. One member highlighted the relevance of the Chinese-U.S. case for the world economy, given the size of both economies and their high share in global value chains. As for the second risk to the global economy, most members mentioned the possibility of the U.S. economy facing higher-than-expected inflationary pressures, while one member stated that this situation could lead to significant increases in the yield curve. As for the risk related to political and geopolitical factors, some members stated that in the Eurozone some vulnerabilities associated with domestic turmoil and political differences have increased, stating as an example those related to the approval of the budgetary process in Italy, the Brexit, the U.S. midterm elections in November, and Brazil’s presidential elections. In addition to the aforementioned risks, some members included the possibility of international prices of crude oil and other energy goods continuing on an upward trend, which could affect economic activity and inflation worldwide. In this regard, one member emphasized that the increase in oil prices responds to several factors, such as a greater demand in the United States, the inelastic supply by OPEC countries, and the effects of the U.S. trade sanctions imposed to Iran. Most members stated that the divergence among the main advanced economies’ performance has increased. They also mentioned that, in contrast with the Eurozone, Japan and the U.K., which have grown below expectations, economic activity in the U.S. exhibited higher growth, partly in response to the fiscal stimulus implemented. Most members warned that, under conditions of reduced slack in the economy, the greater dynamism of the U.S. economy could exert greater pressure on inflation. As for the prospects for growth for the U.S. economy, such members expressed that they expect it to continue growing at a high rate in the next semesters. Some members highlighted that the latter is due to the strength of consumption and investment in that country, associated with the high levels of household and business confidence indicators, and with the low levels of unemployment. However, another member pointed out that, in the medium run, the cyclical position of the U.S. economy could start being a factor that could hinder its dynamism. As to other advanced economies, one member mentioned that weak economic activity in the Eurozone, Japan and the United Kingdom this year was a factor that contributed to revise downward the forecasts for growth for these countries, to rates below potential. Some members mentioned that, in most advanced economies, labor markets have tightened further and their unemployment rates are below their natural levels. One member added that, up to this point, wages do not seem to be subject to pressures. As for emerging economies, one member mentioned that these exhibited slower dynamism than the observed in previous quarters and have also faced tighter financial conditions, in a scenario where advanced economies are foreseen to raise their interest rates. In the case of the Chinese economy, some members indicated that it has been struck by the effects of the intensifying trade disputes with the U.S. and the environment of uncertainty that this situation generates. In this regard, these members pointed out that the outlook for manufacturing activity, capital expenditure and business confidence has been particularly affected. Most members added that indicators for other emerging economies, such as Argentina and Turkey, have deteriorated. In this context, one member underlined that although problems differ among economies, there are two common factors: an inadequate macroeconomic – particularly fiscal- management, and an institutional weakness related, principally, to central bank independence. As for expectations for growth for emerging economies, one member stated that they have been revised downwards and that greater differences have been observed among countries. The same member mentioned that in Latin America, expectations for growth have been revised downwards due to the slowdown of global trade growth and to various idiosyncratic factors, whereas another member added that growth expectations for most crude oil exporting countries have improved significantly. Some members stated that in the main advanced economies, headline inflation continues converging to their central banks’ targets, albeit one of them added that core inflation has remained below such targets. Some members pointed out that in the United States, inflation has fluctuated around the Federal Reserve’s target, while in the Eurozone and Japan it has remained below their central banks’ targets. In this context, some members indicated that given the tightening labor markets in these economies, in the future wages are expected to have greater effects on prices. As for emerging economies, some members mentioned that inflation has trended upward gradually. One member noted that in these economies, the outlook for inflation is heterogeneous and that the risks of higher inflation have escalated in several of them. In this regard, one member added that pressures related to the exchange rates’ depreciation could deteriorate even further the outlook for inflation in emerging economies. In light of the above, most members mentioned that world inflation has increased, and that the higher prices of energy have contributed to such results. Some emphasized that the central banks of both advanced and emerging economies have stressed the possibility of inflationary pressures arising in the short term due to the escalation of trade protectionist measures. One member warned that, in the short term, the balance of risks for world inflation is biased to the upside, although with some differences across countries. All members mentioned that differences in the rate of monetary policy normalization are expected among the main advanced economies. Some members pointed out that such divergence is a reflection of the different stages of the business cycle each of these economies is currently undergoing. In the case of the United States, most members highlighted that, as anticipated, in September the Federal Reserve increased the target for the federal funds rate and reiterated its prevision of increasing it gradually, causing a rise in interest rates in all terms. One member added that the latter was mainly observed in short-term interest rates and, hence, the yield curve remained relatively flat. The same member mentioned that, in particular, the 5-year interest rate was already at levels above 3%, while those of 30 years are already above 3.3%. Such member expressed that these figures show that term premia are still at low levels. Most members highlighted that, in the event of inflationary surprises in the U.S., there is a risk of a faster-than-expected process of monetary policy normalization in that country. One member mentioned that such inflationary surprises could be due to demand-related pressures, given the reduced slack in the U.S. economy, or to the passthrough of import tariffs imposed by the U.S. onto final prices in that country. In this regard, another member made reference to the discussion about the process of price formation in that country, and the flattening of the Phillips curve, which suggests that inflation’s response to the slack conditions in the U.S. has been small. The same member added that several explanations have been proposed to describe this phenomenon, such as: globalization’s disciplinary effect on prices and wages, productivity gains related to automation, large businesses’ monopsonic position in labor markets, and the effects through time of the presence of large e-commerce retailers on the economy’s price formation process. Such member pointed out that despite such explanations, a high degree of uncertainty persists as to the price formation process in the United States, which increases the probability of inflationary surprises. Such member highlighted that the risk is not so much that inflation increases in an environment where monetary policy normalization is done gradually and with transparency, but rather that inflationary surprises emerge. Some members added that, in contrast with expectations for the United States, those for Japan and the Eurozone point to a barely moderate monetary policy adjustment over a longer period. One of them mentioned that, in England, the central bank has maintained the projected pace of normalization, despite the inflationary pressures it faces. Finally, the same member pointed out that, among emerging economies, tighter monetary policy stances are also anticipated. In particular, this member stressed the case of Argentina, whose central bank adopted recently a monetary policy framework based on a target for the monetary base. All members pointed out that international financial markets have undergone episodes of volatility and considered that the prices of emerging economies’ assets have performed negatively in recent weeks. Some members mentioned that this has occurred in an environment of U.S. dollar strength and interest rate increases. Most members stated that the lower risk appetite observed in the last months has already caused both an adjustment of investment portfolios and capital outflows from some emerging economies. In this regard, most members added that differences among these economies were observed depending on macroeconomic fundamentals and idiosyncratic factors inherent to each of these countries. These members highlighted that, in the foreseeable future, an environment of higher external interest rates and U.S. dollar appreciation is expected, which would lead to a greater tightening of financial conditions that will particularly affect emerging economies. As for the risks to international financial markets, most members emphasized those previously described about world economic growth, as well as those associated with sharp adjustments in these markets, which would have a considerable effect on financial asset prices. Most members mentioned that the latest information suggests that, at the beginning of the third quarter of having contracted during the second quarter. One member noted that this contraction was preceded by two quarters of growth recovery. As for aggregate demand, most members highlighted the higher dynamism of exports. As for consumption, some members pointed out that timely indicators suggest a moderate recovery after the stagnation observed during the previous quarter. Some members coincided that investment has remained weak. As for production, most members argued that its performance is explained by the growth of services and the slight recovery of industrial activity. One member mentioned the favorable change in the trend of construction, while some members noted the recovery of manufacturing and the continuing deterioration of mining. In this regard, one member noted that this deterioration has been observed mainly in crude oil extraction. One member pointed out that, after the fluctuations observed in previous months resulting mainly from the natural disasters at the end of 2017, the trajectory of economic activity is expected to normalize throughout the second half of the year. In line with the above, another member noted that, after the growth forecasts of Banco de México’s latest Quarterly Report were revised downwards, the baseline scenario for growth for both 2018 and 2019 remains unchanged. Another member added that expectations for growth slightly below potential during both this year and 2019 prevail. Most members argued that GDP growth for 2018 and 2019 is expected to be between 2.0 and 2.6% and 1.8 and México’s latest Quarterly Report. Some members mentioned that the forecast for 2019 is subject to a high degree of uncertainty and consider several challenges, such as the incoming administration’s implementation of public policy, a slight weakness in the aggregate demand components, and the low levels of crude oil production. Most members stated that, given the complex environment the economy is currently facing, the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside, although such bias has decreased at the margin as a result of the trade agreement recently reached with the U.S. and Canada. One member stated that the announcement of the new agreement is, undoubtedly, positive news that may contribute to strengthen confidence in Mexico. One member explained that, although the ratification process will be lengthy, which could give rise to uncertainty, this should decrease significantly as compared to that observed prior to the announcement, and therefore help to boost domestic demand and, particularly, private investment. Most members stated that there is a risk of uncertainty as to the length of the ratification process, that Congress does not ratify it or that challenges arise in the implementation of some chapters of the agreement. On top of the aforementioned global risks, some members mentioned as an additional risk to growth, the deceleration of public expenditure that is generally observed at the beginning of a new administration. In this same regard, most members pointed out that relevant details of the economic agenda of the incoming administration remain to be explained. Some members mentioned that another risk is for crude oil production to remain significantly below the expected levels. Among the risks to medium- and long-term growth, some members included the possible loss of efficiency and productivity of the Mexican economy, as well as the possible impact to competitiveness caused by domestic factors, such as the deterioration of public security. One member added other factors such as corruption, impunity, and the absence of the rule of law, which affect investment prospects. Another member also included the risk of deviating from the ongoing fiscal consolidation process and public policies that would affect potential growth, as well as an eventual slowdown of the U.S. economy. Most members considered that the slack conditions in the economy are estimated to have remained similar to those observed during the second quarter, pointing out that the economy’s cyclical conditions continued to loosen vis-à-vis the levels observed at the beginning of 2018. One of the members emphasized that this is evident in practically all the different slack indicators monitored by Banco de México, except those related with the labor market. However, another member mentioned that several indicators currently suggest an output gap close to zero. As to the labor market, some members stated that its conditions remain tight. In this regard, one of the members pointed out that the unemployment rate is still at low levels and that although it has not undergone additional decreases, it has remained around its current level for a relatively long period. The same member added that unit labor costs for the overall economy have increased recently, though starting from low levels and, in general terms, no excessive wage pressures have been observed. Another member argued that wages have increased somewhat and that, for this reason, wage revisions should be assessed fully to identify their effects on the price formation process. In this regard, the same member stated that it is important that the different alternatives for wage revisions are associated with productivity gains and do not generate overall cost pressures on the economy. Another one stated that, in that member’s opinion, demand-related pressures stemming from such increases are a factor of greater concern. Finally, as to the forecasts for economic activity, some members pointed out that, if growth expectations for the rest of 2018 and for 2019 materialize, less tight cyclical conditions would be expected in the following quarters. Nevertheless, one of the members noted that these conditions would be consistent with an output gap not far from zero. Most members mentioned that headline inflation has been affected by the significant increases of its noncore component, emphasizing that, since June, higher-than-expected rises in energy prices have been observed, mainly those of gasoline and L.P. gas. Such members noted that these price increases stem from higher international references, stating that the gradual adjustments of domestic gasoline prices has made such increases more persistent. Some members pointed out that the contribution of energy prices to the increase in headline inflation was significant during the first half of September and larger than that exhibited in January 2017. One member specified that in such two-week period, gasoline prices registered an annual rate of change of above 21%, whereas L.P. gas prices of above annual headline inflation increased from 4.85% to of September, while non-core inflation did so from evolution of core inflation, most members highlighted that it has behaved according to expectations. The same members mentioned that the core component decreased from 3.64% to 3.56% between the first half of July and the first half of September. Nevertheless, most members noted that the rate at which core inflation has been declining has been contained by the indirect effects of non-core inflation on production costs. One member added that core inflation has shown a high degree of persistence, despite the deceleration of productive activity and the relatively more favorable behavior of the exchange rate. The same member added that fundamental core inflation figures, drawn from price index data, constructed with those items that are more sensitive to the business cycle, has fluctuated between 3.4% and 3.45% in the last five months. Most members mentioned that expectations for headline inflation for the end of 2018 were revised upwards from 4.25 to 4.50% from July to September, while those for the end of 2019 increased from 3.60 to 3.70% for the same period. One member highlighted that such expectations are reflecting the aforementioned shocks. Most members emphasized that medium- and long-term expectations remained around 3.50%. Some members observed that, although expectations have remained stable, they are still above the target. Most members also pointed out that expectations for core inflation for the end of the end of 2019 remained practically unchanged. Finally, one member underlined that the yield spread between nominal and real government bonds remains high, which suggests that markets are perceiving upside risks for headline inflation in the medium- and long-terms. All members agreed that, although the shocks that affected inflation in Mexico are of transitory nature, they have delayed the convergence of headline inflation to its target. One member added that noncore inflation is expected to remain high during the next months and will continue to be affected by pressures from energy prices, which will in turn affect the trajectory of headline inflation. Another member considered that the forecasts for inflation for the next months remain complex. Most members also stated that core inflation remains in line with forecasts and is expected to continue its downward trend towards anticipated to decrease, but at a slower rate. All members considered that the balance of risks to the forecasted trajectory of inflation remains biased upwards, in an environment of uncertainty where external and domestic risks persist. One member mentioned that, although some risks to inflation have decreased as a result of the recently approved trade agreement with the United States and Canada, other risks have intensified. Another member added that this balance deteriorated since the last monetary policy decision, mainly due to the rise in energy prices and expectations that they will continue to increase. One member argued that some of these risks are cyclical in nature, while others are of a more structural nature. The same member emphasized that both types of risks are operating in the same direction and reinforcing each other. Among the main risks to the upside, most members highlighted the possibility of pressures on the peso exchange rate due to external or domestic factors; a possible escalation of protectionist measures worldwide, which could affect inflation; additional upward pressures on energy prices, as indicated by the futures prices of some of these products; a possible reversion in the favorable behavior of agricultural products’ prices; and, the risk that wage negotiations are not consistent with productivity gains. In this regard, one member stated that wage pressures could appear as a result of the tight labor market conditions or the expected adjustment to minimum wages. Some members also noted the risk of higherthan-expected levels of public expenditure. One of the members emphasized that this could reduce the rate at which core inflation has been decreasing. Another member added the risk that the inertial trend of a greater participation of current expenditure in total government expenditure continues. Some members stated that, if supply shocks, such as those of energy prices, persist for a significant period, the probability of second-round effects in the price formation process could increase significantly. One of the members pointed out that the persistence of these shocks could also intensify the negative consequences that protectionist measures could have on inflation. Finally, another member considered that, on balance, the aforementioned factors jeopardize the convergence of inflation to the de México’s latest Quarterly Report. One member elaborated on the risks of a more structural nature, stressing that the persistence of inflation is currently high and that this may be due to various factors. The same member indicated that, in general terms, persistence is introduced into the inflationary process through formal and informal mechanisms that seek to protect economic agents from inflationary and/or exchange rate risk, and that these mechanisms are used in contracts or in other forms of determining transactions in the economy, in a context in which price formation does not seem to be consistent with the 3% target. Such member emphasized that there may be various reasons for this, but that long-term inflation expectations have remained at levels of around 3.5% for several years, and that this fact implies that economic agents assign a low probability to the event of attaining the 3% target. In this context, the same member mentioned the structural vulnerability of public finances as well as the uncertainty about the management of fiscal policy by the incoming administration. Such member also considered that the most relevant risk is the lack of total factor productivity growth in Mexico over the last two decades, stressing that under such conditions it is difficult to believe that the economy is in a good situation to efficiently absorb -that is, with a low inflationary impact- adverse shocks, such as those to the real exchange rate, the terms of trade, and to the prices of energy and other commodities. The same member argued that a necessary condition for an economy to keep inflation low in a continuous and sustained manner is through constant gains in productivity. As for the downside risks, some members highlighted that the ratification of the trade agreement with the United States and Canada could have favorable consequences on both markets and exchange rate. The majority of the members noted that since the last monetary policy decision, the Mexican peso has exhibited more resilience than the currencies of other emerging economies, attributing this situation to both the progress in the trade negotiations with the United States and Canada, and the country’s prudent macroeconomic management, highlighting the monetary policy stance adopted by Banco de México. In this sense, one member emphasized that the monetary policy stance that has been implemented has allowed interest rate differentials between Mexico and the United States to remain high, a fact that is one of the main reasons that explain the relatively good performance of the prices of Mexican assets. Another added to the above factors the end of the electoral process in Mexico. As for interest rates, one member indicated that shortterm rates registered slight changes, while increases in medium- and long-term rates were observed. Another member commented that, in general, the country’s yield curve has remained relatively flat, making it clear that monetary policy has been effective in containing inflation expectations and the term premia. One member pointed out that, although there were outflows by foreign investors of fixed income instruments, mainly medium and long term, sovereign risk indicators did not show significant adjustments and that they remain at levels consistent with the country’s risk profile. The majority of the members agreed that domestic financial markets and Mexico’s exchange rate, in particular, could be affected by the aforementioned external and domestic risks. In this context, the majority of the members highlighted the importance of having solid macroeconomic fundamentals, which have allowed the economy to adjust in an orderly manner to a particularly complex environment. One member argued that maintaining solid macroeconomic fundamentals is necessary to preserve favorable conditions for economic activity and to avoid vulnerabilities, which, in the event of risk materialization, could lead to a rebalancing of asset portfolios and to capital outflows. Another member stated that prudent monetary policy actions are essential to reach and maintain macroeconomic stability. The same member stated that, nevertheless, in the absence of an adequate support from fiscal policy, these actions would have higher costs for the economy and they might even be insufficient. For this reason, the member emphasized the importance, beyond a solid fiscal position in the country’s public finances face in the medium and long runs. Such member stated that, in that member’s opinion, the most relevant matter for the monetary and fiscal authorities at this stage is to evaluate how to safeguard what has already been achieved and how to address the pending issues in a timely manner. In this sense, one of the members warned that public finances display a high level of vulnerability, pointing out that in the years previous to 2017 public indebtedness had increased considerably. In particular, this member mentioned that, from 2007 to 2016, the Historical Balance of Public Sector’s Financial Requirements (SHRFSP, for its acronym in Spanish) went from 28.8 to 48.7% of GDP, and from 2013 to 2016, from 37.2 to 48.7% of GDP. That member added that, despite the reduction of the SHRFSP in 2017, it is difficult for this decline to be sustainable, since it was based, to a large extent, on cutbacks in public investment, which is currently at very low levels. The same member warned that, given the country’s fiscal situation, and taking into account the expected future increases in international interest rates, the conditions of access to financing can turn less favorable. Furthermore, such member argued that, in addition to the structural vulnerability of public finances, there is also uncertainty about the fiscal management of the incoming administration. Another member added that the president elect and his transition team have stated their commitment to preserve the health of public finances. However, the same member highlighted that it is necessary to know in detail the public policies of the new administration and their potential effects on productivity and on the country’s competitiveness. One member stated that financial markets discount that a solid fiscal position will be continued. Elaborating on the structural challenges that the economy faces, one member highlighted the lack of total factor productivity (TFP) growth over the past two decades and the weakness of investment. The same member pointed out that according to INEGI figures the last spike in the TFP was observed in Such member noted that from 2007 to 2012, this indicator decreased 0.8% each year, whereas from member attributed the above to various factors: a) a regulation and, more generally, rules of economic interaction, that allow excessive market power in some sectors – including several strategic ones— and the few incentives for innovation, research and development; b) a fiscal and social security system that generates large distortions in the labor market, spurring informality; and, c) the prevalence of corruption and insecurity which, together with the aforementioned factors, threatens the rule of law and, particularly property rights. The same member considered that given such factors, the slower dynamism of investment over several years should not be surprising. Such member expressed concerns about some of the public policy proposals that have been discussed recently, and about their possible effect over the economy’s development in the long run. First, such member reflected upon different commentator’s opinions regarding the objectives that a central bank ought to have. Such member emphasized that monetary policy cannot influence the potential growth of an economy, and that, at best, it can only affect the cyclical component of aggregate demand in order to guide inflation towards a particular target. In this sense, such member stated that assuming there is a trade-off between growth and inflation which can be harnessed systematically by a central bank, in the short and long run, implies returning to past discussions and debates that have been solved in both academic and practical terms. Such member noted that this argument is based on fifty years of economic analysis, at an international level, as well as on the historical experience of Mexico and many other countries in the last decades. Second, such member indicated that the proposals about using the international reserves to finance public spending, for example in investment or any other type of expenditure, do not take into account the fact that international reserves are not a source of net wealth, since these have to be financed with the issuance of liabilities by the central bank. The same member emphasized that the implementation of such proposals would directly jeopardize the central bank’s independence and its main statutory mandate, leading to a situation of fiscal dominance over monetary policy. The same member argued that, in the best case, implementing some of these measures would generate a greater inflationary bias, besides the one the Mexican economy already has, and, in the worst case, it would be a return to policies that have already been tried and have failed, and that would imply returning to times of recurring financial and balance of payments crises. Regarding the factors to be taken into consideration for the monetary policy decision, the majority of the members highlighted that core inflation –the component that responds more clearly to the monetary policy stance– has evolved, in general, as anticipated, and is expected to continue to decrease, although some of them pointed out that at a lower rate and subject to greater risks. In this regard, one member emphasized that such component has exhibited a significant degree of persistence. In this context, the majority acknowledged that monetary policy faces challenges and that it must avoid that the supply shocks that have affected non-core inflation contaminate the economy’s price formation process. One member mentioned that the latter is important since these shocks can continue for a considerable period, significantly increasing the risk of secondround effects. The same member added that the latter risk is high in an environment where long term inflation expectations have persistently remained above the target, arguing that, in this context, the central bank's credibility could be affected, which would imply high costs for the Institution and the economy. Another member said that the current conditions make the monetary policy decision complex since, as mentioned before, inflation is still high and its speed of convergence has decreased, while its core component remains on a downward trend and domestic conditions have improved. The majority of the members reiterated that the lower uncertainty after the trade agreement reached in North America has contributed to the Mexican peso’s resilience. One member argued that the latter opens up some room for maneuver for monetary policy in Mexico in the face of the increases expected for the federal funds rate in the United States. Another member noted that while such trade agreement reduces an important source of uncertainty, it is unlikely to have enough impact on the exchange rate as to significantly increase the likelihood of inflation converging to its target during the forecast horizon. The same member specified that the current monetary policy stance, prudent and defensive –both domestic and relative to the United States– has contributed to the recent favorable evolution of the Mexican financial markets. The same member argued that the latter has taken place in an environment in which monetary policy’s risk-taking channel is operating intensively and, therefore, capital flows are very sensitive to rate differentials. In this regard, the same member stated that both the inflation differential between the two countries which is anticipated in the short term, and the reduction in the interest rate differential that markets expect, are factors of concern because of the deterioration that such differentials would entail for Mexico’s domestic and relative monetary policy stance. Some members pointed out that, in the current circumstances, the likelihood of additional adjustments in the monetary policy stance in the short term has increased. One of them warned that either if the persistence shown by core inflation continues, or if some of the anticipated risks materialize or if other risks arise, Banco de México would need to act in a decisive and forceful manner. Another member pointed out that, in the event of an adverse scenario in which the real exchange rate would need to adjust, it is important to prevent medium and long-term inflation expectations from being affected, and to avoid possible second-round effects on the economy’s price formation process. Elaborating on Mexico’s monetary policy, one member detailed that given the shocks that have affected inflation since 2017, the monetary policy stance has been adjusted in order to ensure that inflation converges to its target in a time frame consistent with the full operation of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Some members stressed that Banco de México has been communicating about several changes in such horizon, currently deferring inflation’s convergence to the second quarter of 2020. One member expressed that such forecast is subject to a high degree of uncertainty. The same member considered that the language of the monetary policy statement should convey clearly such possibility and also that the outlook for inflation is complicated. Likewise, the same member expressed disagreement with the forecasts made by analysts and market participants, which suggest that Banco de México is about to conclude its restrictive cycle and that it is likely to start a loosening cycle in 2019. Finally, the majority of the members agreed that, given a complex environment in which external and domestic risks persist, the Governing Board should remain attentive to the evolution of the factors that could entail additional pressures on inflation and delay its convergence to the goal, in order to be able to react in a timely manner. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its anticipated trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and long-term inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. Given the Mexican economy’s recent developments, that the shocks that have affected inflation recently are of a transitory nature, and that the expected trend for core inflation remains downward, Banco de México’s Governing Board has voted by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 7.75%. One member voted for increasing the rate by 25 basis points. The Governing Board will monitor the potential pass-through of the shocks that have affected non-core inflation as well as other factors that could affect the evolution of core inflation, which is particularly relevant in the present scenario, since this indicator is still above 3%. The central bank will take the necessary actions, specifically, maintaining or possibly strengthening the current monetary policy stance so that headline inflation converges to Banco de México’s target within monetary policy’s period of influence. Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and will continue to follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Roberto Del CuetoLegaspi, Irene Espinosa-Cantellano and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of leaving the target rate unchanged at 7.75%. Manuel Ramos-Francia voted in favor of raising the target rate by 25 basis points to 8.00%. For some time, inflation has been subject to a complex environment characterized by both cyclical and structural factors. This situation is evident as shown by long-term inflation expectations, which have remained around 3.5 percent for several years, regardless of the stage of the business cycle the Mexican economy is undergoing. Although there are several reasons for this, all of them are potentially reflected in the lack of growth of total factor productivity over the last two decades. This condition makes it more difficult for the Mexican economy to absorb supply- or demand-related shocks with low inflation. Due to the aforementioned, core inflation currently shows a high degree of persistence. Such persistence, together with perspectives for non-core inflation, makes it unlikely for the current forecast for headline inflation to be attained. Recently, Banco de México has already adjusted on several occasions its estimates for the time frame in which headline inflation is expected to converge to its target. Considering the current inflation forecast targeting framework for monetary policy, as well as the factors that are affecting core inflation, in my opinion, not responding as a consequence of this environment could be very costly for the central bank’s credibility.