Most members mentioned that world economic activity continued recovering during the fourth quarter of 2021, although at a slower rate and heterogeneously across countries and sectors, due to the evolution of the pandemic and the actions implemented by their health, monetary and fiscal authorities. The majority of members stated that the resurgence of infections led to new restrictions in several countries and that global supply chains remain affected. One member recalled that in 2021 the global economy shifted from a partial shutdown of activities to a scenario of expansion, with disruptions in the production processes. Another member pointed out that some leading indicators suggest that, at the beginning of 2022, tertiary activities moderated, while industrial activities recovered gradually, although in emerging economies said sector stopped expanding. He/she stated that, according to the latest projections of the International Monetary Fund, weakness of economic activity at the beginning of the year might be attenuated starting from the second quarter, once the Omicron wave loses strength and economic activity starts to normalize. He/she noted that some indices related to back orders, new orders and delivery times have improved at the margin. The majority of members highlighted that the world growth outlook for 2022 has been revised downwards. Some members stated that this was due to the expectation of lower fiscal and monetary stimuli, especially in the United States. One member added the higher number of infections and the persistence of disruptions in supply chains. Another member indicated that these disruptions will possibly dissipate by the end of the year. Some members considered that the main risks to the global economy are those associated with the pandemic. One member underlined the high inflation levels and their persistence. Another member noted that, in economies with a fragile and incomplete recovery, the tightening of monetary conditions represents a risk to growth, employment, and macroeconomic stability. Some members pointed out that the balance of risks for the global economy is biased to the downside. Most members mentioned that world inflation originated by bottlenecks in production, the reallocation of spending towards merchandise, and high commodity prices, in particular of food and energy products. One member stated that some of these prices have reached all-time highs and that they are expected to continue rising, while another member mentioned that, based on food and energy futures’ markets, these prices are anticipated to decline slowly within one year. One member pointed out that disruptions in global value chains have contributed to the higher prices of industrial inputs and have reduced their availability, as in the case of semiconductors. Another member noted that high inflation could also be the result of wage-related pressures and high transportation costs. One member pointed out that sea freight costs are at unprecedented levels and act as a negative supply shock, raising costs and generating substitution effects that generalize the pressures towards other goods. Some members noted that inflation is well above the targets of most central banks. One member mentioned that, although inflation is expected to decline during the year, its convergence would be slower as compared to what was foreseen in December, especially for developed economies. Most members stated that short-term inflation economies. One member indicated that, despite remaining at levels below those of observed inflation, inflation expectations have been deteriorating and the implicit breakeven inflation rate remains high. Some members noted that longer-term inflation expectations drawn from financial instruments registered moderate changes. One member considered that inflation remains transitory and will begin to decline once the pandemic-related disruptions are resolved. Another member considered that pandemic-related shocks have turned out to be more profound and longer-lasting than previously anticipated. He/she delved into how the amount of slack in advanced economies has decreased, in view of a solid labor demand and a slow recovery of labor participation. He/she added that this could lead to wage-related pressures, which, along with an upward revision in inflation expectations, increases the risk of a more persistent inflationary process. One member listed among risks to the price formation process the sustainability of public and private finances, geopolitical tensions, and emergencies associated with climate change. Most members pointed out that faster reductions worldwide. The majority of members mentioned economies have already started to withdraw their monetary stimuli. However, one member added that, so far, most of them maintain highly accommodative policy stances. He/she recalled that central banks of advanced economies reduced their policy rates aggressively in 2020, while during 2021 they remained patient and kept rates at historically low levels. He/she considered that this can be explained by their diagnosis about inflation not changing fundamentally. All members mentioned that, in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve announced that it will continue reducing the pace of its asset purchases, and that it will soon increase the target range for the federal funds rate. One member stated that the balance sheet reduction could begin in the middle of this year. Most members added that the market is anticipating the first increase to the target range in March. One member pointed out that the pace and the speed of such increments could exceed those originally estimated. Another member noted that, given the economy’s strength and the high levels of inflation, the Federal Reserve’s current monetary cycle is expected to be faster than the previous one. One member mentioned that the Federal Reserve has been cautious about its communication and has reiterated that the adjustment will be gradual, which implies that it will seek to avoid surprising the markets. Another member pointed out that although the decisions of that central bank have been well communicated, orderly and predictable, currently there is less guidance that allows foreknowledge of the magnitude and pace of the cycle. Some members underlined that the Bank of England once again increased its reference rate and that the European Central Bank is preparing to tighten its monetary policy stance. One member added that the Bank of Canada is also preparing to do so. Most members noted that the central banks of various emerging market economies continued increasing their reference rates. One member pointed out that in their latest meetings they did so at an accelerated pace. Another member stated that many economies are expected to increase their reference rates to maintain financial stability and to avoid significant exchange rate depreciations. One member added that only the People’s Bank of China will maintain a more accommodative policy stance, due to a more marked moderation of its economic activity, the instability in its real estate sector, and the high levels of debt of its provinces. Most members highlighted that interest rates for all terms have increased worldwide. Some members noted that most economies exhibited a flattening of their yield curve. One member indicated that additional increments in interest rates for different terms are expected throughout the year. Most members pointed out that stock markets in advanced economies registered losses. One member stated that the technology sector has been especially sensitive to the new narrative of the central banks. Another member added that risk premia have increased. Some members noted that stock markets in emerging economies registered gains, in part, due to the undervaluation they registered during the previous months. Some members underlined that the currencies in some of these economies appreciated, especially in Latin America. They mentioned that capital inflows towards equity assets continue, while capital flows directed towards fixedrate instruments registered moderate outflows. Some members indicated that international financial markets registered volatility, driven by expectations of less accommodative monetary policy stances. infections and the high valuation of certain financial assets also contributed to the above. monetary policy stance in advanced economies poses risks to financial markets. Some members emphasized the risks to capital flows, fixed-income assets, and currencies of emerging market economies. Some members mentioned that there does not seem to be a consensus as to the pace and magnitude of the withdrawal of monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve, which could continue exerting pressure on markets. One member added that the materialization of some geopolitical risks could cause a reallocation of portfolios at the global level. Another member pointed out that the balance of risks to financial stability has deteriorated. All members highlighted that, based on the latest slightly during the fourth quarter of 2021. Most members mentioned that said contraction mainly derived from a fall in the services sector. One member underlined the decline in mobility caused by the contagion rate. Most members pointed out that the recovery remains heterogeneous across sectors. One member added that the economic weakness is reflected in the high percentage of sectors that have still not recovered their prepandemic levels. On the supply side, most members highlighted the weakness of industrial production. The construction exhibits a deficient performance and that manufacturing remains weak. One member stated that the latter have been mainly supported by the automotive industry, and that a modest progress in the resolution of shortage problems in this sector is expected this year. He/she noted that it is estimated that the shortage of semiconductors may have affected GDP growth in He/she underlined the fall in electricity generation and the weakness of mining. Some members mentioned that services continue to be affected by the new regulation on labor outsourcing. Some members mentioned the mixed behavior observed within services. One member added that a greater setback in temporary accommodation and food preparation activities has been observed, together with a higher dynamism in trade, while professional, corporate and business support services continue registering a significant negative contribution. On the demand side, most members stated that exports performed better towards the last quarter of 2021. One member added that non-automotive exports continue recovering and that automotive exports show an incipient rebound. Another member pointed out that, in general, exports have exceeded their levels registered prior to 2020, driven by the US economy’s recovery. However, one member noted that automotive exports remain affected by supply restrictions. Most members indicated that consumption continues recovering gradually. One member stated that its evolution has mainly been concentrated in imported goods. Another member added that private consumption has still not reached its pre-pandemic levels. One member pointed out that, although sales reported by the National Retailers Association of Mexico (ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym) continue expanding, it has been at an increasingly slower rate. He/she added that consumer confidence has declined for two consecutive months, although it still remains at high levels. He/she also mentioned that, despite the fact that the wage bill has continued growing, the average monthly income remains stagnated. He/she argued that remittances have registered the best performance of the last 18 years, although significant challenges are anticipated in the future, given the lower levels of economic growth in the United States, the decreased fiscal stimuli, and the level of employment of Mexican migrants in said country that has already surpassed its pre-pandemic levels. Most contracted. One member pointed out that it has resumed its decreasing trend observed since 2018. Another member pointed out that it has remained stagnant since March 2021. Some members underlined that certain labor indicators remain deteriorated. They noted that unemployment and underemployment rates are still above pre-pandemic levels. One member argued that, although formal employment has already recovered and total employment is close to its prepandemic level, public policy should strive to attain the employment levels that would have been observed if the pandemic had not taken place. He/she indicated that some estimates place that gap at around one million formal jobs. conditions persisted. Some members noted significant differences across sectors. One member underlined that GDP’s deviation from its prepandemic trend suggests that the output gap could be above 10%. Another member highlighted the need to address the challenges in potential GDP measurement to have a better comprehension of slack conditions and of demand-related inflationary pressures. Looking ahead, some members indicated that slack conditions are expected to remain ample. One member added that significant differences by sector and gender are expected to persist. Some members mentioned that growth expectations for 2022 have been revised downwards. One member pointed out that the above responds to the lower growth observed during the second half of Another member underlined that economic recovery shows signs of sluggishness and fragility. One member forewarned about the risk of an even greater economic downturn. Most members highlighted that the rise in inflation is a generalized phenomenon and that various measures of trend inflation show increases. One member pointed out that, despite the decrease of inflation in January, there is a greater number of CPI items whose prices increased at rates above 6%. Another member mentioned that the arguments of price increases being due to seasonal factors or comparison base effects are no longer valid. One member reiterated that inflation in Mexico is being affected by a global phenomenon, whose origins lie in pandemic-related factors. Some members pointed out that inflation remains at levels very much above the 3% target. Some members mentioned that by the end of 2021 it reached levels unseen in two decades. One member underlined that Mexico's inflation gap is high compared to a broad group of emerging countries. Another member warned that CPI simulations by income decile show that inflation is markedly higher in lower-income households. Most members mentioned that, from November to January headline inflation decreased mainly due to the deceleration of the non-core component. Some members noted that said deceleration is largely explained by the reduction in the inflation of energy and agricultural and livestock products’ prices. One member highlighted, however, that the non-core component has posted double-digit annual increases. He/she said that this reflects the high levels of both energy and agricultural and livestock product prices. Another member mentioned that, in general, pressures on food prices have increased, with a larger number of them registering double-digit annual variations. He/she added that this has occurred despite the fact that the exchange rate and the international prices of food commodities have exhibited a better performance, which suggests that there is a significant lag between these variables and food prices in Mexico, which makes these pressures recede slowly and thus they may be synchronized with new shocks. Finally, one member pointed out that given the high volatility levels and the random behavior of the non-core component, the observed decline cannot be taken as a permanent improvement given the current inflationary pressures. All members mentioned that core inflation continued to increase. Some members highlighted that it has risen in each of the last 14 months. One member added that this reflects the persistence of the shocks that have affected it. Another noted that in January this component reached a level unseen in historical high since the inflation-targeting scheme was adopted. Another member expressed his/her concern over the path of this component as it signals headline inflation’s trajectory in the medium term. He/she underlined that in the last five monetary policy decisions, core inflation has been at levels higher than anticipated. The majority of members pointed out that within the core component, both merchandise and services inflation increased. Some members indicated that, regarding core inflation, the proportion of items with price increases above 5% continued trending upwards, reaching record levels of 80%. One member indicated that, although part of the initial increase in merchandise inflation was due to changes in the relative prices of merchandise with respect to services, the concurrence of additional shocks and their persistence have generated a high inertia in this component. Another member stated that the pressures that continue to be observed within food merchandise are associated with the behavior of prices of products derived from soybeans, corn and wheat. He/she underlined that price variations in nonfood merchandise prices are also relevant and that they have taken place along with recent upward variations in the prices of education services, and more persistently, in those of food services. One member mentioned that services inflation has followed an upward trend as a result of the reopening of activities, the increase in their demand, and vaccinations. He/she noted that inflation of services excluding housing and education exceeded 6% in January. Another member pointed out that, unlike other countries, core inflation in Mexico includes food merchandise, which tends to be volatile and highly susceptible to supply shocks. Therefore, he/she suggested focusing on the alternative core index Banco de México has used in other occasions, which includes merchandise and services, but excludes food merchandise. Regarding this index, he/she highlighted that: i) its annual inflation rate is 100 basis points below that of traditional core inflation; ii) it has remained more stable in recent months, while the traditional one has increased; and iii) pressures at the margin for this index decreased significantly in January, when annualized monthly inflation was close to its historical average. expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased again. Most members noted that medium- and long-term expectations remained stable, although some members pointed out that at levels above 3%. One mentioned that expectations for the next twelve months have remained more stable and declined recently, while medium-term expectations also improved at the margin. Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that expectations for the short and medium terms remain at high levels, above those observed in other inflationary periods. He/she highlighted the current discrepancy between analysts’ inflation expectations and Banco de México's forecasts for 2023. Another member mentioned that the deterioration of inflation expectations increases the risk of them becoming unanchored. Meanwhile, one member pointed out that short-term inflation expectations have not stopped increasing despite the sequence of interest rate increases. Most members stated that inflation instruments continued trending upwards. One member added that although the ten-year inflation risk premium apparently is decreasing, it remains at levels similar to those recorded in stress episodes. Another member underlined that the higher levels of inflation risk premia implicit in market instruments reflect a greater risk of long-term expectations becoming unanchored. However, one member noted that expectations drawn from market instruments for the 6-10 year average stood at 3.07% in January. He/she mentioned that the contrast between shortand long-term expectations suggests that analysts and markets foresee that the current inflationary pressures will eventually ease. Most members pointed out that forecasts for headline and core inflation increased again. One member mentioned that they were adjusted upwards for the next five quarters. Some members added that their annual measures are expected to converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon. One member stated that the forecasts have repeatedly undershot when anticipating the trajectory of inflation given the continuous appearance of unexpected shocks. Thus, he/she pointed out that the convergence of the core component will depend on the absence of additional shocks, which he/she considered is a strong assumption given the high levels of oil, commodities, sea freight and food prices. He/she mentioned that the shocks that have affected core inflation are expected to continue at least until the second half of 2022, and that its components most susceptible to shocks related to energy prices and the exchange rate will remain under pressure. Another member noted that inflation forecasts have continued to be revised upwards since the current tightening cycle began in June to reach its highest point in the first quarter of 2022, as the inflationary shocks that were observed in the same period of the previous year begin to fade. He/she added that, from then onward, it is expected to decline steadily in part because of the lesser pressures that the non-core component has been subject to, which tend to affect core inflation with some lag. He/she pointed out that this is expected to take place mainly through food merchandise prices, which would reflect the lower pressures on agricultural input prices. One member highlighted that the outlook for inflation continued to deteriorate, given the deviation of its trajectory from what was previously forecast. Most members stated that the increase in regarding its core component. One member added that this not only responds to temporary external pressures. However, another member mentioned that the temporary effects of increases in energy prices and in some agricultural and livestock product prices have started to fade. He/she added that this process is expected to continue and contribute to further declines in inflation. Among upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted cost-related pressures and the persistence of core inflation at high levels. Some members added external inflationary pressures, exchange rate depreciation, and increases in energy prices. One member stated that, insofar as the pandemic transitions to a more favorable stage, there could be a reallocation of spending towards services, which could exert pressure on service prices. Another member noted the risk of continuing imbalances between supply and demand, due to rigidities in production or the evolution of the pandemic. Some members mentioned that there is a positive correlation between the level of inflation and its persistence, and thus high levels of inflation carry the risk of the price formation process becoming contaminated. One member added the risk of wage revisions being influenced by observed inflation and by minimum wage increases. Among downward risks, another member mentioned: i) a greater-thanexpected effect from the negative output gap, ii) social distancing measures, and iii) exchange rate appreciation. Most members stated that the balance of risks for inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member highlighted that the balance of risks has continued to deteriorate. Most members mentioned that the exchange rate appreciated and interest rates increased, mainly short-term ones. Some members noted that, in general, domestic financial markets performed favorably, in line with what was observed in Latin America. They also stated that the behavior of interest rates led to a flattening of the yield curve. They pointed out that the stock market registered gains. One member added that default risk premia were slightly above the level observed in the previous monetary policy meeting. Some members mentioned that the economy is well positioned to face a global monetary tightening cycle. They highlighted the low levels of the current account deficit and of non-resident investors' holdings of government debt. One member considered that this reduces the vulnerability of the peso. Another member added the fiscal balance and the level of international reserves. One member considered necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic stance, procuring a low and stable inflation and the soundness of the financial system, given the country’s high degree of trade and financial integration with the rest of the world and its exposure to external shocks. He/she added that this is essential given the outlook of a further monetary tightening worldwide. Most members highlighted the weakness of credit to firms. Some members considered that this obeys to structural demand factors, which reflects the deterioration of investment climate. One member underlined that this is unrelated to the current monetary policy stance. Another member emphasized that financing to the non-financial private sector continued to moderate its contraction. He/she stated that, in 2021, external sources of financing registered a negative balance for the first time in 12 years, while domestic sources rebounded due to increases in the reference rate. He/she mentioned that mortgage lending displays an upward trend. One member stated that monthly variations of credit to the private sector have finally started to be positive towards the end of last year. However, he/she considered that this improvement is not enough and is at risk due to the interest rate increases, which would have an impact on the demand for credit. He/she pointed out that during the fourth quarter of 2021, the annual flow of domestic financing to the private sector accounted for 1.1% of GDP, in contrast to the 3.2% recorded in 2017, prior to the tightening of monetary conditions in Mexico. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and price formation becoming contaminated, as well as the additional challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and considerations, on this occasion, the majority decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.00%. Most members highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. They expressed that for the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target and an adequate adjustment of the economy and One member highlighted that, in contrast to other economies, Mexico provided a reduced monetary stimulus in 2020 and started to withdraw it early in that Mexico's monetary policy stance is currently among the least accommodative among emerging market economies, surpassed only by economies with geopolitical conflicts or deteriorated macroeconomic fundamentals. He/she considered that, given the mandate of price stability, an increase in the reference rate is justified, especially to preserve financial stability. However, he/she mentioned that the concern is whether to raise it by arguments for accelerating the monetary tightening. First, the real interest rate has not changed significantly despite the previous increases to the reference rate. In this regard, he/she pointed out that these increases created the expectation of a more permanent inflation, and therefore did not affect the real interest rate. Second, as to the Federal Reserve's adjustments possibly being greater than anticipated, he/she highlighted that said central bank has reiterated that it will adjust its rates gradually. He/she stated that, if the adjustment were greater than expected, given that Banco de México makes its decisions in calendar dates close to those of the Federal Reserve, there would be time to react and in this regard he/she considered unnecessary to act ahead or over-react to that central bank’s actions. He/she added that, given its robust macroeconomic stance, Mexico is in a better position to face the Fed’s restrictive cycle. Third, he/she mentioned that although other emerging economies have increased their reference rates at a quick pace, the relevant variable is the interest rate level and that Mexico continues having one of the highest among these economies. He/she noted that, in other economies, the greater adjustment is due to the fact that they reduced them more markedly in the past or because they face idiosyncratic problems. He/she mentioned that the current inflationary phenomenon is mostly explained by factors linked to the evolution of the pandemic and that, in the face of these exogenous pressures, there is not much that a more restrictive monetary policy stance can do. He/she added that the cost associated with a higher rate must be considered, as there is the risk of reaching a restrictive policy stance too soon, thus affecting the economic recovery. He/she mentioned that this would generate greater risk aversion and macroeconomic instability, which could translate into exchange rate- and price-related pressures, making it difficult to achieve Banco de México's objective. He/she stated that the central bank’s actions and the way it communicates them affect both expectations and the price formation process. Another member considered that some readings on inflation and its expectations have started to move in the right direction. However, he/she noted that it is still necessary to strengthen the downward trajectory of inflation, given that pressures have not dissipated, and to make the balance of risks to inflation more neutral and symmetric around the medium-term forecasts. He/she stated that there is empirical evidence of a positive correlation between high levels of inflation and its degree of persistence, and therefore if price variations do not begin to revert, there is the risk of inflation becoming more persistent. He/she considered that, throughout this inflationary episode, inflation expectations have been more sensitive by incorporating increases when observed inflation has been higher than expected, but have reacted less when it has decreased for some months, which in his/her opinion suggests that monetary policy should support more decisively the decline in inflation. He/she mentioned that the fact that the real ex-ante interest rate has increased since the last meeting indicates that the stance adopted by Banco de México is consistent with its mandate, but added that it is necessary to continue in this direction in order to influence short- and long-term expectations. He/she stated that, in view of the Federal Reserve's announced cycle of monetary normalization, the decisions taken by Banco de México since last year place our country in a relatively solid monetary position compared to that of the United States, and such position is close to reaching, both in nominal and real terms, the largest spread observed in the last cycle. He/she argued that, under different macroeconomic metrics, Mexico is well positioned with respect to previous monetary cycles, and thus it must not assume a mechanical rule with respect to the Federal Reserve's adjustments, but rather act by assessing all the information available at each moment in time. He/she considered that Banco de México faces a scenario of slow economic recovery and persistent inflation, especially in its core component, which represents a complex combination. He/she mentioned that maintaining a robust monetary policy stance in the face of persistent inflation will allow to better address the challenges ahead and thus fulfill the constitutional mandate of price stability. One member highlighted that core inflation was again higher than anticipated in January, that medium-term expectations were revised upwards, and that the new forecast trajectory for inflation was above that previously published. He/she warned that current inflation is not a temporary phenomenon focused on the prices of certain CPI items and that, if the policy response is not decisive, there is the risk of having a more persistent inflationary episode and of long-term expectations becoming unanchored, which would reduce the effectiveness of the expectations channel, which is the most relevant channel for monetary policy. He/she considered that given the continuing emergence of unanticipated shocks, the adjustments prescribed by the monetary models have not been sufficient to attain the convergence to the inflation target. He/she highlighted that, so far, given the continuous increase in expected inflation, the reference rate increases have been neutralized in the ex-ante real interest rate. He/she stated that, in his/her opinion, the dilemma is between maintaining the current pace of increase at 50 basis points or raising it to 75 basis points. He/she considered that the decision should seek a balance among three factors: high levels of inflation that are not receding, which is the primary factor, the imminent interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve, and the adverse cyclical conditions of the economy. He/she noted that, although Banco de México started the cycle a little earlier and from a less expansionary level than most central banks, if it does not accelerate the monetary tightening, it will be overtaken by most of them, since some countries have raised their rates at a triple-digit pace in their last meetings, and intend to maintain said pace. He/she argued that a pace of adjustment must be adopted in order to synchronize the domestic and global monetary cycles. The relative monetary policy stance must be adjusted cautiously in terms of margin of maneuver with regards to possible deviations from the cycle of rate increases by the Federal Reserve, in order to address, in a nonmechanical way, the short- and medium-term inflationary effects and the equilibrium of the abovementioned factors. He/she added that, although the cyclical position of the economy seems to provide some room to maneuver, core inflation remains on a strong upward trend. He/she stressed that the main challenge is to control core inflation, which is above 6%, remains on an inertial upward trajectory, and is persistent. He/she underlined that actions must be taken to maintain long-term expectations anchored and Banco de México’s credibility about its commitment to its primary objective of price stability. He/she considered that lessons from recent experience are that the monetary astringency necessary to anchor expectations and ensure compliance with the price stability mandate should not be underestimated, and that achieving that objective is the best social contribution to the country, since neglecting it would imply regressive effects on the most vulnerable population. dilemma in the face of historically and persistently high levels of inflation, especially in its core component, in a complex international environment and with an economy that contracted during the third and fourth quarters of 2021. He/she noted that the appropriate pace at which to reduce monetary stimulus must be assessed to ensure an orderly convergence to the target. He/she underlined four factors to act decisively. First, recent analyses suggest that the presence of a possible inflationary inertia may lead to an unanchoring of expectations. He/she indicated that this could occur if inflation is systematically above forecasts and these tend to be revised upwards, as has occurred previously. Second, monetary policy actions have not achieved the desired effect on the real interest rate. He/she argued that underestimating future inflation systematically leads to lower real interest rates than those consistent with the disinflationary process, which implies maintaining higher real rates in the future and for a longer period of time. Third, a balance of risks to inflation that is clearly biased to the upside. Fourth, the risks to global financial stability that have increased with the confirmation of the tightening cycle in the United States. He/she added that the increase in slack conditions does not justify a moderation in the monetary policy stance because the limited impulse that could be achieved would not offset the cost of expectations becoming unanchored, which would imply a more aggressive adjustment in the future, with higher costs for the population. He/she warned that the deterioration of the inflationary outlook has increased the risk of delaying the convergence of inflation to the target, thus affecting price dynamics. He/she expressed that an increase of 50 basis points to the reference rate would contribute to maintain consistency between the communication regarding the primary objective and the actions to achieve it. He/she pointed out that these actions are intended to strengthen the expectations channel and limit demand pressures. He/she added that this measure places the central bank in a better position to face more astringent global financial conditions. He/she considered it fundamental for the monetary policy statement to mention that the balance of risks for inflation has continued to deteriorate, and that it restates the central bank’s commitment to price stability. Finally, he/she recalled that the greatest contribution that the central bank can make to foster sustained growth and increase the population’s welfare is to guarantee compliance with its constitutional mandate. He/she highlighted that, with these actions, it is possible to lay the foundations of stability and confidence necessary to promote investment and a better allocation of resources in the economy. One member noted that Banco de México has faced an unprecedented environment, in which atypical, deep and widespread shocks derived from the pandemic have posed significant challenges for the fulfillment of its mandate to safeguard the stability of the currency's purchasing power. He/she stated that the main challenge is that world inflation has reached levels unseen in decades. He/she argued that, given the social and economic costs derived from high inflation, which affect the lower-income population to a greater extent, monetary policy must continue focusing on consolidating an environment of low and stable inflation. He/she stated that allowing inflation to remain at high levels, considering that inflation expectations might continue to be affected, could erode monetary policy’s credibility, posing an obstacle for the convergence of inflation to the target, and affecting domestic financial markets and economic activity. He/she considered that in the current scenario, the central bank's commitment to fulfilling its mandate should be strengthened. He/she mentioned that the monetary policy response must be consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target in the forecast horizon and should seek to keep inflation expectations anchored. He/she considered that Banco de México’s communication should provide certainty that the necessary actions will be taken so that the price formation process is not contaminated. He/she argued that the above, in addition to having a favorable impact on the convergence of inflation to its target, will contribute to induce orderly conditions in the foreign exchange and fixed income markets, in an environment where the international monetary cycle might generate volatility. He/she added that the outlook for monetary policy has become more complex, given the outlook for a faster withdrawal of monetary stimulus around the world, particularly in the United States. He/she pointed out that the upcoming decisions should consider, as the Governing Board has been doing, the evolution of all inflation determinants, including inflation expectations, especially longer-term ones, cost-related pressures, slack conditions, the evolution of financial markets, and international monetary policy. He/she expressed that the evolution of the shocks that have exerted pressures on inflation must be considered, evaluating whether they are starting to mitigate as economic conditions normalize and, at the same time, monitoring the risk of new shocks arising or the effects of those already observed becoming amplified. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and price formation becoming contaminated, as well as the additional challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and financial conditions. Based on these considerations, on this occasion, the Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.00%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates and an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.00%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 5.75%. The anticipated beginning of the Federal Reserve’s restrictive cycle will have significant implications for international financial markets. Banco de México must remain vigilant and be prepared to take the necessary actions to guarantee the country’s financial stability. From June to date, the target rate in Mexico has increased by 150 basis points, in the same magnitude as the interest rate spread relative to the United States. This implies that we have already taken steps forward in addressing this issue. For this reason, I believe that a 25-basis point increase should be enough to face the uncertainty before the referred cycle begins. It must also be recalled that headline inflation reached an all-time high during the second fortnight of November, and that it has already started to decrease. Moreover, although core inflation has continued to increase, it is foreseen to reach its highest level during the first quarter of 2022, and from that point, to also start decreasing. I reiterate that I do not consider it appropriate to get too far ahead of the Fed's interest rate normalization process because that could take us too soon to a very restrictive monetary policy stance, which could have detrimental economic and financial effects.