Most members stated that, during the first quarter of the year, global economic activity grew at a lower-than-anticipated rate. They considered that the lower dynamism was mainly caused by disruptions in supply chains, partly as a result of recent mobility restrictions in China, and by the economic repercussions resulting from the Ukraine. One member added the lower economic stimuli compared to the previous year. He/she stated that the degree of heterogeneity in the recovery between advanced and emerging economies has increased. He/she indicated that the United States, despite undergoing a slowdown, shows a strong domestic demand, with a favorable performance in industrial production. He/she noted that some indicators related to supply chains, such as lead times and backorders, have shown some improvement at the margin, although there is still limited certainty about a definite solution to bottlenecks. In this context, most members pointed out that the outlook for global economic growth has recently been revised downwards. One member indicated that a significant moderation in economic activity is expected in the euro area, the United Kingdom, China, and the United States, as well as greater negative effects in emerging economies and in commodity-importing economies. Some members considered that the main global risks are those associated with the pandemic, longer-lasting inflationary pressures, worsening geopolitical tensions, and a further tightening of monetary and financial conditions. One member warned that the high levels of public and private debt reduce the global economy's room for maneuver against new shocks. Another member stated that the balance of risks for global economic growth is biased to the downside and subject to unusually high uncertainty. All members highlighted the impact of the geopolitical conflict on world inflation. Most members noted that the latter continued being pressured by bottlenecks in production, the recovery of demand, and the high levels of food and energy prices. They noted that, in some cases, inflation reached its highest level in decades. One member pointed out that the conflict has involved disruptions in global trade that have reduced the supply of various commodities, with several countries implementing export restrictions on certain food products. Another member stated that its effect on commodity prices is detrimental to households' incomes, undermines investors' confidence, and increases uncertainty in general. He/she noted that the pressures derived from the conflict have mainly affected price dynamics in the euro area, while in the United States there has been additional pressure from the services and housing sectors. Meanwhile, one member noted that various indicators reflect that the supply constraints attributable to the pandemic have started to ease. Among these, he/she mentioned the New York Federal Reserve's Global Supply Chain Pressure Index and the recent stability in sea freight rates. Some members highlighted that, in the United States, inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditure deflator, increased to 6.6% in March. One member pointed out that most price sub-indices registered inflation close to 4%. Meanwhile, another member highlighted the pressures associated with energy and food components. Most members stated that in most economies, upwards for 2022 and 2023, and that these are above the target of their respective central banks. One member emphasized that this may represent an obstacle to the convergence of inflation to their respective targets. Another member noted that futures’ curves suggest that commodity prices will remain on an upward trend. He/she pointed out the deterioration of short- and medium-term inflation expectations in a context of a solid recovery in labor markets. Most members stated that a large number of central banks continued raising their reference rates. All members mentioned that in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points and anticipated future adjustments. Most members pointed out that, starting in June, said central bank will begin reducing its balance sheet. One member stated that, if the pace of adjustments anticipated by markets materializes, in 2023 the United States would have a rate above the level estimated as neutral. Another member indicated that given expectations of a further monetary tightening, shortterm interest rates in the United States increased, with a flattening of the yield curve. Regarding emerging economies, one member mentioned that, although they have started to reduce the stimulus, the pace of normalization has been heterogeneous due to differences in economic recovery and inflation dynamics. He/she noted that Chile and Brazil, which have undergone a stronger economic recovery, have had to rapidly implement tighter monetary policy stances than their peers, while Mexico has made more moderate adjustments because it provided less monetary stimulus during the pandemic. Another member noted that, given the elevated inflation levels and the risk of expectations becoming unanchored, emerging economies central banks’ decision to accelerate monetary tightening reflects their priority to control inflation. Looking ahead, most members highlighted expectations of a faster withdrawal of Most members noted that global financial conditions tightened further, with an increase in interest rates, a stronger US dollar and declines in stock market indexes, in a context of higher volatility and risk aversion. One member pointed out that this was partly the result of a faster normalization of the monetary policy stance in the United States. He/she added that the latter, together with the uncertainty associated with the military conflict, was reflected in an increase in practically all nodes of the US yield curve and in a correction of more than 11% in its main stock market index. Another member stated that the dollar appreciated reaching levels unseen since 2003, which contrasts with the historical depreciation of counterparty currencies, and was accompanied by an increase in implied volatility of currency options. As for financial markets of emerging economies, he/she mentioned that there were capital outflows in fixed-income markets and inflows in equity markets. One member stated that default risk premia have increased moderately in these economies, as a result of higher funding costs worldwide and lower risk appetite. He/she indicated that looking ahead, emerging markets will continue to be affected by the outlook for their inflation and economic growth, as well as by advanced economies’ monetary policy. Another member pointed out that the outlook of a faster tightening by the Federal Reserve implies risks for global financial markets, which could affect to a greater extent those economies with insufficiently sound macroeconomic fundamentals. One member stated that episodes of volatility in US Treasury and mortgage-backed securities’ markets cannot be ruled out, with possible contagion effects on the rest of the financial system. Another member mentioned that, looking ahead, due to the potential risks that this unprecedented adjustment may imply, close attention must be given to the possible impact on the price formation process and on the stability of the financial system. information suggests that economic activity rebounded in the first quarter of 2022, driven by both secondary and tertiary activities. Some members mentioned that said reactivation took place in a complex environment, where factors such as the rise in infections caused by the Omicron variant, the persistence of some disruptions in global supply chains, and the military conflict between Russia and Ukraine, stood out. One member pointed out that economic activity grew 0.9% during the first quarter, after having registered variations of -0.7 and 0.0% in the two previous quarters. Another member noted that Mexico's economic recovery is still incomplete. On the supply side, most members noted that manufacturing sector. One member added that mining also contributed to the recovery, while construction has shown little dynamism. Some members pointed out that the automotive sector still remains somewhat affected. However, one member mentioned that the technical shutdowns of some car makers are becoming fewer and more plant-specific, which has allowed light vehicle production to perform better than last year. Most members noted that there was a reactivation in the services sector albeit with heterogeneity. One member pointed out that this sector has recovered as a result of the reopening of activities and the increase in mobility. However, he/she stated that there are still opportunities for growth in some services such as lodging, food preparation and leisure. Another member recalled that the primary sector fell at the margin. On the demand side, most members highlighted that consumption has shown a significant recovery, exceeding its pre-pandemic levels in February. Some members noted that there is still a differentiated recovery among consumption components. One member underlined that consumption of goods is at relatively high levels, while consumption of services still needs to close the gap that was opened due to the health emergency. Another member said that a recovery has been observed, particularly in consumer non-durable goods. Most members noted that various indicators of the determinants of consumption remain at high levels. However, one member highlighted that these have decelerated at the margin, and thus that it will be important to continue monitoring their evolution. Meanwhile, most members underlined that investment continues showing a lack of dynamism, mainly due to the construction sector’s poor performance. One member highlighted that the deterioration of investment precedes the beginning of the adjustment in the reference rate. Another member pointed out that, although gross fixed investment rebounded in January, it declined again in February. One member pointed out that investment in machinery and equipment has registered significant growth in recent months. Regarding the foreign sector, most members noted the good performance of exports. Some members highlighted the dynamism of non-automotive manufacturing exports. One member pointed out that their growth is due to an increase in both the price and volume of exports. Another member highlighted the ongoing recovery of automotive exports. Regarding the labor market, most members highlighted the progress observed in several indicators, although negative effects persist. They stated that both unemployment and downward trend during March. One member added that national and urban unemployment rates decreased to 3.5 and 4.4%, respectively, nearing their pre-pandemic levels. He/she pointed out that the above was observed in a context in which the labor participation rate decreased slightly during the first quarter of the year and the employment rate among the working age population registered levels similar to those observed at the end of 2021. Another member mentioned that IMSS-insured jobs continued increasing and that job posting rates remain on a positive trend. He/she stated that the favorable performance of employment indicators has contributed to slightly reduce labor market slack, although total employment still remains significantly below its pre-pandemic trajectory. One member mentioned that nominal wage revisions for IMSSinsured workers reached a double-digit annual increase, the highest in more than two decades. He/she added that wage revisions in the private sector reached a historical rate of 8.2%. Meanwhile, participation rate, in particular, continues showing a lag with respect to that observed prior to the pandemic. conditions remain, although they narrowed in relation to the previous quarter. Some members mentioned that economic slack continues showing differences among sectors. One member indicated that while in other emerging economies GDP is already above its pre-pandemic level, in Mexico it is still below that level and significantly below the level it would have reached had it continued on its prepandemic trajectory. He/she noted that this means there is still room for further economic growth in is complicated to measure the level of economic slack in the current environment. Most members highlighted that the environment remains uncertain. One member stated that the global economic slowdown this year, particularly in the United States, would be the greatest risk for an economic contraction in Mexico. Another member mentioned that, although the pandemic has diminished notably in the country, the risks to growth have increased due to the uncertainty caused by the conflict in Eastern Europe and its effects on the global economy. He/she considered that the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside. In this context, one member pointed out that the growth outlook for 2022 and 2023 has deteriorated due to forecasts of lower domestic oil production, as well as a weaker performance of industrial activity in the United States. Most members indicated that in April headline and core inflation registered annual rates of 7.68 and 7.22%, respectively. They noted that this has been their highest level since January 2001. Some members pointed out that this was the result of the behavior of the core component, while they added that it was partially offset by a reduction in the non-core one. Most members stated that the pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict have been added to the shocks that have emergency. Some members pointed out that the conflict has pushed commodity prices further upwards. Some members highlighted that the adverse effects have been more evident on livestock products and on food merchandise. One member underlined the large weight of said products in the consumer basket. Another member forewarned that the disruptions in supply chains have extended the imbalances between supply and demand. One member stated that shocks on inflation are part of a global phenomenon and that incipient signals of mitigation in global and local supply restrictions have already started to be observed. Most members mentioned that inflationary pressures have been generalized and persistent. Some members pointed out that 43% of the CPI items registered annualized seasonally-adjusted monthly increases above 10%. One member added that 82% of cities registered an annual inflation of between 7 and 10%. Some members mentioned that the behavior of core inflation mainly responded to the increase in food and non-food merchandise prices. One member noted that core inflation has been increasing for over a year. Another member added that its annualized monthly rate has followed an upward trend, shifting from 3% in January 2021 to 8.56% in April 2022. He/she underlined that said increase indicates that domestic consumption recovery has been added to external inflationary pressures. One member pointed out that merchandise inflation has reflected disruptions in production and distribution chains, as well as the increase in international energy and food prices. He/she added that annual inflation of food and non-food merchandise registered high levels in April. increased as a result of greater mobility and the recovery of demand for services. One member mentioned the higher operating costs of businesses and higher energy and food prices, and pointed out their impact on transportation and food service prices. Some members mentioned that, despite its decline in April, non-core inflation remains at high levels. Some members noted that its reduction has been favored by the fossil fuels price policies. One member stated that the favorable performance of the non-core component is attributed to the lower inflation of agricultural and livestock products, which was partially offset by a higher inflation of energy products. However, another member noted that inflation of agricultural and livestock products remains at high levels, as a result of the additional price increases of inputs such as fertilizers and grains. All members stated that inflation expectations for 2022 and 2023 have increased considerably. One member added that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2022 are at 6.75%, having registered a added that said expectations have been revised more rapidly than during other inflationary episodes. Some members underlined that expectations for the end of 2023 are above the upper limit of the variability interval. Some members pointed out that inflation expectations for the next 12 months are at levels close to 5%. One member forewarned that they had not reached those levels since 2009. Another member highlighted that they have increased by 64 basis points since February. expectations have increased. They noted that marginally, to a level of 3.55%. They underlined that they had not reached said level since they began to be measured. One member stated that this represents a warning of the risk of them becoming unanchored. Another member argued that long-term expectations have remained stable, although at levels above the target. Some members noted that expectations measured by compensation for inflation and inflationary risk of 10-year bonds remain at high levels. One member added that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments have increased and that the inflation risk premium registered its highest level in April, although it remains at levels similar to those observed during other stress periods. Another member pointed out that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments for the 6- to 10-year average remain at Most members stated that, in view of greater- forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards up to the second and the third convergence to the 3% target during the first quarter of 2024 is maintained. One member highlighted that the upward revision took place even after incorporating the impact of the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices. Another member noted that, considering the recent dynamics of core inflation, it can be inferred that it is about to reach its peak and that it could soon begin a downward trend. One member underlined that, so far, there have been eleven consecutive monetary policy decisions in which the central bank has revised the inflation forecast upwards, either for a particular time frame or for the entire forecast horizon. He/she highlighted that this is not exclusive to the central bank’s projections. He/she pointed out that monetary authorities in other countries and market analysts have also adjusted their forecasts to the upside, which reflects the high degree of uncertainty that has prevailed. Another member stated that the convergence of inflation to its target faces significant risks. Among upward risks to inflation, all members mentioned the greater pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices and energy prices, due to the geopolitical conflict. Most members mentioned the persistence of core inflation at high levels and external inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic. Some members added the cost-related pressures associated with wage revisions, which could be passed through to consumer prices. One member added an exchange rate depreciation, due to possible bouts of volatility in international financial markets. He/she mentioned that, although the military conflict has already started to exert pressure on inflation, the scope, duration and magnitude of possible shocks derived from it are still unknown. He/she also indicated that there is no certainty as to the time required to regularize supply chains. Another member pointed out the possible continuation of droughts, which would affect agricultural products’ prices. He/she considered that the pressures caused by the conflict in Ukraine could potentially affect the formation of inflation expectations due to their greater effect on households and families. One member stated that, although the shock to commodity prices associated with the military conflict poses a significant risk, historically it tends to be solved through higher supply when global markets operate adequately. inflationary pressures. He/she stated that uncertainty in measuring economic slack makes it difficult to anticipate possible price pressures in certain sectors that are recovering. One member pointed out that a high and persistent inflation could contaminate the price formation process. He/she added that different indicators, such as the upward revision in analysts and markets’ expectations, and minimum wage revisions that exceed labor productivity growth, suggest that this is already happening. He/she added that the fact that inflation has not stopped accelerating and is affecting an increasing number of goods and services is a cause for concern. Regarding downside risks to inflation, some members mentioned a better functioning of supply chains, as a result of the control of the pandemic. One member added: i) a decline in the intensity of the military conflict; ii) that, given the slack conditions in the economy, cost-related pressures and hiring conditions do not exert pressure on prices; and iii) a higher-than-expected effect of the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices. Some members considered that said program will have moderate effects on inflation. One member stated that the different measures included in the program go in the right direction as they seek to improve conditions on the supply side, and that they have the potential to affect the price formation process and inflation expectations. He/she estimated that the program could contribute to reduce inflationary pressures at the margin. On the other hand, he/she argued that a number of factors point to a moderation of world inflation in 2022, such as less expansionary policy stances by most governments and central banks worldwide, as well as signs of a mitigation of pressures on supply chains. Most members stated that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside and has continued deteriorating. One member pointed out that this is due to the possibility that the effects of the geopolitical conflict are greater or longer-lasting than previously estimated. Some members highlighted an environment of greater uncertainty for inflation. Regarding domestic financial markets, most members highlighted that the exchange rate remained relatively stable. They underlined the performance of the Mexican peso despite the conditions. They emphasized that the Mexican peso remains the second currency with the highest volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States. Some members considered that the favorable performance of the currency is attributed to the sound macroeconomic fundamentals, such as fiscal discipline and a prudent monetary policy. One member added that it is also due to the moderate deficit in the current account. He/she stated that, from a medium-term perspective, the performance and the relative low volatility of the Mexican peso sets it apart from other emerging economy currencies. Another member pointed out that, in this favorable context, analysts kept their exchange rate outlook practically unchanged. Most members mentioned that interest rates increased in line with global trends. Some members noted that practically all nodes of the yield curve increased, with up to 100 basis points increments in the longer-term ones. Meanwhile, one member stated that the real yield curve also registered generalized increases, albeit of a lower magnitude, given the greater demand for instruments that offer protection against inflation. He/she mentioned that there was an outflow of M-Bonos held by foreign investors and an inflow of resources channeled to Udibonos seeking to mitigate the risk of higher inflation. Some members pointed out that the stock market fell by 11%. One member mentioned that default premia increased by over 40 basis points. Regarding the evolution of credit, another member stated that commercial banks’ financing to businesses continued performing poorly. He/she mentioned that, while businesses’ demand for credit has started to reactivate, lending standards have somewhat deteriorated, as a reflection of supplyrelated constraints. Some members warned that the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy stance represents a significant challenge as well for the stability of the financial system. One member indicated that, if the risk of the Federal Reserve undergoing a faster tightening cycle materializes, the Mexican peso will follow a more depreciated trajectory. Another member warned that Mexico, like other economies facing high risks and with a high degree of financial and commercial integration to the external sector, must maintain a solid macroeconomic policy stance at all times. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk and price formation becoming contaminated. Most members also considered the increasing challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, and greater inflationary pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict, the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in China, and the possibility of inflation being affected by additional pressures. Based on these considerations, the majority voted for raising the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 7.00%. The Board highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Governing Board stated that for the next monetary policy decisions, it will monitor inflationary pressures thoroughly as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Most members added that, given the growing complexity in the environment for inflation and its expectations, taking more forceful measures to attain the inflation target One member pointed out that the strengthening of monetary policy contributes to: i) preventing secondround effects given the new supply-related shocks; ii) maintaining financial stability, considering the increase in the Federal Reserve’s federal funds rate; and iii) helping the interest rate move closer to a level considered as neutral. He/she warned that inflation is high and thus it is critical to make adequate decisions to lower it. He/she also stated that said actions should be taken efficiently, with the least possible costs for society. He/she listed the factors that should be considered when defining an adequate trajectory for the interest rate under the current upward cycle. He/she pointed out that, above all, inflation is a global phenomenon, and that for this reason inflation in Mexico will decrease insofar as world inflation also declines. He/she noted that the second factor is that there was little monetary stimulus granted in 2020 and it began to be withdrawn in advance in 2021, and, therefore, unlike other countries, Mexico does not have a problem of excess demand. He/she mentioned that the recovery could continue without generating further inflationary pressures, while the monetary policy stance transitions to a neutral level. He/she underlined that, at the beginning of 2022, the ex-ante real interest rate was among the highest in the world, which has already started to affect credit, durable goods consumption, and investment. He/she considered that the room to raise the policy rate without affecting economic activity is rather limited. Therefore, he/she stated that it is important to continue the cycle of increases prudently and avoiding an excessive tightening. He/she mentioned that a third factor is that excessive monetary tightening entails higher financial costs for the economy as a whole. He/she warned that an increase in default risk premia is already being observed in emerging economies, which would indicate the limits of a restrictive monetary policy in consolidating macroeconomic stability. Finally, he/she considered it not advisable to raise the reference rate at a faster pace than the Federal Reserve. He/she highlighted that the volatilityadjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States is among the highest in emerging economies. He/she pointed out that both economies are subject to the same global shocks and that Mexico has already made progress in normalizing its monetary policy stance. In addition, Mexico did not adopt an expansionary fiscal policy stance during the pandemic. For all of the above, he/she stated that it is unnecessary and even imprudent to adopt a pace of rate increases above that of the Federal Reserve. He/she mentioned that, looking ahead, conditions might emerge to even start reducing such spread, given the solid macroeconomic fundamentals, the favorable evolution of the Mexican peso, and the relative monetary policy stance. Another member highlighted that headline inflation is still at high levels and considered highly worrisome that core inflation, the component that most reacts to monetary policy actions, continues trending upwards. He/she warned about: i) the Federal Reserve's more restrictive monetary policy tightening affecting price formation and financial system stability; ii) uncertainty regarding the continuation of the geopolitical conflict; and iii) mobility restrictions in China and their impact on global supply chains. He/she warned that although the reference rate has increased by 250 basis points since the beginning of the current cycle, the real ex-ante rate has increased in a smaller proportion, and currently stands around the lower limit of the neutral range. He/she highlighted that, in past monetary cycles with nominal interest rate levels similar to the current ones, the exante real interest rate increased in a similar magnitude as the nominal interest rate and stood slightly above the neutral interest rate. However, he/she mentioned that, in the current cycle, the reference rate increases have only been able to compensate for the upward adjustment in inflation expectations and have been less effective in making the ex-ante real interest rate increase to at least its neutral level. He/she underlined that even considering the unprecedented context, in which the duration and magnitude of the shocks are different from other inflationary episodes, it is imperative to act decisively to ensure that inflation returns to its target within the forecast horizon. He/she emphasized the importance of monetary policy operating with predictability in order to influence an orderly formation of expectations, and therefore the central bank’s communication should clearly convey that it will consider taking more forceful measures in the next monetary policy decisions, and that it might be necessary for the ex-ante real interest rate to reach a level higher than the neutral rate. He/she also pointed out that it is essential to consolidate a robust approach that provides absolute certainty about the central bank’s commitment to its constitutional mandate, which mitigates the risk of possible second-round effects on prices, while also ensures the anchoring of inflation expectations to avoid longer-term expectations from becoming contaminated. One member mentioned that despite accumulating an increase of 250 basis points in the reference rate, the real ex-ante short-term rate stands at 1.7%, slightly below the lower threshold of the estimated range for the neutral rate. He/she noted that if inflation expectations for the next 12 months stand at estimated to be 3.4% in real terms, the reference rate would need to be above 8% and possibly at levels above 9%. The challenge is to establish an ideal trajectory, in terms of timing and pace of adjustment, to be able to attain such level. He/she stated that, since the adoption of the interbank interest rate as an operational target in 2008, only in 9 out of 25 occasions, the target rate has been raised by 50 basis points, and never by 75 basis points, although there has never been such a complex outlook for inflation as the current one. He/she pointed out that raising the rate by 75 basis points would send a stronger message of commitment to the central bank’s primary objective. This measure would further dissipate any doubts regarding central bank autonomy, and would restate the institution’s moral obligation with the most vulnerable population. Moreover, this would imply reaching the neutral zone more rapidly, would help to offset the deterioration of medium-term expectations, would have a greater effect on anchoring long-term expectations, and would provide a stronger relative monetary policy stance to face increases in risk aversion. However, he/she noted that it would surprise both markets and analysts, making it difficult to forecast the reference rate’s trajectory and distorting the interpretation of the reaction function. He/she added that such an increase would suggest lower sensibility regarding cyclical conditions in the economy. It could also mark a new pace of adjustment, difficult to reduce in the context of high inflation, a very restrictive cycle by the Federal Reserve, and cycle of monetary adjustments in Mexico that will last for quite some time. A faster pace of adjustment might result in an excessively high terminal rate for the sound development of the economy and financial markets. Meanwhile, he/she noted that a 50 basis-point increase is discounted by markets and analysts, sends a message of commitment to the primary mandate, and is consistent with the narrative of gradual adjustments. It also allows time to communicate the possibility of increases in the pace of monetary tightening. He/she added that, with this decision, the nominal rate curve would maintain its current structure, confirming markets’ expectations, while a 75 basis-point increase would lead to a flattening of the yield curve. He/she mentioned that the current spread of 600 basis points has so far favored the exchange rate. However, he/she considered that an increase of 50 basis points could be perceived as an insufficient increase in the ex-ante real interest rate in the short term, given the lagged effect with which monetary policy operates and the difficult inflationary context currently faced. Furthermore, it does not provide the relative monetary policy stance with additional space to face a disruption in financial markets. This decision also does not hasten the transition of the absolute policy stance to a more restrictive range, given the deterioration of inflation expectations. He/she pointed out that the current decision should be communicated with a more restrictive tone, categorically signaling the willingness to act more forcefully in the future if forecasts of convergence to the target do not materialize. Another member stated that since the previous monetary policy decision, inflation has continued accelerating. He/she pointed out that in addition to further surprises and shocks, monetary policy adjustments have been insufficient to counter the deterioration of price formation and have had a limited impact on the real interest rate, which remains below the required level. He/she considered that monetary policy has fallen "behind the curve" and that, in the current situation, a 50 basis-point increase is insufficient to guarantee the convergence of inflation within the forecast horizon. Also, the key role of monetary policy is to act decisively and in a timely manner to curb inflationary inertia and avoid more severe rate increases in the future, and for this reason he/she pointed out that it is time to raise the rate of adjustment of monetary policy by 75 basis points. He/she stated that this action is consistent with the commitment to make the necessary adjustments to comply with the central bank’s primary mandate. He/she added that given the high uncertainty surrounding the ongoing various shocks, the most prudent course of action is to act sooner rather than later. He/she highlighted that the expectation that markets have internalized about the current and subsequent monetary policy decisions should be assessed. He/she stated that although most analysts expect an increase of 50 basis points, three analysts consider the possibility of 75 basis points, and expectations derived from market instruments indicate a higher implicit rate by the end of the year. He/she mentioned that a surprise on the side of prudence -with a larger increase- is not necessarily bad news, but shows a central bank whose priority is to control inflation. He/she mentioned that the decision should strengthen both the exchange rate and the expectations channels. He/she recalled that the latter is one of the most important and that complacency in the face of the observed adjustments warns about the possibility of them starting to become unanchored, which would imply high costs for society. He/she indicated that a more rapid monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve could affect the exchange rate and impose challenges for monetary policy. Therefore, he/she added that it is also essential to maintain conditions for a resilient exchange rate. He/she argued that this decision should validate the Governing Board’s commitment to taking appropriate decisions and should clearly communicate the deterioration of the economic conditions. One member stated that monetary policy in Mexico faces a significantly complex environment. He/she mentioned that given the social and economic costs generated by inflation, which affect to a greater extent the lower-income population, it is essential for monetary policy to foster an environment of low and stable inflation. He/she highlighted that the high levels of inflation, the persistence of the effects of the shocks derived from the pandemic, and the difficulties arising from the military conflict in Ukraine, imply an environment that poses a high risk of contamination of the price formation process. He/she recalled that inflation expectations continue increasing, and although the output gap is estimated to be wide, the labor market has continued recovering and various cost-related pressures are observed. He/she added that the outlook for international monetary and financial conditions faces circumstances unseen in decades, which could have a significant impact on domestic financial markets, including the foreign exchange market. He/she argued that it is thus essential to continue adjusting the monetary policy stance in Mexico, in order for inflation expectations to remain anchored and, therefore, the price formation process to be consistent with the primary objective. He/she added that the central bank needs to consider more decisive actions, because, if it does not take the necessary measures, longer-term inflation expectations could be affected by both the high levels of inflation and the duration of the shocks that have affected them, as well as by the continuous revisions to the forecasts. He/she warned that an un-anchoring of expectations must be avoided by taking forceful actions. He/she stated that the willingness to make full use of the tools to make inflation converge to its target should be restated in the central bank’s communication. He/she considered it necessary to acknowledge the profound change in global economic and geopolitical conditions, and that an appropriate monetary policy stance could be significantly more astringent than in other circumstances. He/she pointed out that extraordinary conditions, such as those being faced, may require extraordinary actions. He/she argued that it is imperative to communicate the central bank's determination to attain convergence of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon, and the willingness to redouble efforts if necessary. All of the above will contribute to induce orderly conditions in the foreign exchange and fixed income markets in the prevailing environment of higher inflation at a global level. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and price formation becoming contaminated. It also considered the increasing challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, and greater inflationary pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict and with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in China, as well as the possibility of inflation being affected by additional pressures. Based on these considerations, the Board decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Governing Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Given the growing complexity in the environment for inflation and its expectations, taking more forceful measures to attain the inflation target may be considered. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Gerardo Esquivel, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 7.00%. Irene Espinosa voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 7.25%. Given the intensification of inflationary pressures, our forecasts for headline inflation have been revised upwards for the next five quarters, thus accumulating eleven consecutive decisions in which forecasts have been adjusted to the upside for either part or the entire forecast horizon. Long-term inflation expectations have also been adjusted marginally above 3.5% for the first time since they began to be estimated. The faster-than-expected increase in inflation has limited the effect of the monetary policy adjustments implemented in recent months on the real interest rate, which remains below the level required to attain convergence to the 3% target. In light of these results, an environment of greater uncertainty, highly adverse external conditions, and a balance of risks for inflation that has worsened and is biased upwards, it is essential to act decisively, forcefully, and in a timely manner. Increasing the pace of monetary tightening to 75 basis points is necessary to attain convergence to the target within the forecast horizon and to reinforce credibility in the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate of maintaining price stability.