information shows that world economic growth has increased moderately during the fourth depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the actions implemented by their public health, monetary and fiscal authorities. In particular, the new variant of the virus and the adoption of mobility restrictions, mainly in Europe, were highlighted. Some members pointed out that supply constraints continue to affect industrial production and noted that global employment has not been able to return to its pre-pandemic levels. One member stated that this is due to an incomplete recovery in demand. Some members indicated that the weakness in employment is also due to individuals’ labor supply decisions in light of health risks. One member stated that the pandemic led to the early exit of older generations from the labor force and a lower participation of women and young people. He/she added that there has been a change in relative wages, associated to the risks of contagion, and to wage-related pressures, which has worsened as a result of the recent inflation dynamics. Some members mentioned that forecasts for 2022 remained stable, although they continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty. One member highlighted that the evolution of the pandemic and its new variants continues being the greatest risk factor for the global economic recovery. Another member pointed out the effects that the pandemic has had on the global economy: i) the shutdown of various sectors of productive activity; ii) the adoption of substantial spending stimuli in advanced economies; iii) a reallocation of spending; and iv) profound effects on the labor market. He/she stated that this series of unprecedented shocks has led to considerable forecast errors for economic activity and inflation. He/she highlighted that in 2021 fiscal support and transfers to households increased considerably in the United States, generating an increase in the demand for consumer durables worldwide, thus exerting pressure on their prices and generating bottlenecks. He/she also highlighted the rigidity and lack of resilience in supply chains. All members mentioned that world inflation originated by bottlenecks in production, the reallocation of spending towards merchandise, the elevated food and energy prices, and the recovery of some services. In the case of emerging economies, most members pointed out the impact of exchange rate depreciation on price increases. One member stated that the increase in inflationary pressures has coincided with the decline in the number of infections and the subsequent increase in mobility and spending. Some stressed that producer prices have been subject to significant pressures. One member pointed out that consumer durables have also been subject to pressures, registering an annual change of 14.9% in November of the previous year, when it registered -0.6%. He/she stated that inflation has been heterogeneous in advanced economies, highlighting the case of the United States, where it has been associated with its greater spending support programs. He/she detailed that, in this country, the annual variation of the personal consumption expenditure price deflator in October and that of the consumer price index in November, registered their highest values in 31 and nevertheless, that the latest data related to the manufacturing sector's purchasing managers' index, such as outstanding orders, delivery times, and sea freight rates, have shown an improvement at the margin. Some members pointed out that inflation dynamics have affected inflation expectations in the main advanced economies. One member said that inflationary pressures could last longer than expected, given that headline and core inflation have been above their central banks' targets for several consecutive months. He/she stated that in the main advanced economies, expectations for the next 12 months have reached historic highs, although longterm expectations have remained stable. Another member stated that in the United States, short- and medium-term inflation expectations of businessmen, consumers, and those implicit in fixed-income markets have increased. One member mentioned that inflation in that country will remain high during continue in emerging economies as well. Another member pointed out that the forecasts of central banks and international organizations anticipate a significant decline in inflation during the second half of 2022. He/she pointed out that commodity prices decreased in the last month, particularly those of basic energy commodities. He/she stated that as the sanitary problem continues to be resolved and uncertainty lessens, supply restrictions and price pressures will begin to ease. One member considered that this environment poses considerable challenges for inflation in the face of: i) disruptions and lack of flexibility in the supply of multiple products; ii) the concentration of spending on consumption of goods; iii) transfers to households; and iv) the increase in financial savings that may sustain high spending patterns going forward. He/she added that this makes it more complex to anticipate the duration of pressures on global inflation. He/she expressed that the risks for price formation at a global level, and their possible influence on our country, are considerable and rising. He/she highlighted that Mexico has one of the largest gaps in headline and core inflation among emerging economies. All members stated that the Federal Reserve announced an acceleration of the removal of monetary stimulus, doubling the pace of reduction of its net asset purchases. One member mentioned that this purchase program is expected to end in March 2022. All members noted that FOMC's projections for the federal funds rate point to larger increases than previously incorporate up to three increases by 2022. Some members noted the Fed's change in discourse towards a more restrictive policy stance, as it no longer considers the increase in inflation to be a transitory phenomenon. One member added that the Fed pointed out that supply-related issues and the reopening of the economy have exerted pressure on prices. Another member mentioned that it is still expected that a negative real interest rate will be maintained until 2024. He/she noted that the Fed's gradual and clear communication has avoided abrupt fluctuations in financial markets, and that it has been careful not to withdraw its monetary stimulus prematurely. The majority agreed that at a global level central banks are expected to adopt progressively less accommodative policy stances. One member added that while most central banks maintain an accommodative stance, their narrative has started to become more restrictive. Another member mentioned that a large number of emerging economies have accelerated their interest rate raising cycles. One member detailed, however, that the vast majority continue providing significant stimulus despite headline inflation being above their targets. He/she highlighted the cases of Chile, Colombia, Peru, Hungary, and Poland. Another member reflected upon the fact that, while advanced economies, which for many years have had inflation and its expectations below their targets, have more room for maneuver, in emerging economies, particularly in Mexico, price formation can be more easily contaminated. He/she emphasized that emerging economies face two considerable challenges: i) the significant inflationary pressures to which they have been subject for months; and ii) the expectation of tighter global financial conditions in the near future. He/she pointed out that for economies that are already facing significant inflationary pressures, deferring their monetary policy response to synchronize it with that of the Federal Reserve would imply the risk of contaminating inflation expectations, eroding the credibility of monetary authorities, and would require greater adjustments in the future. He/she added that, on the contrary, inducing more restrictive monetary conditions in a timely manner would avoid a greater impact on price formation and would favor a more orderly adjustment in the economy as a whole, which would lead to better conditions to face episodes of volatility. He/she stated that this reflection applies to the case of the Mexican economy. financial markets exhibited greater volatility, associated with the new variant of the virus, the normalization of monetary policy by the main central banks, and the increase in world inflation. They highlighted the increase in interest rates of short-term government bonds, particularly in the United States, which contributed to a generalized appreciation of the US dollar. Some members highlighted the increase in risk aversion in equity markets. One member stated that stock markets in advanced economies fluctuated markedly, although he/she pointed out that in the United States, gains were reported given the Federal Reserve's decision. Some members mentioned that, in this context, financial markets of emerging economies exhibited a negative bias. One member noted that stock markets fell, interest rates increased, and currencies depreciated against the US dollar, although these last ones registered a favorable behavior after the Federal Reserve's announcement. Another member stated that capital flows channeled to fixed-income instruments registered outflows, while those destined to equity showed positive movements. The majority mentioned that looking ahead, global financial conditions are expected to tighten in light of the expected earlier withdrawal of monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve. One member stated that this will be a risk factor for capital flows in emerging economies. The majority mentioned that information up to October shows a recovery of economic activity, after the contraction observed during the third quarter. However, they noted that the recovery remains fragile, incomplete and heterogeneous across sectors. One member noted that activity will close the year below pre-pandemic levels. Another member noted that the pandemic remains the main risk to economic activity. He/she added that the new variant of the virus could represent a setback to the recovery. On the demand side, most members highlighted remained at high levels in October. However, they mentioned that disruptions in supply chains that month, said exports were 9.04% lower than in February 2020. Another member noted that after having driven the economic recovery, exports have lost momentum. The majority underlined that consumption showed a certain recovery in September, although some members pointed out that its recovery remains weak. Some members stated that consumption could continue recovering during the fourth quarter and one indicated that it would be supported by the increase in the wage bill and in remittances. The majority mentioned that dynamism as it registered a contraction in September. One member highlighted that the fall in investment, both in construction and in machinery and equipment, places it as one of the most lagging variables, which shows the need to foster conditions conducive to investing. Another member pointed out that it remains stagnant since March and 16% below its highest level reached in 2018. He/she stated that timely indicators suggest that its lack of dynamism will continue during the fourth quarter. On the supply side, some members mentioned that industrial production improved in October, mainly driven by manufacturing, particularly of transport equipment. One member highlighted that construction contracted once again in October. Looking ahead, another member pointed out that a rebound in industrial production is anticipated, especially in non-automotive manufacturing, driven by external demand. One member mentioned that the performance of services remains heterogeneous across subsectors. He/she indicated that, within business-support services, those related to employment fell sharply in September, as a reflection of the labor outsourcing reform. He/she mentioned that the services sector is expected to slightly rebound in October. The majority noted that the labor market affected relative to pre-pandemic levels. One member highlighted that in October the levels of labor participation and employment improved. Another member noted the recovery in formal employment, which has already exceeded the level observed in February 2020. He/she added that separations and hires caused by the new labor outsourcing reform appear to have compensated each other, thus maintaining employment at stable levels. One member pointed out that, although the level of alternative unemployment declined slightly in October, it remains above pre-pandemic levels. Another member pointed out that both national and urban unemployment rates are above pre-pandemic levels, and that the underemployment rate is above the labor market remains uneven in terms of gender. One member added that inequality is also observed by age groups. Most members noted that the recent increase in the minimum wage could exert pressures on labor costs. One member stated that the increase in the unit labor cost indicates an upward trend, as a result of an increase in mean real wages and a decline in productivity. All members agreed that slack conditions have persisted. Most members pointed out that significant differences are still observed across sectors. One member noted that output gap estimations indicate that slack conditions remained wide during the fourth quarter. Another member mentioned that the deviation of economic activity from the trend that would have been observed in the absence of the pandemic is of around 10%. One member considered that slack conditions remain sensitive to both direct and indirect factors associated with the pandemic, and, to a lesser extent, to monetary conditions. Some members highlighted the problems to measure slack conditions in the economy. One member underlined that underestimating the amount of slack could lead to equivocal decisions, as it could contribute to overestimate the magnitude of demand-related inflationary pressures and to underestimate the costs associated with a less accommodative policy stance. Another member warned that the negative output gap is probably being overestimated in view of a lower potential GDP, given that supercore inflation has continued following an upward trend despite the ample slack conditions. All members stated that global and domestic inflationary pressures continue affecting annual headline and core inflation. Most members mentioned that in November annual headline inflation reached its highest level since January 2001. They highlighted that the prices of more than half of the generic items that comprise the CPI are growing at rates above 5%. One member noted that the monthly inflation rate exhibited an increase unseen for the month of November since it once again exceeded the projections of both private sector economic analysts and Banco de México. He/she considered that the fact that the annual growth rates of multiple components are above the inflation target reflect not only problems associated with products affected by bottlenecks, but rather a generalized problem. One member pointed out that the inflation rates of all CPI components show clear upward trends, which suggests that the peak has not been reached. Some members underlined that different inflation indicators, such as the trimmed mean indicator and supercore inflation point to a steady upward trend. One member added that the trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation was in 2003. Most members stated that, due to the deep economic integration with the United States, the higher levels of inflation in that country have contributed to the rebound in inflation in Mexico. One member highlighted that in the United States the producer price index reached 9.6%, while in Mexico it registered an annual change of 9.9% in November. Another member underlined that, considering the high levels of inflation that will persist in the United States in 2022, there could be more imported inflation. Some members pointed out that headline inflation is currently influenced by an adverse base effect, as a result of an extension in the number of days that comprise the “Buen Fin” discount sales campaign during 2020. One member mentioned that, considering the aforementioned, in November last year, annualized monthly inflation was exceptionally low and close to zero, and core inflation registered deflation. He/she added that, even if in November this year monthly inflation would have been in line with its historic average, the annual rate would have exceeded 7% in either case, given that 67% of the increase in annual inflation between October and November is attributed to the base effect. He/she pointed out that the rest of the increase in inflation was due to additional pressures. However, these occurred in a context of higher mobility and spending, due to an improvement in the indicators of contagion, and thus there is no reason for the sudden increase in demand to repeat itself. All members mentioned that core inflation faced pressures in merchandise prices and a rebound in services prices. Some members highlighted that the core component accumulated 12 consecutive monthly increases in November. Some members noted that in said month annual core inflation was the highest in 20 years. One member pointed out that it has been above 4% since March, and that supercore inflation is increasingly close to surpassing it. Another member considered core inflation dynamics a cause of concern, as, after having shown a resistance to decline until 2019, it has been clearly following an upward trend, indicating that there has been a pass-through of second-round effects to the rest of the economy. One member pointed out that the increase of annual core inflation in October and November is largely explained by the base effect related to greater number of days comprising last year’s “Buen Fin” sales campaign. Most members mentioned that merchandise prices have reacted to the increase in international prices and to disruptions in productive processes. Some members mentioned that pressures have continued to intensify both on food and non-food merchandise. One member highlighted that the above occurred despite the “Buen Fin” sales. Another member pointed out that over 70% of merchandise components registered annual changes above 5%. He/she added that the increase in merchandise prices is higher than that registered in 2009, when the peso depreciation exceeded 35% at some point. Some members pointed out that the variation in services prices continues to rebound, reaching levels close to 4%, pressured by components different from education and housing. One member mentioned that, despite the recent increase in annual inflation, the biennial annualized inflation of services remains around 3%, which indicates that pressures on this component remain limited. Most members stated that pressures on non-core inflation increased. They highlighted the annual rates of change of agricultural and livestock product prices, and government-authorized prices are accumulating cost pressures that could cause an increase in inflation next year. Another member stated that non-core inflation has almost reached its highest level in twenty years. All members mentioned that headline and core inflation expectations for 2021, 2022 and for the next 12 months increased again, along with expectations have remained stable at levels above the target. Most members pointed out that expectations corresponding to the end of 2022 are already above the upper limit of the target range. One member mentioned that more than half of the private sector economic analysts interviewed believe that inflation will be above 4% in the next 12 months and in 2022, and that the probability that it will be above 5% has started to increase. Another member stated that the deterioration in short-term expectations is estimated to extend until 2023, given that monthly inflation expectations have consistently been below observed figures. However, one member mentioned that the National Survey on Consumer Confidence (ENCO, for its acronym in Spanish) shows a more favorable outlook for expectations for the next 12 months, given that these do not show a significant upward trend, have not reached their worst level since the beginning of the pandemic, and are far below the levels reached during the 2017 inflationary episode. Another member noted that analysts do not expect inflation to decrease as fast as estimated by the central bank and that there is a significant discrepancy regarding the rate of decrease of the core component. He/she pointed out that the increase in medium-term headline inflation expectations is worrying, as these are at 3.68% despite the fact that the ones corresponding to the following two years are at 3.5%. He/she noted that this indicates the presence of doubts regarding the convergence of inflation to its target in the medium term. One member stated that, if the deterioration in medium-term expectations is not addressed, these could contaminate long-term expectations. Some members highlighted that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments remain high. One member pointed out that they are above those drawn from surveys. Another member added that said expectations have continued following an upward trend, particularly those of 1- to 5-year expectations. One member mentioned that the average of 6- to 10- year expectations is at 3% and that they show a lower variability than short-term ones. Another member stated that inflationary risk premia decreased during last month. One member considered the high levels of the breakeven inflation rate implicit in medium- and long-term bonds as worrisome. Some members warned that de-anchoring of inflation expectations is one of the most important challenges faced by monetary policy. All members stated that the forecasts for headline and core inflation were once again revised upwards, especially those for 2022. The majority of members mentioned that it is expected that, in its annual measurement, they will decrease to a larger extent after one year and that they will converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon. Some members noted that the upward revisions reflect an exchange rate depreciation and additional inflationary pressures. One member mentioned that the systematic revisions to the inflation forecast show how difficult it has been to determine the duration of bottlenecks, how long high transportation and freight costs will be maintained, and the unusual variations in commodities. Some members pointed out that the pressures originate from the core component. One member added the effects registered in non-core inflation and a higher-than-expected increase in minimum wages. He/she stated that upward revisions to forecasts have been made for over six months and that the most recent one was of considerable magnitude. Another member noted that the core component shows a strong upward adjustment, especially for the first quarter of 2022, although it is expected to decline from the second quarter of that year. One member considered that supply chain disruptions and input shortages are likely to remain until mid-2022, and that their effects could be exacerbated by the new variant of the virus. He/she noted that it cannot be expected that an economic slowdown will contain the increase in prices. He/she added that the emergence of new shocks and a more adverse behavior of the non-core component could prevent the convergence to the target within the forecast horizon. Another member stated that providing the annualized seasonally adjusted quarterly inflation forecasts in each monetary policy decision will give the public greater elements for evaluating and monitoring the current inflationary environment, which will contribute to better price formation. Some members mentioned that the phenomenon of readjustment in relative prices and the arguments about the transitory nature of inflationary pressures no longer seem appropriate to explain the current situation, since the increase in inflation has been persistent and widespread. One member highlighted that headline inflation and its components show an upward trend under different methodologies. He/she added that this phenomenon has begun to contaminate inflation expectations and that the prolonged duration of price increases is not only a reflection of bottlenecks, but also of global demand pressures. Another member noted that the debate on the transitory nature of the pressures has been left behind given the accumulation of inflationary shocks that will last for a longer period of time and whose effects will outlast the pandemic. He/she said that the high breakeven inflation rate implicit in medium- and long-term bonds reflects the fact that investors perceive inflationary pressures to be more permanent. One member noted that a large part of the inflationary shocks has been associated with the pandemic and that these have coincided with other shocks whose origins precede the pandemic. He/she added that the slow fading and uncertain duration of these shocks could lead to a scenario where high inflation synchronizes with new shocks that prevent the convergence of inflation and de-anchor expectations. Another member mentioned that longterm expectations drawn from market instruments are close to 3%, which is consistent with the perception that pressures are transitory. He/she stated that, although the shocks have been prolonged, it is important to remember that their origin was due to the change in consumption patterns and supply restrictions that have generated an increase in the prices of goods at a global level; to the increase in international commodity prices; and to a reversion in the trend of prices of services and some goods, which means that their inflation levels will be high for some more months, without this implying a lack of control in the price formation process. He/she pointed out that the first two factors are affecting domestic prices despite the domestic slack conditions. He/she estimated that pressures will tend to fade insofar as the world economy continues evolving towards a more homogeneous recovery, with more control of the pandemic, which will favor the mitigation of the abovementioned supply restrictions. He/she noted that signals in this direction are already beginning to be observed, such as food and industrial inputs price stability and improvements in transportation indicators. Among upward risks to inflation, the majority of pressures. Some members mentioned cost-related pressures, an exchange rate depreciation and energy price increases. One member added the persistence of core inflation at high levels. Some members mentioned the effects of the recent increase in the minimum wage. One member stated that this could be observed as a result of the growing proportion of workers with a salary close to this new reference value. Another member stated that this wage policy, together with the deterioration of labor productivity, is an internal factor that could reinforce inflationary pressures and trigger a wage-price spiral, eroding workers' purchasing power. One member added as a risk the pressures that are still being observed in the prices of commodities, food, and in producer prices, in addition to the volatility of the exchange rate. He/she highlighted that those core inflation items that are more susceptible to the exchange rate and energy prices could continue registering larger increases. Among downward risks, another member pointed out: i) the widening of the negative output gap, ii) social distancing measures, and iii) exchange rate appreciation. The majority of members mentioned that the balance of risks with respect to the expected trajectory of inflation over the forecast horizon deteriorated Most members noted that domestic financial markets have recently registered volatility. Some members mentioned that this was due to both international and idiosyncratic factors. In this regard, succession process. He/she mentioned that risks to financial markets increased moderately. The majority of members noted that the peso depreciated. One member noted that this was a result of the Federal Reserve's less accommodative policy stance, the deterioration of the trade balance, and the greater local uncertainty. Another member explained that the national currency proved to be highly sensitive to fluctuations in global financial markets, especially in relation to other emerging market currencies. In this context, some members warned about the negative variation in the holdings of foreign investors in peso-denominated assets. One member added that, recently, long-term bond holdings, which had been relatively stable, have also been affected, despite the fact that Mexico keeps a better relative position as compared to other emerging market economies. Another member stated that foreign holdings of government securities as a percentage of the total amount outstanding reached their lowest level in a decade. He/she mentioned that capital flows are more sensitive to interest rate spreads. Some members mentioned that medium- and long-term interest rates registered upward adjustments, influenced by external conditions. They noted that the Mexican stock market performed negatively. One member mentioned that sovereign risk indicators increased and another member noted that there is an increase in risk aversion by the private sector, which is showing a preference for highly liquid assets over term instruments. He/she mentioned that net corporate debt placements in the domestic and foreign markets exhibited low dynamism, reflecting a cautious behavior. One member mentioned that credit to firms and households remains deteriorated, and that financing to Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) is still more than 12% below pre-pandemic levels. Another member noted that the contraction in domestic credit is due to factors that are beyond the reach of monetary policy, such as business agents’ reluctance to invest. One member noted that the corporate credit portfolio increased slightly in October, which contributed to mitigate its annual contraction. He/she added that monetary aggregates continue registering a slowdown compared to last year, although they remain at high levels. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along contaminated, and the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of monetary and financial considerations, on this occasion, the majority of the Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%. The Board highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its target. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will monitor pressures as well as of all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to determine a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and One member stated that in the absence of other factors contributing to dissipate pressures on financial markets and the exchange rate, a moderate tightening of the monetary policy stance is necessary. However, he/she warned that this should be done with caution, given that an overly restrictive policy stance could affect economic growth and, eventually, capital flows and the exchange rate, thereby going against the original objective of the aforementioned policy. He/she noted that several emerging market economies were able to provide greater monetary stimuli in 2020 and 2021 than Mexico despite having less strong macroeconomic fundamentals. He/she argued that, if a more gradual tightening policy had been chosen during 2021, or more stimulus measures provided during 2020, there would be more room today to pursue financial stability and maintain an accommodative policy, as other emerging economies have done. He/she mentioned that continuous interest rate increases in necessary to sacrifice this stance to achieve such stability. He/she added that moving too far ahead of the Fed's rate normalization process puts the economy at risk of falling into a trap of low growth and financial instability. He/she highlighted the importance of analyzing and communicating the nature of the current inflationary phenomenon, related to exogenous and global factors, which will begin to fade in the following months, and added that monetary policy can do very little to contain such pressures. He/she recalled that continuous rate increases have failed to prevent inflation in Mexico from rising to levels not seen in two decades. He/she stated that, instead, interest rate increases do imply a high cost for economic activity in Mexico, affecting credit, investment, consumption, financial markets and public finances. He/she considered that the argument of controlling expectations seems insufficient to justify the continuous increases, since short-term expectations have continued to rise despite the interest rate increases. He/she pointed out that, on the one hand, not all measurements of medium-term expectations have been affected, while long-term expectations are stable, which is consistent with the transitory nature of inflationary pressures. Another member pointed out that, in light of the Federal Reserve's accelerated removal of its asset purchases, the data regarding inflation, and the deterioration of its expectations, decisive actions are essential to promote the anchoring of inflation expectations. He/she pointed out that monetary policy reinforcing initiated this year was intended to act preemptively to avoid possible second-round effects, a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, and the contamination of price formation in Mexico, and that, with this objective, the interest rate had been raised by 100 basis points. He/she noted that, despite these increases, the ex-ante real interest rate has been adjusted by less than a quarter of a percentage point since June so far, given that inflation expectations have continued to deteriorate, which suggests that monetary policy has to be more decisive in view of the level of observed inflation and the uncertainty about the duration of the shocks that are being faced. He/she recalled than in an inflation forecast targeting regime, the monetary policy stance must insure that the projected inflation trajectory tends to converge to the target and that, if monetary policy adjustments are perceived as highly credible, then the shocks will not manage to divert inflation from its target in a sustained manner, expectations will remain anchored, and there will be gains in the efficiency of inflation convergence, and thus he/she considered that maintaining a framework of credible actions is currently an imperative task. He/she pointed out that his/her vote seeks to propitiate an adequate formation of inflation expectations and their firm anchoring. He/she stated that, given the macroeconomic fundamentals of the Mexican economy, the monetary strengthening should not require increases similar to those observed in other economies. However, he/she stated that, given the current uncertain environment, it is necessary to show an unequivocal commitment to Banco de México’s constitutional mandate and to take on a more robust monetary policy approach. One member noted that since the previous monetary policy decision, inflation has reached very high levels, with an outlook for longer external and internal pressures. He/she warned that the contamination of the price formation process demands a faster, firm and proactive pace of adjustment that considers all the factors, not mechanically, but rather upon adequate consideration. This, in order to maintain an inflation trajectory convergent to the target, which allows for the anchoring of expectations and the synchronization of local and global monetary cycles. He/she pointed out that a balance must be found between a weak economic recovery, persistent inflationary pressures, and the beginning of the new monetary tightening cycle by the Federal Reserve. He/she stated that Banco de México’s autonomy, the impossibility of financing the government, and the good performance of public finances have prevented falling into a situation of fiscal dominance. However, he/she pointed out that the argument of not raising the rate because it would have an effect on public spending through an increase in financial costs, may introduce elements of fiscal dominance that would harm the proper functioning of monetary policy. He/she highlighted that it is essential to send clear signals of commitment to the primary mandate in order to preserve the institution’s credibility. To this end, he/she was of the opinion that the inflation forecast targeting regime, which relies on the transmission channel of expectations, should be strengthened. He/she pointed out that considering that an increase in the monetary policy rate sends the opposite signal by increasing inflation expectations, is not consistent with the current monetary strategy and leads to the danger of inflation that is higher and difficult to control, similar to what Turkey is currently undergoing. He/she argued that a proactive attitude prevents a further deterioration of expectations. Therefore, he/she emphasized that the monetary policy response should be proportional to the inflationary outlook in order to preserve credibility and the long-term anchoring of expectations. He/she stated that, looking ahead, the Governing Board will continue to work together to find the best strategy to meet Banco de México's primary mandate in the current complex environment. Another member considered that, in view of inflation risks and of the adjustments to forecasts, and in order to serve responsibly the central bank's primary mandate, it is essential to increase the pace of removal of monetary stimulus. He/she emphasized that, in the absence of a more decisive and forceful action that ratifies the commitment to the primary objective, there is a risk of losing credibility and of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, which would imply exceedingly costly measures for the population, especially for those of lower incomes. He/she argued that in view of the results obtained so far, the monetary policy strategy should be reconsidered. He/she noted that the inflationary outlook has deteriorated during the year to levels not seen in two decades, while the response has remained gradual, cautious and data-dependent. He/she stated that this was made feasible by a policy stance in June 2021 that allowed some margin to adopt a gradualist approach. He/she stated that the continuous upward revisions to the inflation forecasts show that the strategy has not been effective in containing inflation and its expectations. He/she pointed out that this strategy poses a risk for Banco de México’s expectations and credibility, in the event that there is a perceived lack of consistency between the monetary policy statements and the actions taken. He/she noted that the monetary policy statement should emphasize the deterioration of the inflation outlook and the upward bias of the balance of risks. He/she added that the statement should endorse the commitment that the necessary actions will be taken to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target and the firm anchoring of expectations. He/she highlighted that inflationary pressures from abroad and due to supply shocks will remain even with the monetary policy stance adjustment; nevertheless, the latter mainly seeks to strengthen the expectations channel and limit demand-related pressures. He/she added that this adjustment places Banco de México strategically to face the tighter global financial conditions that will be observed during 2022, especially considering that the Mexican peso is strongly exposed to external shocks, and above all given the upcoming shift in advanced economies’ monetary stimuli, mainly in the United States. He/she estimated that risks will be faced that must be addressed in a timely and decisive manner. One member highlighted that although the monetary policy target rate has increased by 100 basis points throughout the year, with the increase of more than practically unchanged between May and November. He/she argued that the monetary policy stance should consider: i) the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have driven headline and core inflation to levels unseen in two decades; ii) the persistent uncertainty about global price dynamics; iii) the high risk of price formation and inflation expectations becoming contaminated; and iv) the challenges faced by a small emerging economy that is highly integrated to world financial markets, in view of the tightening of global monetary and financial conditions that may imply capital outflows and exchange raterelated pressures. He/she added that these economies, which supplement their internal savings with external sources, must maintain sustainable public finances, a monetary policy focused on low and stable inflation, and a strong financial system. He/she stated that monetary policy should keep inflation expectations anchored, bring about orderly conditions in the exchange market, contain risk premia along the yield curve, and enable the convergence of headline inflation to its 3% target. He/she added that in the current context, the trajectory of monetary policy implies exceeding the upper limit of the interval for the neutral rate in real terms within the forecast horizon. He/she pointed out that the role of monetary policy is to maintain inflation around its target, ensuring that the high levels it has reached are transitory, and avoiding the contamination of price formation. He/she considered that tolerating high inflation levels, well above the target, without making the necessary adjustments, would affect price formation and lead to a significant deterioration of domestic financial markets. He/she underlined that this would represent hindering the convergence of inflation to its target and would erode the hard-earned credibility of Banco de México. He/she emphasized that in the current context, the central bank’s commitment to its constitutional mandate of protecting the peso’s purchasing power must be reinforced. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along with the risk of price formation becoming contaminated, and the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of monetary and financial global conditions. Based on these considerations, on this occasion, the Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will monitor thoroughly the behavior of inflationary pressures as well as of all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to determine a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 5.25%. Expectations of a less accommodative policy stance by the Federal Reserve affected global financial conditions. This, along with idiosyncratic factors, has generated greater uncertainty and volatility in local markets. For this reason, I believe the monetary policy stance must be reinforced. This process should be moderate, as an overly restrictive policy stance could have several negative implications. A short-term vision that reacts mechanically with rate increases before any shock should be avoided. Understanding and properly communicating the nature of the current inflationary phenomenon is crucial. This phenomenon is explained by exogenous factors that will begin to fade in subsequent months without the need for prematurely tightening local monetary conditions excessively. Continued rate increases did not prevent inflation from rising to levels unseen in two decades. The reason is that the origin of this episode is predominantly external. The argument of controlling expectations, which has justified said increases, has been disproved by the facts, since short-term expectations have not stopped rising despite such increases. In perspective, it should be considered that getting too far ahead of the Fed's normalization process puts the economy at risk of falling into a trap of low growth and financial instability.