Most members stated that global economic activity weakened during the second quarter. They pointed out that, timely indicators suggest said weakness would persist during the third quarter. They mentioned that economic activity was mainly affected by the slowdown in China, in view of mobility restrictions, the adverse effects of the military conflict, and the tightening of global financial and monetary conditions. They highlighted specifically, that in the United States GDP fell for the second consecutive quarter. One member stated that this was associated with a decrease in inventories, and, to a lesser extent, with a decline in investment. He/she added that certain indicators associated with the real estate sector of that country registered a considerable moderation. Nevertheless, most members highlighted that job creation in the United States accelerated at the beginning of the third quarter. One member mentioned that this is considered to be incompatible with a recession scenario. Another member pointed out that an incipient change of trend is starting to be observed in certain indicators, such as vacancies and initial unemployment insurance claims. Most members underlined that global economic growth forecasts have been revised downwards. They added that fears of recession in the near future have escalated. Among the risks to the conditions, and the intensification of geopolitical tensions. Some members indicated that these factors have resulted in an environment of uncertainty and risk aversion. One member considered that the balance of risks to global economic activity remains biased to the downside. Most members pointed out that world inflation continued increasing, in some cases once again occurred in an environment where imbalances between demand and supply in diverse markets and high levels of food and energy prices persist. commodity prices have stabilized recently and have even decreased. Some members added that disruptions in supply chains have decreased at the margin. One member underlined that the expected trajectories for inflation in the short-term in the main advanced economies were revised upwards, albeit maintaining the convergence to their respective central banks’ targets towards the end of 2023 and the beginning of 2024. Another member mentioned that the increase in input and final goods’ prices reported in purchasing managers’ surveys has moderated, that inflation expectations implicit in market instruments have decreased, and that global aggregate spending has moderated. He/she argued that the above-mentioned facts allow to foresee that the downward adjustment in world inflation has already begun. He/she pointed out that said progress is reflected in the latest figure for US inflation. Most members pointed out that, although headline inflation in the United States decreased between June and July, it still remains high. One member considered that there are signs indicating that it has reached a peak. Another member underlined that core inflation remained high, reflecting labor market pressures. Some members indicated that the personal consumption expenditure deflator increased between May and June. One member pointed out that around 70% of the components of this inflation indicator registered annual variations above 4%. Another member stated that in the euro area annual headline inflation continued increasing between June and July. Some members noted that inflation also continued increasing in emerging economies. One member pointed out its persistence in Latin America, where the declines in commodity prices have not been reflected in lower levels of inflation, which could imply the presence of secondround effects. All members stated that a large number of central banks continued raising their reference rates. Most members noted that, in some cases, they did it in a greater magnitude than previously expected. Regarding the Federal Reserve, they stated that in its latest monetary policy decision it raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points for a second consecutive time and anticipated future increases. Some members indicated that the European Central Bank raised its reference rate by 50 basis points. One member added that said institution announced its strategy to prevent the fragmentation of European sovereign debt markets, to reestablish orderly trading conditions, and to limit the risks for monetary policy implementation. As to emerging economies, he/she pointed out that their central banks also continued raising their reference rates. Another member mentioned the presence of certain heterogeneity in monetary tightening in these economies, which depends on whether there are demand pressures or not, and on the observed levels of inflation. He/she indicated that, in most of them, real interest rates remain at low or even negative levels. He/she added that Mexico continues to be one of the economies with the highest real interest rate worldwide. Most members stated that uncertainty prevails regarding the future trajectory of monetary policy worldwide. They underlined that several central banks have adopted a forward guidance that conditions reference rate adjustments to the evolution of data. Some members agreed that the slowdown of global economic activity has moderated expectations of a faster reduction of the monetary stimulus. Some members added that, in certain economies, interest rates are expected to decrease starting in the second quarter of 2023. One member pointed out that financial markets anticipate the Federal Reserve’s rate to be above 3.5% by the end of 2022. Another member highlighted that, according to the Federal Reserve, the magnitude of the subsequent rate increases is yet to be discussed. One member mentioned that according to such institution, although the interest rate already lies at a neutral level, the need for the rate to attain to a more restrictive level is foreseen, which generated uncertainty about the terminal value for the Federal Reserve’s rate in the current cycle. Another member stated that a certain unwarranted optimism with respect to US monetary policy prevails, regarding expectations of quickly achieving a “soft landing”. He/she emphasized that a historic analysis of US disinflationary periods suggests that the current monetary policy is behind the curve and that a greater than expected monetary effort is required to bring inflation back to its target. He/she added that, over the last decades, the Federal Reserve has not managed to reduce inflation rates that were higher than 3% without causing a significant deterioration in economic activity and employment. For this reason, he/she considered it surprising that the Federal Reserve’s projections anticipate a reduction of inflation in a short period of time, with a low reference rate, and without affecting employment. All members stated that international financial markets registered volatility, in an environment in which financial conditions remained tight and economic activity weakened. Some members noted a reduction in risk appetite. One member pointed out that the new geopolitical tensions between the US and China add to the uncertainty resulting from the Russian-Ukrainian military conflict. Another member added that volatility implicit in foreign exchange options signals a greater level of uncertainty. Most members mentioned that the US dollar registered a generalized appreciation. They pointed out a decrease in government bond yields, especially long-term ones. One member added that certain forward-looking indicators of interest rates have trended downwards. Another member mentioned that corporate bond spreads exhibited a mixed behavior. Most members pointed out that stock markets registered gains. One member indicated that this behavior was supported by the lower costs of financing and, more recently, by the favorable inflation figures in the United States. Another member pointed out that, in emerging economies, yield curves registered a mixed behavior, while the foreign exchange market had a negative performance and the stock market, a positive one. He/she underlined that outflows from the equity market were observed for the first time, while the fixed-income market maintains a negative balance. One member stated that, for most of these economies, risk premia had a somewhat positive behavior during the period. Most members pointed out that economic activity continued recovering and that timely information indicates that in the second quarter of 2022 it grew at a rate similar to that of the previous quarter. Some members underlined that the economic recovery continued, despite the complex environment and the rebound in the number of infections. However, some members noted that the recovery is still incomplete. One member highlighted that monthly Global Economic Activity Indicator that during the period of May-June the recovery rate moderated slightly. He/she added that some highfrequency indicators suggest that said moderation might have continued at the beginning of the third quarter. On the supply side, most members stated that supported by progress in the manufacturing sector. Some members added that a slight recovery in the construction sector also contributed. One member pointed out that mining and construction have remained flat since the first months of 2021. Most members indicated that the services sector highlighted that said recovery has been heterogeneous. One member noted that both industrial activity and services moderated during the May-June period. On the demand side, most members mentioned that consumption continued recovering. Some members noted that the recovery has been observed, to a larger extent, in the consumption of imported goods. One member pointed out that their consumption is around 30% above its pre-pandemic level, while the demand for national goods has barely reached such level. Most members stated that confidence, retail sales and real average income, among others, suggest that private consumption has started to decelerate. Nonetheless, some members mentioned that certain determinants of consumption, such as remittances and the wage bill in real terms, remain at high levels. Most members improved, while some members pointed out that it slowed down in May. Some members noted that investment has been driven by spending on machinery and equipment, while spending on construction remains sluggish. Regarding the external sector, most members highlighted the automotive and non-automotive. One member underlined that the increase in manufacturing exports has derived from increases in both their volume and prices. However, some members noted a moderation in their growth rate. Most members stated that different labor market Nonetheless, they pointed out that the recovery remains incomplete. One member pointed out that the improvement in employment has included most economic sectors. Another member noted that the labor participation rate and the employment rate among the working age population continued approaching their pre-pandemic levels, while the national and urban unemployment rates remained low. One member pointed out that annual nominal wage revisions of IMSS-insured workers registered record increases of 11.5% in July, while those of the private sector fluctuated between 7 and 9% throughout the year. He/she warned that said increases may be indicating a certain contamination towards wages due to the high levels of inflation. He/she considered that these increases contrast with the 3.5% average adjustment observed in the public sector. However, some members highlighted that certain labor market indicators show weakness, such as the extended unemployment rate, which includes the unemployed, the underemployed, and individuals who are not economically active but willing to work, which still remains above its pre-pandemic levels. Most members pointed out that slack conditions in the economy have decreased. However, one member mentioned that slack in economic activity and in the labor market remains ample. Another member pointed out that, if professional and business support services are excluded, the gap appears to have closed. However, he/she warned that said estimates should be taken with caution, given that their measurements exhibit a wide range of variability, depending on the methodology used. environment for the economic recovery prevails. One member pointed out that the economy is expected to continue recovering, albeit at a lower rate than in the first semester. Some members indicated the presence of risks associated with a lower external demand from the United States and with strong inflationary pressures. One member stated that a survey to businesses identified both the observed and expected behavior of inflation as the main obstacles to sales and investment, due to its harmful effects on consumers’ purchasing power and to the difficulty in making plans for the future. Some members mentioned drought conditions in Mexico as an additional risk. One member pointed out that this could affect primary sector activities and the manufacturing industry in the affected regions. Some members agreed that the balance of risks for economic activity is biased to the downside. All members emphasized the high inflation levels. Most members stated that in July headline and core inflation registered annual rates of 8.15 and 7.65%, respectively. One member pointed out that the accumulation of unexpected, subsequent, broad-spectrum, deep and persistent inflationary shocks has been reflected in the significant price increases registered by most CPI items. Another member stated that, on several occasions since the beginning of 2021, headline inflation has been higher than expected. One member underlined that in July the annualized monthly rate of headline inflation was significantly higher than its pre-pandemic average, which implies that pressures have continued at the margin, albeit having declined slightly in relation to the previous four months. Most members indicated that inflation in Mexico is partly attributed to a global phenomenon. Some members pointed out that this is directly due to the imported content in goods or, indirectly, due to the incidence of international references on local prices. One member highlighted that the above poses a significant challenge for price formation. Nevertheless, another member pointed out that certain products’ prices have also been subject to domestic pressures related to insecurity in the country. One member mentioned that headline inflation has been mainly affected by a greater incidence of the core component. Another member underlined the sharp upward trend followed by the inflation of processed and unprocessed foods, whose incidence accounts for over half of the level of headline inflation in July, a contribution that is greater than the nearly one-third that was observed, on average, between 2017 and 2019. Most members mentioned that core inflation remained at high levels. Some members pointed out that this component continues on a concerning upward trajectory. One member added that it continues showing significant persistence. Another member highlighted that it has increased for twenty consecutive months. He/she noted that all of its components, except for telecommunication services, register seasonally adjusted monthly variations that are above the average of the last ten years. One member pointed out that core inflation remains subject to pressures related to increases in production costs, increases of different input prices, and to disruptions in production and distribution chains. He/she added that these factors have hindered the adjustment of supply to the high levels of demand worldwide. Some members underlined that merchandise inflation reached double digits. One member mentioned that its components have faced continuous shocks for three years. Most members pointed out that food merchandise reaching 12.09% in July. One member highlighted that this component has increased by double digits for five months and that the outlook is complex, even if food merchandise prices are excluded from the core inflation estimation, as is the case in the United States. He/she pointed out that inflation of non-food merchandise and of services have settled above 4%. Another member expressed his/her concern about services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, maintaining an upward trend for over a year and reaching levels close to 5%. One member mentioned that said inflation increased as a result of the higher adjustments in tourism and food services’ prices. He/she highlighted that services inflation is the highest on record since 2009 and that of services other than housing and education registered its highest variation in the last 20 years. Another member noted that, at the margin, pressures on merchandise prices remained similar to those observed in recent months, while those on services prices decreased slightly. All members noted that non-core inflation remains at high levels, affected mainly by the prices of agricultural and livestock products. Some members highlighted that these goods registered double-digit inflation levels. One member added that said inflation has been subject to pressures due to an increase in input prices, such as those of fertilizers and grains. Most members mentioned that energy inflation has remained at relatively low levels. Some members pointed out that variations in this component have been contained by Federal Government policies. One member highlighted that the dynamics of the energy price subindex were influenced by the lower variations in L.P. gas prices. All members mentioned that expectations for headline and core inflation for 2022 rose again. Most members pointed out that those for 2023 and for the medium-term increased to a lesser extent. One member indicated that expectations for the next 12 months have remained stable for five consecutive months, although above the 3% target. deterioration of medium-term expectations has eased at the margin, these are still affected. Some members noted that long-term expectations for headline inflation remained stable, although at levels above target. Some members highlighted that those for long-term core inflation increased at the margin. One member pointed out that between May and July, those corresponding to the next four years went from were adjusted from 3.50 to 3.57%. Some members considered the gradual deterioration of long-term expectations a cause for concern. One member mentioned that this could signal the beginning of a process of unanchoring of inflation expectations. Another member indicated that this could suggest negative effects on the price formation process. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, some members pointed out that these have continued to deteriorate. However, some members noted that breakeven inflation decreased for all maturities. One member underlined that longer-term expectations drawn from market instruments remained at levels close to the 3% target, although with slight increases at the margin. Most members indicated that in view of greater- forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards for the period up to the third convergence to the 3% target is still projected to be attained in the first quarter of 2024. Some members underlined that inflation is still expected to reach its highest level in the third quarter of 2022. One member pointed out that observed and expected inflation continue to be at levels incompatible with the 3% target, in a context of high uncertainty. Another member highlighted that although it is possible that inflation reaches a peak during the third quarter, it will almost certainly be above 8% by the end of the year. He/she pointed out that, given the persistence of inflation, doubts have increased as to whether the inflection point in its trend is near. He/she stated that it is highly probable that the inflationary peak will be reached later than expected. He/she said that each revision to the inflation forecast incorporates the assumption that inflation will reach a higher level at a later-thananticipated date, and thus it is not possible to assure that the peak of the inflationary cycle has been reached. Among upward risks to inflation, some members mentioned cost-related pressures. One member highlighted labor-related costs. He/she noted that minimum wage increases above 20% could be observed in 2022 and 2023. He/she mentioned that these would materialize just at the time when inflation is expected to begin converging to its target. Some members noted that droughts in several areas of the country could exert further pressure on the prices of agricultural and livestock products. One member highlighted as additional upward risks: i) the persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii) the external inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic; iii) the continued pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices and on energy prices due to the ongoing geopolitical conflict; and iv) an exchange rate depreciation. Among downward risks, one member pointed out: i) a greater-than- anticipated slowdown in global economic activity; ii) a decline in the intensity of the geopolitical conflict; iii) better functioning of supply chains; iv) a greaterthan-expected effect from the negative output gap; and v) a larger-than-anticipated contribution from the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices that in both Mexico and the rest of the world, inflation would eventually perform favorably insofar as the Federal Reserve’s actions contribute to bring down inflation levels in the United States. Another member indicated that, although world and US inflation might have reached a peak, this will not necessarily translate into an immediate reduction of inflation in Mexico, given the lag between world and domestic inflation cycles. Most members stated that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased Regarding domestic financial markets, most members highlighted the resilience of the exchange rate, although it exhibited episodes of volatility. They highlighted that the resilience of the Mexican peso in relation to other currencies was partly due to the wide volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States. macroeconomic fundamentals. One member noted that the Mexican peso stood out as the second-best performing currency during the period, only slightly behind the Brazilian real. Most members pointed out that short-term interest rates increased and longer-term ones decreased. One member mentioned that the flattening of yield curves was supported by inflows into Udibonos and marginally into M-Bonos. He/she added that the interest-rate spread between downwards. Most members noted that the stock market remained stable. One member mentioned that this market was recently favored by a greater appetite for risk. Another member added that the premia reflected by credit default swaps at different maturities shifted downwards. Some members highlighted that tighter monetary conditions and the increase in geopolitical tensions are a source of uncertainty and volatility for domestic financial markets and have generated an environment of risk aversion. Some members pointed out that the rounds of dispute settlement consultations with the United States and Canada regarding Mexico's energy policies within the framework of the USMCA could have significant repercussions for the Mexican economy. One member warned that they could result in compensatory tariffs that would translate into pressures on the country’s balance of payments. Another member noted that one rating agency ratified the country's sovereign rating while changing the outlook from negative to stable, while another one downgraded both the sovereign and Pemex’s ratings. In this regard, one member pointed out that there are factors of domestic pressure that could increase the idiosyncratic risk premium. Some members noted that financing conditions for the private sector have improved at the margin. They highlighted that during the second quarter of 2022, domestic financing to firms continued moderating its rate of contraction in annual terms. They pointed out that commercial bank credit to firms continued recovering. They indicated that this occurred in a context of increased demand from firms and in spite of the tighter monetary conditions. One member noted that lending conditions for smaller firms have become less restrictive since the second half of firms were at levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic and that delinquency rates continued to decrease. In contrast, he/she warned about the banks’ financing to firms, as compared to an expansion of 2.1% by commercial banks. Regarding household financing, another member mentioned that mortgage lending continued growing moderately at a real annual rate. He/she added that consumer credit continued increasing in real annual terms, mainly as a result of the sustained dynamism of payroll credit and the credit-card portfolio, as well as the recent recovery in the personal-loan portfolio. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, and inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as well as the possibility of greater effects on inflation. Based on these considerations, all members voted to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 8.50%. They highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Governing Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times, with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board added that it will assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy decisions One member stated that, like most economies, Mexico has faced a highly complex and uncertain environment due to the concurrence of shocks that have caused widespread and large-scale inflationary pressures. In this context, it has been imperative to focus on establishing a monetary policy stance conducive to an adequate adjustment of relative prices and domestic financial markets. He/she pointed out that Banco de México has acted timely and decisively considering: i) the negative impact that a prolonged period of inflation well above the target could have on longer-term inflation expectations; ii) the high social and economic costs derived from inflation; and iii) the risk of a disorderly behavior in financial markets, including the foreign exchange market. He/she recalled that, although from June 2021 to June 2022 the reference rate has been raised by 375 basis points, until early 2022, the impact on the ex-ante real interest rate had been partially offset by the increase in inflation expectations due to the additional and unexpected shocks that were observed. However, he/she estimated that, given the 75 basis points increase of the previous decision, an additional 75 basis points increase in the current decision would allow the exante real interest rate to be in restrictive territory. He/she considered that a smaller increase would be insufficient for the real interest rate to exceed the estimated range for the neutral interest rate. He/she highlighted that it is essential for Banco de México to act decisively in order to avoid a deterioration in the price formation process. He/she added that, given the complexity of the environment, characterized by tighter global financial conditions and high uncertainty, it is the central bank's responsibility to take the necessary measures to comply with its constitutional mandate, which increases the importance of decisively raising the reference rate in the present decision. He/she warned that in order to guarantee the convergence of inflation to its target, additional upward adjustments in the reference rate will be required, the magnitude of which must be assessed according to the available information. Another member stated that the inflationary landscape confirms that a process of unanchoring of inflation expectations is beginning to take place. He/she underlined that, in his/her opinion, it is evident that the adjustments implemented in the monetary policy stance have been insufficient to counteract the deterioration in the price formation process and the increase in inflation expectations, and therefore he/she considered it absolutely necessary to bring the real interest rate to restrictive territory. He/she pointed out that only through firm and decisive actions it will be possible to rebuild the confidence in the central bank's commitment to the convergence of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon. He/she added that the deterioration in the global economic environment, geopolitical conflicts, uncertainty about the reestablishment of supply chains, and the future path of world inflation, result in an even greater challenge for the conduction of monetary policy, and that the start of a period of elevated interest rates and economic weakness may be witnessed. He/she highlighted that in addition to figuring out the adequate pace of adjustment, the duration of the restrictive stance must also be defined. He/she considered that, currently, the main risk is the possibility of unforeseen changes in monetary policy in the United States. He/she argued that given the complex outlook, it is crucial to maintain a risk management approach, maintain the pace of monetary tightening, eliminate inflationary inertia, strengthen confidence and anchor inflation expectations at around 3%, as well as to promote an orderly adjustment of markets in light of tighter financial conditions. He/she added that the monetary policy statement should allow to anticipate more restrictive monetary conditions in the future. He/she pointed out that given the high uncertainty prevailing in the economic environment, such forward guidance should guarantee flexibility and reiterate that Banco de México will act decisively when required. He/she mentioned that the number of shocks the economy has faced, as well as their intensity and duration, have persistently accelerated inflationary dynamics. He/she warned that, in accordance with the central bank’s constitutional mandate, it is the Governing Board's duty to implement an active monetary policy that curbs the aforementioned inflationary dynamics and seeks the stability of prices and of inflation expectations around the target, thus strengthening monetary policy’s main transmission channels. One member stated that the proposed adjustment of the reference rate is appropriate for reasons of financial stability and to avoid second-round effects on the price formation process. He/she indicated that these effects occur in view of high and persistent inflation and consist of prices increasing simply because they rose yesterday and are expected to do so tomorrow. To avoid this, and considering the nature of the shocks, it is necessary to transit to a moderately restrictive monetary policy stance. However, he/she warned that an excessive tightening could imply a high cost in terms of employment, purchasing power, and economic activity, and even be counterproductive for macroeconomic and financial stability. He/she considered that since the consequences of the pandemic and the intensification of geopolitical conflicts are still being experienced, there is high uncertainty about the effect of the monetary adjustments on inflation and economic activity, however, there are signs that an unnecessarily high level of monetary tightening is soon to be reached. He/she mentioned that the variables most sensitive to the monetary policy stance, such as investment, construction, consumer durables sales and business credit, have remained weak since before the pandemic, and that further tightening could affect their performance even more. He/she added that the incipient deceleration of production in various sectors, of private consumption and of investment suggests that the monetary policy stance might have already started to have an impact on these variables. He/she stated that inflationary pressures stem mainly from external factors, and thus a moderation in domestic spending would not necessarily translate in an improvement in the country’s price formation process. He/she argued that, in the current environment, the use of monetary policy could be relatively inefficient. He/she mentioned that there are signs that global pressures have started to ease, and therefore inflation in Mexico might decline regardless of the monetary policy stance. He/she indicated that avoiding an excessively restrictive monetary policy would imply the possibility of decoupling from the pace of the Federal Reserve's interest rate hikes relatively soon. He/she expressed that this is feasible since: i) the volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States is one of the highest among emerging economies; ii) the Mexican peso stands out for its good performance and low volatility; iii) the Federal Reserve's policy stance is an important factor to consider, but Mexico’s monetary policy stance should rely more on the evolution of domestic variables and on the absolute policy stance; iv) Mexico started the hiking cycle earlier, and with a 75-basis point increase the policy stance would be situated in restrictive territory; v) unlike the United States, Mexico does not seem to face inflationary pressures from demand or the labor market; and vi) inflation in Mexico is closer to its target than the United States and other countries. For said reasons, he/she stated that there is room for a less restrictive monetary policy than in other emerging countries. Another member considered that, given the inflationary outlook, the hiking cycle must continue and a restrictive policy stance must be consolidated to contain inflation in the short-term and have a policy stance consistent with a downward path of inflation, even if this occurs in the medium term. He/she added that adjustments in the policy rate will not eliminate global pressures, but will help to avoid second-round effects. He/she pointed out that there are also domestic pressures. He/she indicated that there are no clear signs of deceleration, and that a lower slack allows for a more restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she stated that in view of the continuous deterioration of observed inflation and its expectations, during this hiking cycle it has been necessary to increase the pace of tightening two times. Even so, the ex-ante real interest rate remained in expansionary territory for almost a year, and after the last decision it finally reached a neutral stance. He/she estimated that an increase of 75 basis points would allow to barely reach a restrictive level, so there should be no concern that the real interest rate is too high or harmful for economic activity. He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions become less important, until inflation is under control. He/she stated that an interest rate increase lower than that of the Federal Reserve is not feasible because: i) the interest rate spread of 600 basis points relative to the United States has been sufficient to enable a good performance of the Mexican peso under episodes of volatility and a generalized appreciation of the dollar, and maintaining a relative policy stance would contribute to avoid episodes of exchange rate volatility; ii) there is still a sentiment of global risk aversion; and iii) there are idiosyncratic factors that could increase the risk premium. He/she pointed out that a change of direction in the monetary cycle remains distant since: i) there is no guarantee that the inflationary cycle has reached a peak; ii) even if it is reached, the reference rate cannot be lowered too early without being sure that inflation is clearly trending downwards; and iii) the deterioration of inflation expectations, especially long-term ones, might suggest the presence of negative effects on the price formation process. He/she stated that it is crucial to provide guidance on the path of the policy rate, to communicate explicitly that the hiking cycle is not over yet, to emphasize that the central bank will act decisively as needed, and that the Governing Board will monitor the evolution of the inflationary outlook and the external monetary conditions to determine whether the pace of increases in the reference rate will be maintained or if there is a space that can be used to ameliorate this pace. He/she stated that the central bank’s reaction function must be communicated with a clear and explicit forward guidance. For this purpose, the qualitative references about the future actions that have been made in previous communications must be complemented. He/she mentioned that the favorable reception of these changes by the public suggests that communication with forward guidance in which the path of the reference rate consistent with the inflation forecast is published should be analyzed. With such an addition, there would be greater certainty about the outlook for the current hiking cycle in order to counterbalance the uncertainty in the inflationary scenario. He/she indicated that this exercise of transparency and accountability would reinforce the credibility on the central bank's commitment to its mandate. One member highlighted that the international monetary conditions showed greater tightness and that geopolitical tensions increased and are an important source of uncertainty and volatility. He/she added that inflation continued increasing and that its expectations are still affected. He/she argued that an increase of 75 basis points in this decision would strengthen the absolute monetary policy stance in two dimensions: i) the ex-ante real interest rate would exceed the upper threshold of the estimated range for the neutral rate, which, in his/her opinion, is a key element for the monetary policy stance to be effective and decisively support the process of inflation convergence to its target. He/she also added that it would allow to send a clear signal so that inflation expectations remain anchored and return to their previous levels; and ii) the nominal interest rate would reach the level of headline inflation and exceed that of core inflation, a circumstance that has been observed in other monetary cycles before achieving inflation convergence. He/she added that, at the global level, during the current monetary cycle, this situation has been observed in very few economies. He/she mentioned that, as for the relative monetary policy stance, the interest rate spread relative to the United States is above both its historical average and the average observed during previous hiking cycles. He/she argued that there are two elements that indicate that the current relative monetary policy stance is competitive: i) when the interest rate spread relative to the United States is measured through ex-ante real interest rates, a much more solid policy stance in terms of level, speed and celerity can be noted, highlighting that said soundness has even been transmitted along the yield curve, where medium and long-term interest rate spreads are at high levels; and ii) since Mexico is an economy that complements its sources of financing with foreign savings, it is important to note that the interest rate spread has been complemented by favorable expectations on the performance of the Mexican peso with respect to other emerging economies' currencies, even when such indicators are adjusted for volatility. He/she argued that the current environment of high uncertainty worldwide, with domestic inflation at high levels, and with the policy stance that would be achieved with the proposed increase, would require, in the future, to carefully assess the available space so that the next decisions are consistent with the convergence of inflation to the target as well as with an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets, prioritizing the safeguarding of the central bank’s credibility. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, and inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as well as the possibility of greater effects on inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 8.50%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times, with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board will assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy decisions based on the prevailing conditions. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Gerardo Esquivel, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 8.50%.