Most members stated that available indicators suggest a moderation in global economic activity during the first quarter of the year. Some members noted that economic activity remains affected by the pandemic. One member added that supply restrictions and demand-related pressures derived from the change in consumption patterns, have been more persistent than anticipated. He/she pointed out that back orders, delivery times and sea freight costs remain higher than they were prior to the pandemic. He/she added that, as control of the pandemic improves, supply restrictions will decline and inflationary pressures will ease, although he/she also acknowledged that said process will be gradual and is not exempt from facing interruptions. Some members noted that mobility indicators have recovered, particularly in emerging economies. One member mentioned the improvement in indicators related to manufacturing and services purchases, which points to a lower intensity and duration of the effects caused by the Omicron variant, compared with previous waves of contagion. Most members pointed out that the Russia- Ukraine conflict has generated an environment of deterioration in the outlook for growth at a global level. One member mentioned that, measured through the foreign trade flows of these economies, their direct ties and the destination of their products, the impact could concentrate mostly in Eastern Europe and euro area countries, as well as in China, although he/she considered that, given the importance of the economies involved, as suppliers of metals and commodities and as producers of fertilizers, global economic activity could be affected. Some members stated that the economic sanctions imposed on Russia could affect financial markets, international trade, and supply chains. One member mentioned as a risk factor an increase in the number of infections in China and expectations of strong lockdown measures. Some members noted that the balance of risks for world economic growth is biased to the downside and is subject to high uncertainty, mainly for European economies. All members stated that the geopolitical conflict intensified inflationary pressures worldwide. Most members pointed out the important role that the countries involved play in the supply and fertilizers and grains. In this regard, most members mentioned that commodity prices considered that this pattern could continue until above, the convergence of inflation to their respective central banks’ targets could take longer than expected. He/she added that commodity prices have surpassed those registered during the pandemic and other stress episodes. However, some members noted that said increases have partially reversed recently. One member added that, in the future, the conflict could lead to a reconfiguration of global value chains, with ensuing cost-related pressures. Most members mentioned that, in addition to the above, world inflation continued increasing due to pressures originated by bottlenecks and high levels of food and energy prices. One member added that the reallocation of spending also continued exerting pressure on prices. Another member highlighted the case of the United States, where inflation in February reached its highest level in 40 years. One member mentioned that inflation expectations drawn from surveys and from market instruments deteriorated once again. Another member stated that, for advanced economies, shortterm inflation expectations continue increasing and longer-term inflation expectations show increments as well, although recently they have decreased slightly. Some members considered that the continuous rebound in headline and core inflation could accelerate as a result of the adverse effects on freight transport and the potential shortage of inputs in the face of historically low inventories. One member added that the inflationary environment could worsen as a result of the lockdown measures adopted in some regions of China. Another member mentioned as factors that would contribute to reduce world inflation, the lower number of infections and higher vaccination rates, as well as lower monetary and fiscal stimuli in systemically important economies. accommodative monetary policy stances in advanced economies. All members mentioned that, in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points and announced that it expects to continue increasing it in the remaining meetings of 2022. Some members pointed out that, recently, the chair of the Federal Reserve expressed that its monetary policy stance could be adjusted more aggressively. One member mentioned that its asset purchase program has concluded. Another member added that it is expected to begin a gradual reduction of its balance sheet in May. He/she highlighted that the United States is experiencing strong economic growth and faces a tight labor market, while inflation is registering levels unseen in more than three decades. One member mentioned that the Federal Reserve announced the possibility of maintaining a monetary policy stance slightly above its neutral rate for 2022 and 2023. Some members stated that there is still uncertainty over the rate and the magnitude of said monetary cycle, which has been exacerbated by changes in the environment caused by the geopolitical conflict. Some members noted that a large number of central banks in emerging market economies continued increasing their reference rates. One member stated that most of these economies maintain real interest rates that are negative or close to zero, while Mexico stands out for its positive real interest rate. Most members noted that international financial markets registered high volatility due to the uncertainty associated with the armed conflict. Some members mentioned that financial conditions tightened. One member added that said conflict has exerted pressure to a larger extent on fixed-income and commodity markets. Most members pointed out that, since the last monetary policy decision, stock market indices in advanced economies continued falling. Some members added that government bond interest rates for different terms increased throughout the year, in response to central banks’ tighter monetary policy stances. One member stated the flattening of the yield curve in the United States is associated with further monetary tightening and to previsions of a deceleration in economic growth. Another member mentioned that, in recent days, risk appetite increased, driven by the relatively optimistic tone of the Federal Reserve regarding the expected performance of the US economy. He/she added that, in that context, stock market indices increased, which offset the previous decreases. He/she stated that this shows how the signals sent by central banks can be equally or more relevant than the policy decisions regarding the interest rate. Some members underlined that financial markets in emerging economies exhibited a mixed behavior. They added that stock market indices performed heterogeneously according to their geographical and trade proximity to Russia. One member underlined the fall in stock markets in Eastern Europe and the better performance these registered in Latin America. Another member highlighted the interest rate increases, the appreciation of most Latin American currencies, the outflows in fixed income instruments, and the moderate inflows in equity instruments. One member pointed out that the recent increase in risk appetite benefited emerging economies, especially those with a more favorable economic growth outlook, which registered appreciations in their currencies and increases in their stock market indices. This, despite the Federal Reserve’s interest rate increase. conditions are foreseen to continue tightening as a result of the interest rate increases stemming from the normalization of the main central banks’ monetary policy stances and the geopolitical turmoil. One member added that the exclusion of Russia from international payment systems, such as SWIFT, and potential cyber-attacks as a form of reprisal, could affect financial stability. indicators suggest that economic reactivation could have resumed at the beginning of 2022. One member stated that the Timely Indicator of Economic Activity (IOAE, for its acronym in Spanish) suggests an annual increase in economic activity of activities. Nonetheless, most members pointed incomplete, and heterogeneous across sectors. One member pointed out that, in January, economic activity in nearly 50% of sectors had still not returned to pre-pandemic levels. Another member stated that in the fourth quarter of 2021 economic activity was although it is anticipated to continue recovering gradually. On the supply side, most members highlighted that industrial production continued recovering manufacturing, and an unusual rebound in mining. Nonetheless, they underlined the lack of vigor in construction, as well as in automobile production and exports due to supply chain problems. One member added that in January industrial activity registered four consecutive months of growth and that manufacturing, excluding transportation equipment, has remained on an upward trajectory for several months. Most continued registering weakness, with levels lower than those prior to the pandemic, as well as a heterogeneous behavior among subsectors. They considered that the weakness in the services sector partly reflects the impact of the labor outsourcing reform. One member pointed out that this effect is of an accounting nature. He/she pointed out that, apart from the effect of this reform, most services have continued to recover. Another member pointed out that the contraction in business support services contributed to a reduction of 1.3 percentage points in GDP growth in 2021. He/she indicated that weakness in the services sector and heterogeneity among its components is expected to persist. He/she highlighted that primary sector activities rebounded significantly in December 2021. On the demand side, most members stated that consumption continued recovering in December 2021. Some members noted that it registered levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. One member mentioned that, although consumption of services is lagging, consumption of non-durable goods surpassed its pre-pandemic levels since early crisis. He/she stated that the above derives, among other factors, from the favorable evolution of some indicators, such as consumer confidence, the wage bill, remittances, and social transfers. Some members mentioned that various leading consumption indicators improved in early 2022. Most members highlighted that investment remains weak. One member stated that it remains stagnant at levels below those observed prior to the health emergency. He/she added that public investment has performed better than private investment, as it is 5% above its pre-pandemic levels and is trending upwards, which contrasts with the negative trend this indicator had exhibited for over a decade. Some members stated that exports contracted at the margin in January. However, one member stated that they remain at relatively high levels. Regarding the labor market, most members highlighted the progress observed in different indicators, although negative effects still persist. They pointed out that unemployment and underemployment rates declined in January. One member added that the labor informality rate also decreased. Some members forewarned that this improvement in indicators was partially a result of the fall in labor participation, caused by the increase in the number of infections. Consequently, one member pointed out that unemployment and underemployment rates have still not returned to their pre-pandemic levels. Another member highlighted the gender bias that has favored men in the labor market recovery process. He/she stated that, in January, said progress was based on male formal employment, while a setback in female employment was observed. He/she added that the increase in economically inactive population is still concentrated in women. Some members mentioned that minimum wage increases have had an upward effect on wage revisions of IMSS-insured workers. One member pointed out that this was the result of both mechanical and non-mechanical increases. He/she added that said revisions averaged a historically high annual increase of 9.5% in February. He/she recalled that, when comparing January of this year with previous years, there was a greater proportion of salary increases for workers that are not tied to the minimum wage, which confirms the presence of certain wage-related pressures. conditions persist. However, they added that, in lower than those registered during the previous quarter. One member delved into the fact that GDP continues showing a negative gap of over 10% with respect to the trend observed prior to the pandemic. Another member anticipated that slack conditions will gradually decrease, although they will still show a considerable gap. One member mentioned that uncertainty prevails regarding the traditional estimation of the output gap and of potential GDP to determine the degree of slack in the economy. geopolitical turmoil between Russia and Ukraine has generated a new source of uncertainty for the Mexican economy. Some members agreed that the impact on Mexico's economic activity, either directly or indirectly through the US economy, will be limited, due to the geographic distance and the relatively weak trade and financial ties with the countries in conflict. One member considered that such impact is uncertain. Another member pointed out the following risks to Mexico's economic activity. On the downside: i) a greater-than-expected persistence of the pandemic; ii) prolongation or intensification of bottleneck problems in supply chains, or higher costs of inputs and production in various sectors of the economy; iii) additional episodes of volatility in international financial markets; and iv) lower-thanexpected or insufficient investment to support economic recovery and long-term growth. On the upside, he/she highlighted: i) a greater control of the pandemic; ii) that national and international stimuli continue to support consumption and investment; iii) Mexico being an attractive destination for investment in view of a reconfiguration of global production processes within the framework of the USMCA; and iv) the maintenance of global financial conditions to enable a faster economic recovery. He/she highlighted that some of the downside risks have been accentuated by the conflict in Eastern Europe. Some members mentioned that the balance of risks for growth remains biased to the downside while one member stated that it has deteriorated at the margin. Most members mentioned that during the first fortnight of March, headline and core inflation registered annual variations of 7.29 and 6.68%, respectively. Some members noted that this was attributed to the performance of the core component, which was partially offset by a marginal reduction in the non-core component. One member noted that, after two consecutive months in which monthly headline inflation was close to its historical average, it accelerated again in February. He/she added that the annual rate is far above its target. Some members expressed their concern about price dynamics, which have followed a marked upward trend for a long period. One member added that price growth is accelerating even faster than in 2017, which is most noticeable in the core component. Most members argued that inflation remains associated with the pandemic. One member pointed out that this has been reflected mainly in the merchandise component. Another member said that these effects are largely transmitted through tradable goods, including final goods, intermediate goods, and raw materials. He/she highlighted that the annual inflation of the National Producer Price Index (INPP, for its Spanish acronym) of intermediate inputs excluding oil reached a peak last December, that in February it continued declining, and that its current level is lower than the all-time high reached during the inflationary episode of 2017. One member highlighted that inflation is a generalized problem and that inflationary pressures are not only imported, but also domestic and are affecting non-tradable goods. He/she stated that domestic pressures are the result of idiosyncratic factors, such as public insecurity, adverse weather conditions, lack of specific inputs and wage pressures, in a context where there are doubts about the traditional estimations of the output gap and potential GDP. Another member noted that in Mexico food products have a higher weight in the CPI as compared to advanced and some emerging economies, and thus increases in food prices at the global level have generated a negative bias on Mexico’s inflation. He/she highlighted that, nevertheless, Mexico does not stand out for being the country with the highest levels of headline inflation among other countries that registered similar levels of inflation prior to the pandemic. One member pointed out that inflation of practically all CPI food items is growing at annual rates higher than 4% and around half of them are registering variations higher than 10%. Most members mentioned that core inflation shows generalized increases. Some members stated that this reflects the persistence of the shocks that have affected it. One member pointed out that this dynamic does not pertain to a specific group of consumer goods and/or services, as it has affected the entire consumer basket. Some members noted that this component reached its highest rate since accumulated 15 consecutive months of increases. Another member stated that it has grown significantly above its historical pattern and is influencing the upward trajectory followed by headline inflation. Some members noted that its monthly variation accelerated in February. One member noted that said variation was more than double that observed for a month of February since mid-2001. Another member noted that its annualized monthly variation has followed an upward trend, going from 3% in January 2021 to 8% in February 2022. One member pointed out that the merchandise component registered an annual variation of more than 8% and that more than 80% of the items that comprise it registered annualized monthly increases of more than 5%. Another member stated that food merchandise registered an annualized monthly rate of 12% and non-food merchandise a variation of 9%. One member pointed out that within the food merchandise component, significant price increases were observed in products derived from soybeans, corn, wheat and cold meats, while in the non-food merchandise component, price pressures were registered in household cleaning products, personal hygiene and health care products, and in automobiles. Another member mentioned that services registered an annualized monthly inflation of 5%. One member noted that services excluding education and housing registered an annual rate of 6.6%. Another member stated that the prices of food services, tourism and transportation have been under pressure. The majority of the members mentioned that non- pressures. Some said that agricultural and livestock products’ inflation continues registering increases. Most members noted that energy inflation decreased at the margin. Some members pointed out that gasoline prices have been contained by fiscal stimuli. One member added that various estimates suggest that, in the absence of such stimuli, headline inflation would have been higher, which reflects the magnitude of the shocks currently being faced. expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased again. Some members noted that those for 2022 are above the upper limit of the variability interval while those for 2023 are above the point target. One member pointed out that almost all analysts surveyed by Banco de México assign a minimal probability of inflation returning to 4% this year. Another member highlighted that most business agents interviewed by Banco de México said that the prices of their inputs have changed with a similar or greater frequency than in the previous quarter, and that they hold their level. On the other hand, one member pointed out that economic analysts' expectations for the next 12 months were revised slightly downwards. Most expectations for headline inflation increased. All members mentioned that long-term expectations have remained stable at levels above the target. One member noted that medium-term expectations are approaching the upper limit of the variability interval. Another member added these are both above their historical average, as well as above the average observed in other inflationary episodes. One member expressed his/her concern about the upward trend that expectations for the next four years have had since August of last year. Another member said that, although long-term inflation expectations remain anchored, the risks surrounding their formation process should not be underestimated. One member warned that in recent months these expectations have already started to be revised upwards. Most members noted that expectations drawn from market instruments have also deteriorated. One member pointed out that expectations measured through compensation for inflation and inflation risk in 10-year bonds reached a historical high, and that the 10-year inflation risk premium remains at levels similar to those registered during other stress periods. Another member noted that expectations from market instruments for the 6to 10-year average were close to 3.1%. All members stated that forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards. Most members mentioned that convergence to the point target has been delayed. One member highlighted that Banco de México's forecasts now estimate inflation at 5.5% for the last quarter of 2022. Another member noted that, up to March 2022, there have been ten consecutive monetary policy decisions in which inflation forecasts have been revised upwards. He/she underlined that, during this period, convergence to the target was deferred from the second quarter of 2022 in December’s 2020 decision, to the first quarter of 2024 in the current decision. He/she warned that the systematic underestimation of inflation forecasts has generated an inflationary inertia that has already affected medium-term expectations and, if this continues, could lead to a de-anchoring of long-term expectations. One member noted that the factors associated with the pandemic are expected to continue having an influence on the inflation outlook worldwide. Another member mentioned that the current outlook is even more challenging as it is optimistic to believe that the effect of the accumulation of supply and demand shocks on inflation will dissipate immediately. He/she added that inflation will likely remain at high levels for a long period before decelerating. He/she highlighted that the forecast decline in headline inflation assumes that the core component registers moderate levels and that non-core inflation decreases, which is unlikely to materialize under the current conditions. Among upside risks to inflation, most members highlighted the persistence of core inflation at high levels, external inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic, increases in agricultural and livestock product prices and in energy prices due to the recent geopolitical conflict, and cost-related pressures. Some members added the possibility of an exchange rate depreciation. One member pointed out that external inflationary pressures have originated from logistical problems, high sea freight costs, disruptions in global value chains, and from changes in consumption patterns. He/she added that these pressures are not expected to be resolved soon. He/she noted that the greater pressures on food prices have high social costs and could affect household inflation expectations, which would accelerate inflationary dynamics even if other goods prices were to perform better. Another member mentioned that persistent supply and demand imbalances have also been due to production rigidities. He/she noted the risk of contractual wage revisions becoming contaminated given the high levels of observed and expected inflation, and in the presence of mechanical, aboveinflation wage revisions. He/she indicated that greater unforeseen adjustments to the reference rate in the United States could increase the risk of an exchange rate depreciation. One member considered that the risk of energy prices being subject to pressures is limited due to the domestic fuel price policy. He/she added that some estimates show that, even if the aforementioned policy is considered, increases in oil prices do not imply a deterioration in public finances. Among downside risks to inflation, another member included: i) a decline in the intensity of the military conflict; ii) that given the slack conditions, cost-related pressures and wage revisions do not exert pressure on prices; iii) that energy prices are lower than those anticipated; and iv) an exchange rate appreciation. One member noted that the decline in annual inflation of INPP intermediate inputs excluding oil could imply lower future pressures for core inflation. Most members stated that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation over the forecast horizon has deteriorated again and remains biased to the upside. One member pointed out that this is due to the possibility that the effects of the geopolitical conflict are greater than expected. Another member considered geopolitical tensions as a new source of uncertainty for inflation. One member warned that the ongoing occurrence of supply and demand shocks continues to deteriorate the balance of risks. Most members highlighted that, in domestic financial markets, the exchange rate appreciated slightly albeit registering some episodes of member pointed out that financial markets showed greater resilience since the previous monetary policy meeting. Another member considered that they displayed a mixed performance. One member said that, so far this year, the peso's performance contrasts with that of other Latin American currencies and the South African currency, which have appreciated significantly. Some members pointed out that increases were observed in practically all nodes of the yield curve. One member stated that, while nominal interest rates adjusted upwards up to between -30 and 33 basis points. Another member pointed out that Mexico continues having a wide volatility adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States. Some members noted that the stock market registered increases. One member pointed out that these were in line with other stock market indices in the region. However, another member noted that Mexico’s stock market performance was surpassed by that of other Latin American economies, which could reflect better economic prospects and greater attractiveness for raising capital in those countries. One member warned that the escalation of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine could add limited risks to the stability of Mexico’s financial system. He/she stated that, looking ahead, episodes of depreciation and high volatility in financial markets are not ruled out due to the environment of global uncertainty that persists. One member highlighted that consumer credit has recovered at a faster rate than during the 2008 crisis, while financing to firms has reactivated more slowly. Another member pointed out that credit to individuals with business activity decreased around first quarter of 2017. He/she added that credit to Small- and Medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) remains more than 10% below its pre-pandemic levels, including in those sectors that did not experience a recession, thus suggesting that the lack of credit can be partially attributed to the supply side. He/she said that as long as credit to businesses remains deteriorated, it will be very difficult to see a substantial improvement in private investment. One member pointed out that the lack of private investment is due to a deterioration in the business climate originated by external and idiosyncratic internal factors that were present way before the beginning of the tightening cycle, and therefore the weakness of investment can hardly be attributed to the adjustment of the monetary policy stance. Another member highlighted that during January resources due to a reduction in investment funds’ balances, while the strong demand for highly liquid instruments persisted. He/she added that markets have still not incorporated the risk of possible increases in the cost of corporate financing derived from the balance sheet reduction by the Federal Reserve. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along with the risk of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and price formation becoming contaminated. Most members also considered the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and financial conditions, and the environment of significant uncertainty and greater inflationary pressures associated with considerations, all members voted to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within Most members stated that in the next monetary thoroughly the behavior of inflationary pressures as well as of all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and on its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial One member highlighted that, given the inflationary pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict and the beginning of a less expansionary policy by the Federal Reserve, the monetary policy stance must be reinforced to reduce possible second-round effects in the price formation process, and to maintain financial stability. However, he/she mentioned that, in Mexico, the current interest rate is relatively high, as little monetary stimulus was granted during 2020 and began to be withdrawn early in 2021. In this regard, he/she noted that it is not convenient to overreact to the expected rate increases in the United States. He/she highlighted that domestic inflation will decrease along with world inflation, as the number of infections decline, as vaccination coverage improves at a global level, and as monetary and fiscal policies in systemically important economies are adjusted. He/she added that inflationary risks stemming from the geopolitical conflict are limited due to Mexico’s fuel price policy. Given the aforementioned balance of risks, looking ahead, the policy response should be moderate and gradual, avoiding taking the reference rate to an excessively restrictive level. He/she pointed out that the interest rate levels anticipated by both private sector analysts and market traders are too high, considering the level of deviation of inflation from its target, and the slack conditions in Mexico relative to other economies. He/she warned that the Mexican economy shows weakness precisely where monetary policy has a direct influence, such as the deterioration of credit for productive purposes, the stagnation of investment, the lack of dynamism in construction, the fall in consumer credit, and the reduction in domestic sales of new automobiles. He/she stated that, in contrast, consumption of nondurables, which responds more to other determinants, has performed better. He/she added that continuing to raise the reference rate at an excessively elevated pace could affect the country's growth outlook, which would reduce its attractiveness to capital flows seeking high yields in emerging market equities. He/she warned that a recession would translate into macroeconomic and financial instability, exerting pressures on both risk premium and the exchange rate, which eventually could affect inflation. Another member mentioned that Mexico is one of the few economies with a positive ex-ante real interest rate close to its neutral level, which has maintained solid macroeconomic fundamentals, and still has a widely negative output gap. He/she stated that geopolitical tensions constitute a new source of uncertainty for the behavior of Mexico’s nominal, real and financial variables, and that their potential effects will depend on the duration and intensity of said tensions. He/she added that, up to now, the impact on economic activity is uncertain, while regarding inflation, the risks are several. He/she pointed out that inflation in Mexico continues being subject to pressures related mainly to the effects of the pandemic and whose global factors may continue to influence the inflation outlook. As a result, Banco de México's forecasts were significantly revised and convergence to the inflation target was also adjusted accordingly to the horizon in which monetary policy operates. He/she stated that the rapid increase in inflation could affect the anchoring of inflation expectations if sufficient measures are not implemented. He/she mentioned that the monetary policy stance must remain robust so that the balance of risks regarding the medium-term inflation forecast acquires a more neutral character. He/she added that under an inflation forecast targeting framework, it is fundamental to guarantee that long-term expectations remain anchored and that shorter-term expectations return to the target. Thus, looking ahead, if the ex-ante real interest rate needs to be above the range estimated as neutral, a balanced relative monetary policy stance must be maintained. He/she pointed out that commitment to the constitutional mandate requires monetary policy stance be such that it ensures convergence to the inflation target, maintaining a proper balance in light of the imminent cycle of upward adjustments in the United States, and also foster the proper functioning of the financial system and an orderly adjustment in markets. He/she considered that, looking ahead, Banco de México must continue monitoring the observed and expected determinants of inflation. One member stated that inflationary pressures continue increasing and their persistence is not expected to diminish for a long period. He/she noted that it is necessary to induce a downward trajectory of inflation towards its long-term target. He/she argued that, at least in the short term, it is necessary to respond to the Federal Reserve's cycle of interest rate increases with proportional ones in order not to relax the relative monetary policy stance, for which there is no room for maneuver. He/she also pointed out that Banco de México must remain attentive to any possible effects of the Federal Reserve's monetary tightening on financial markets, but without acting mechanically. He/she pointed out that a greater tightening than that of the Federal Reserve could be required when the outlook for domestic inflation so demands, but without introducing excessive monetary restriction. He/she stated that given the possibility of inflation reaching its peak in the next quarter and then begin declining, decisions should be taken cautiously. He/she argued that a balance should be sought when assessing inflation persistence, the cyclical conditions, and the Federal Reserve’s cycle of interest rate increases, keeping in mind inflation as the most important issue to tackle. He/she noted that the ex-ante real interest rate is still at the bottom of the neutral interest rate range, which implies that monetary policy must continue to be adjusted at the current pace until exiting the neutral stance and reaching one that is consistent with the current situation. He/she pointed out that inflation expectations and the price formation process have continued to deteriorate and that, without the expectations channel functioning properly, monetary policy’s transmission mechanisms will be limited. He/she added that the expectations channel should not be minimized by arguing that a rate increase only mitigates the effect of inflationary shocks of a certain nature. He/she argued that, instead, acting decisively should make expectations adjust downwards. Thus, understanding the causality of the expectations channel and the lag with which it operates is crucial to avoid narratives incompatible with its functioning. He/she also highlighted that the credit channel is the least effective in the Mexican economy due to the low levels of depth, inclusion, and competitiveness of the financial system, and the high levels of labor informality. He/she mentioned that being in favor of an insufficient monetary policy response, based on the possible negative effects on economic activity, could be counterproductive, as it would contribute to higher levels of inflation, which in turn could hinder economic growth. Therefore, he/she pointed out that sending distorted signals that might undermine the credibility regarding the central bank’s primary mandate should be avoided. He/she noted that, according to the latest Regional Economic Report, around 30% of business agents surveyed consider inflation as one of the main obstacles to growth. He/she stated that the fact that high inflation has a greater negative effect on low-income population should also be taken into consideration. Another member mentioned that the outlook for inflation has deteriorated in light of the geopolitical conflict, in addition to the negative implications of the pandemic. He/she warned about the risk of high and persistent inflation affecting the price formation process and inflation expectations, especially longerterm ones. He/she recalled that the expectations channel is one of the most important for monetary policy transmission in Mexico, and that being complacent in light of the observed levels of inflation could lead to their unanchoring, which would imply a high cost for society. He/she pointed out that monetary policy faces a greater dilemma because the recovery of economic activity is still incomplete. He/she mentioned that the fundamental role of monetary policy is to stop the inflationary inertia that has developed over the last year, and that it is therefore necessary to act in a timely and decisive manner. He/she argued that the desired effect on the real interest rate has not been achieved because forecasts have systematically underestimated inflation, leading to lower real interest rates than necessary. He/she stated that central banks that have acted more rapidly have been able to reduce their monetary stimulus more effectively. He/she added that it is necessary to analyze more extensively whether front loading the pace of adjustment of the reference rate would curb inflationary inertia more firmly, shorten the expected duration of the upward cycle, and achieve a final interest rate of lower magnitude. He/she noted that markets expect an elevated trajectory for the reference rate. He/she added that failure to act rapidly and decisively may imply having higher and longer-lasting real interest rates in the future, which would increase the cost in terms of domestic production and employment. He/she underlined that the action brought forward maintains consistency between communication about the primary objective and the actions that are being implemented, and that it seeks to strengthen medium- and long-term expectations. He/she considered that, given the balance of risks for inflation, the risk of a greater monetary tightening at a global level, and the possible impact of the current geopolitical conflict on markets, it may be necessary to modify the pace of adjustment of the reference rate, for which the Governing Board is prepared to make the appropriate decisions. One member mentioned that monetary policy faces an unprecedented environment, because in addition to the challenges to fulfill the primary mandate derived from the pandemic, which have not been fully resolved, there is a geopolitical conflict that has generated strong additional inflationary pressures and significantly higher levels of uncertainty. He/she argued that given the greater possibility of Mexico’s price formation process becoming contaminated, it is important to adjust the monetary policy stance to keep inflation expectations anchored. He/she warned that if the necessary measures are not taken, inflation expectations could be affected given the high levels of inflation that have been observed for an extended period, which could in turn jeopardize convergence to the inflation target. He/she pointed out that the global inflationary environment would also lead to tighter monetary conditions. He/she argued that given Mexico's high degree of financial and trade integration with the rest of the world and its exposure to various types of external shocks, it is necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic stance at all times. He/she underlined that, within Banco de México's attributions, this implies procuring a low and stable inflation and safeguarding the financial system’s strength. He/she warned about the social and economic costs of current inflation, which affect the lower-income population to a greater extent. He/she considered it imperative that, given the aforementioned challenges, the monetary policy response be clearly consistent with the convergence of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon, and seek to maintain inflation expectations anchored. He/she highlighted that future decisions should consider the evolution of the different shocks that have exerted pressure on inflation throughout the economic recovery, after the initial shock of the pandemic, and of those associated with the conflict in Eastern Europe, so that Banco de México fulfills its constitutional mandate. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along with the risk of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and price formation becoming contaminated. It also considered the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of global monetary and financial conditions, and the environment of significant uncertainty and greater inflationary pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict. Based on these considerations, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will monitor thoroughly the behavior of inflationary pressures as well as of all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to take the necessary actions to avoid the price formation process from becoming contaminated, and set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Gerardo Esquivel, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.50%.