Most members stated that timely indicators suggest that world economic activity continued decelerating during the third quarter. They indicated that it has been affected by the adverse effects of the military conflict, and one member added the impact of the tightening of financial conditions. However, most members highlighted continued showing strength. Some members underlined the recovery in labor participation rates and job creation in the United States. One member mentioned that, however, real wages in almost all advanced economies have started to register real negative variations, which anticipates future adjustments in private consumption. Another member added that high inflation has eroded the increase in nominal wages and highlighted that the current juncture has affected consumer confidence. Most members underlined that global growth especially for 2023. One member added that expectations of a recession have increased. Another member considered that the Chinese economy seems to have regained some dynamism. Nevertheless, some members pointed out that its growth expectations have been revised downwards. Among risks to the global economy, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic, the intensification of geopolitical tensions, and greater adjustments in monetary and financial conditions. One member added the energy crisis that may arise in Europe, as well as the possible effects of the decline in housing prices in advanced economies. Another member considered as additional risks: i) the increasing private debt that could lead to conditions of financial instability; ii) the high fiscal deficits, particularly in systemically important economies that implemented substantial stimulus packages during the pandemic; and iii) that the vulnerabilities in the real estate sector in China, in a context of weak economic activity, lead to credit default events, with amplifying effects to the rest of the world. Finally, he/she noted that the balance of risks for global economic activity remains considerably deteriorated. Most members pointed out that global inflation continued increasing. This occurred in an environment where imbalances between demand and supply in several markets, and still high levels of food and energy prices, persist. Some members noted that in most economies, inflation remains above their respective central bank targets. Most members highlighted that core inflation continues increasing. Some members pointed out that in the United States, headline inflation declined in August, while core inflation increased. One member stated that in the euro area headline and core inflation increased in August, while in the major emerging economies headline inflation remained at high levels and core inflation continued increasing. All members underlined the decline in the international prices of some commodities, volatility. They pointed out that disruptions in supply chains have also moderated. Most pressures on headline inflation have started to diminish. One member indicated that price-related pressures have decreased due to the effects of the favorable dynamics of the pandemic and to the restrictive stance adopted by various governments and central banks, which has led to a moderation of global spending. He/she considered that inflation expectations drawn from surveys and those implicit in market instruments have started to decrease at the margin in different countries. Some members stated that there is still uncertainty regarding whether world inflation has already reached its peak and whether its decline will coincide with central banks’ forecasts. Most members mentioned that a large number of central banks have continued raising their reference rates, some of them in a greater magnitude than expected. They mentioned that said institutions have maintained a restrictive tone, reaffirming their commitment to price stability. Regarding the Federal Reserve, all members stated that, in its latest monetary policy decision, it raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points for a third adjustments. Most members highlighted that the latest forecasts by said institution suggest further increases of 125 basis points for this year which would place the reference rate at 4.4%, and at 4.6% for the end of 2023. One member stated that the chairman of that institution expressed that future increases in the rates will continue to depend on incoming economic data. Most members mentioned that the European Central Bank also raised its reference rate by 75 basis points. One member underlined that other central banks have started to decouple from the Federal Reserve, responding to their domestic conditions. He/she pointed out that China and Japan continue implementing accommodative policy stances, while Chile and Brazil appear to have already reached the end of their hiking cycles. Most members mentioned that expectations of a faster monetary tightening worldwide and of reference rates at elevated levels for a prolonged period prevail. One member mentioned that monetary authorities have generally acknowledged that inflationary pressures will be more severe and longer-lasting than expected. He/she underlined that they also anticipate a delay in the convergence of inflation to their targets toward the end of 2023 and expressed that ex-ante real interest rates could exceed the neutral range for some time and attain levels above those previously estimated. He/she noted that central banks have indicated that, if necessary, they will make greater sacrifices in terms of growth and employment. Most members stated that financial conditions remained tight and that international financial markets exhibited volatility. They mentioned that the above have been affected by an outlook of more restrictive monetary policies in the main advanced economies and by a lower global growth outlook. They underlined that interest rates registered widespread and significant increases worldwide. They pointed out that stock markets exhibited a negative performance. They mentioned that the dollar continued gaining strength, reaching its highest level in 20 years. One member highlighted that this could imply a greater pass-through of external inflation to domestic inflation, a higher cost of debt service for debt denominated in that currency, and larger capital outflows in emerging economies. He/she added that the latter has been observed recently, particularly in fixed income instruments. Another member underlined that the pound sterling, the euro, and the yen reached their lowest levels in decades. Some members mentioned that the currencies of emerging economies exhibited a negative behavior, in a context of higher risk aversion. Some members highlighted that different central banks had to intervene in their foreign exchange markets. One member mentioned that risk premia in emerging economies also increased. Another member pointed out that an environment of high uncertainty is foreseen to continue for the rest of the year. Most members expect growth of economic activity during the third quarter of 2022 to slow down with respect to that observed in the first half of the year. However, they pointed out that after having remained weak in May and June, economic activity recovered in July. One member stated that said result was supported by the three main economic sectors. Nevertheless, he/she warned that almost 35% of sectoral activity remains below pre-pandemic levels. Another member added that economic activity still has not been able to surpass the level reached in April, and that, if timely figures for August are confirmed, economic activity will have remained on a flat trajectory for four consecutive months. Some members noted that the economy is expected to continue recovering gradually, although at a lower rate, and facing a complex global economic environment that maintains the balance of risks for growth biased to the downside. On the supply side, most members stated that supported by the sound performance of the manufacturing sector. One member indicated that industrial activity has expanded for five consecutive months. Some members considered said expansion has been heterogeneous across its sectors, showing a lack of dynamism in the mining and construction sectors. Most members highlighted the slight recovery of services in July, nevertheless they underlined that these remain weak. Some members mentioned that they continue showing a differentiated behavior. On the demand side, most members pointed out supported by the high levels of remittances and of the real wage bill. Some members stated that during the second quarter the monthly indicator of private consumption increased 1.2%, although it decelerated in May and June. One member underlined that consumption has barely recovered its pre-pandemic level and continues showing a certain lag with respect to its trend. Another member highlighted the positive trend of consumption of imported goods. However, most members noted that different consumption determinants, such as consumer confidence and real average income, among others, deteriorated at the margin. Some members noted that this suggests a possible deceleration of private consumption. Most members mentioned that investment continued recovering. One member pointed out that this recovery has occurred with a high monthly variability. Most members observed that the component of machinery and equipment has improved at the continues to lack dynamism. One member pointed out that spending on transportation equipment improved. Another member indicated that during the May-June period, total investment interrupted its growth, in the components of machinery and equipment and of construction. As for the external sector, most members underlined the positive performance of exports. Some members pointed out that automotive exports expanded in August, while the rest of manufacturing exports declined at the margin. One member noted that an improvement was observed in both the oil trade balance and the total trade balance. Another member added that the value of manufacturing exports has remained high, due to increases in both their volume and prices. One member warned that there are signals of a reduction in the growth rate of non-automotive exports, partly associated with expectations of a global slowdown. All members mentioned that different labor although some members pointed out that the recovery remains incomplete. Most members unemployment rate and the labor participation rate registered levels similar to those prior to the pandemic. One member added that in August the number of IMSS-insured jobs continued trending upwards. However, another member mentioned that there is still a deficit in formal job creation, and around 32 million workers remain in the informal sector. Some members highlighted that in August contractual wage revisions in the private sector and those of IMSS-insured workers continued trending upwards, with adjustments close to 7 and 12%, respectively. One member considered that, although the implementation of pending adjustments in wages is good news, the global indicator of labor productivity has accumulated eight consecutive quarters of contraction and is at levels previously observed in 2009, and that for this reason unit labor costs have increased considerably. Another member stated that the National Survey of Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish), which includes both formal and informal workers, suggests that wages have not increased significantly in real terms. In contrast, he/she pointed out that inflation might be having a greater incidence on certain sectors, which would be associated with a heterogeneous recovery. He/she pointed out that wage revisions have concentrated in the subgroup of formal IMSS-insured workers, where the sectors of construction, agriculture and business-support services stand out. In contrast, he/she stated that real wages in other sectors are lagging behind. He/she mentioned that recent studies which decompose wage dynamics of IMSS-insured workers by type of worker, suggest that wage increases can be largely attributed to the 2021 labor outsourcing reform. He/she deemed it important to assess if such increases will be observed in the future once the effects of said reform dissipate. Most members pointed out that slack conditions in the economy are expected to continue decreasing. One member warned that, on the demand side, the negative output gap could be inexistent or even positive if potential GDP turns out to be lower than estimated, or if the negative effects of the labor outsourcing reform are excluded. Another member argued that economic activity continues showing considerable slack, given that in the second quarter of the year, GDP remained well below its medium-term trajectory and slightly below its pre-pandemic level. All members emphasized the high inflation levels. Most members indicated that in the first fortnight of September headline and core inflation registered annual rates of 8.76 and 8.27%, respectively. They stated that both headline and core inflation continue trending upwards. One member stated that such upward trajectory has been observed for over 20 months for headline inflation, and for over 18 months for core inflation. Some members mentioned that inflation has repeatedly been at higher-than-expected levels since early 2021. One member pointed out that headline inflation does not show signs of reaching its peak. Nonetheless, another member stated that pressures at the margin on monthly inflation have trended downwards since March. One member added that both headline and core inflation remain at levels unseen in two decades. Another member mentioned that even CPI items with more price rigidity register inflation levels above 4%, which indicates generalized pressures. Most members stated that the high levels of inflation in Mexico are partly attributed to a global phenomenon. They indicated that although less disruptions references of some commodities have been observed, there are still imbalances between supply and demand in different markets. Some members pointed out that production costs remain affected by increases in various input prices. One member mentioned that world inflation, particularly in the United States, needs to show a change of trend for inflation in Mexico to begin decreasing. However, he/she warned that this would not be sufficient, given that increasing pressures are also being faced at a domestic level. Most members mentioned that core inflation continued registering high levels. One member pointed out that this was observed in practically all of its components. Another member noted that, at the margin, there were lower pressures on monthly core inflation, particularly in food merchandise and services. Some members highlighted that merchandise inflation is at double-digit levels. Most members pointed out that food merchandise inflation reached 13.27% in the first half of September. One member pointed out that this figure is nearly double the one registered a year ago, and that its annual increase in August was more pronounced than that of previous months. He/she added that this reflects the high levels of international food commodity prices. Another member mentioned that food merchandise prices have been increasing at double-digit rates for months. He/she added that in addition to negatively affecting the CPI and the purchasing power of lower-income households, this situation is worrying because consumers perceive these increases as the level of inflation in the economy in general. Some members pointed out that non-food merchandise inflation continues facing pressures. Some members noted that it has consolidated at very high levels and one member warned that it has trended upwards this year. Most members mentioned that services inflation has highlighted that it is at very high levels. Some members pointed out that this is due to the inflation in tourism and food services. One member added the inflation in education services as a cause. Another member deemed that services prices are responding to pressures on input costs and to an increase in demand due to greater mobility. All members noted that non-core inflation remains at high levels. Some members mentioned that this is mainly explained by the prices of agricultural and livestock products. One member highlighted that the non-core component remains at high levels despite government efforts to contain energy inflation. He/she added that it is not expected to decrease easily. Another member mentioned that this component registered monthly rates in line with its historical average for three consecutive months. He/she added that this favorable behavior was observed in energy and in agriculture and livestock products. One member highlighted that inflation of agricultural and livestock products reached double digits. He/she pointed out that despite the decrease in international references, energy prices in Mexico have not declined proportionally. However, another member mentioned that energy prices registered relatively low annual inflation levels. Most members stated that expectations for headline and core inflation for 2022 and 2023 rose again. Some members pointed out that this has been in line with the observed increase in inflation. Most members indicated that medium-term expectations increased slightly at the margin and remained stable, although above the target. However, some members highlighted that their distribution shows a greater dispersion. Regarding expectations for core inflation, one member stated that long-term ones decreased at the margin. In this context, another member mentioned that although medium- and long-term inflation expectations have begun to stabilize, they are still at high levels. instruments, most members noted that these have continued to deteriorate. Some members mentioned that those related to the long-term remain slightly above 3%. Some members noted that breakeven inflation registered generalized increases in all maturities. Most members stated that, in view of greater- than-anticipated inflationary shocks and an outlook for their effects lasting longer than anticipated, forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards for the entire forecast horizon. They pointed out that, in the foreseen to converge to the 3% target in the third quarter of 2024. One member mentioned that pointwise convergence is in line with the time frame in which monetary policy operates and coincides with the anticipated convergence of inflation in several economies. However, he/she noted that the fact that inflationary shocks could worsen or that new pressures could materialize cannot be ruled out. Another member highlighted that convergence to the target will take time because lower levels of external inflation do not automatically translate into a decline in domestic inflation, and because of the lag with which the restrictive stance will have an impact. He/she stated that convergence will be fragile given the continuous emergence of unanticipated shocks. He/she mentioned that convergence will be difficult to achieve, as it implies that by the second half of is usually observed. He/she indicated that, in addition to the fact that it has not followed a downward trend, it has a very strong seasonality, and it is volatile. Likewise, he/she pointed out that there is a divergence for the end of 2023 between our forecasts and analyst expectations, which calls into question the credibility of the trajectory presented, and could contribute to the deterioration of medium- and longterm expectations. Among upward risks to inflation, most members mentioned the persistence of core inflation at pressures associated with the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict. One member considered that international reference prices of various commodities have shown a strong correlation with domestic prices and have generated an important pass-through onto domestic inflation, and for that reason it may be a risk if such pass-through shows an asymmetric effect onto the decline in inflation as the price of these commodities declines. Therefore, he/she stated that, looking ahead, the process of convergence could face significant challenges. As for wage revisions, another member estimated that these could intensify due to additional increases in the minimum wage, which could rise by more than 20% in the next two years. One member highlighted that the high levels of inflation seem to have started to affect wage revisions, which could imply the risk of a price-wage spiral. Another member pointed out that salaries, including those of both formal and informal workers, have not increased significantly in real terms, and therefore it is difficult to argue that there are generalized wage pressures. One member added the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in light of prospects of tighter global financial conditions. Another member added that the economy faces increasing domestic pressures. He/she noted that the output gap could be smaller than currently estimated and pointed out that services prices have increased considerably, even though they are generally non-tradable. He/she added that weatherrelated factors could exert upward pressure on prices. He/she stated that various risks are taking place in an environment of low competitiveness in multiple sectors, which could favor price increases. One member mentioned two risks to public finances that could exert pressure on monetary policy. First, that the growth levels foreseen in the 2023 Economic Package do not materialize. Second, that a larger fiscal deficit with greater levels of public spending are observed. Regarding downward risks, another member highlighted a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in world economic activity, as well as a reduction in the effects of the pandemic and the military conflict on production and distribution chains. In this context, most members mentioned that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased Most members pointed out that domestic financial markets reflected the global dynamics of lower risk appetite and a generalized strength of the US dollar. They stated that the stock However, they pointed out that the peso remained stable. They noted a favorable behavior compared to the currencies of most emerging economies. One member noted that this positive result was also observed with respect to the currencies of advanced economies. Another member stated that the peso has been more volatile in recent days due to external factors. Some members highlighted that the sound macroeconomic fundamentals have contributed to the relatively favorable performance of domestic financial markets, particularly of the foreign exchange market. One member added that exchange rate stability has not only prevented further capital outflows, but also reduced inflationary pressures stemming from imported goods. Another member indicated that fiscal discipline has also contributed to preserve the credit ratings of public debt. He/she noted that capital flows to the debt market by non-residents have been negatively affected by the global component, and positively by the idiosyncratic factor. He/she stated that this explains the better performance of Mexican debt securities relative to those of other emerging economies. One member pondered that monetary policy actions implemented by Banco de México have led to an attractive volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States. Most members highlighted that interest rates of government bonds increased throughout the entire yield curve. Some members pointed out that short-term interest rates increased close to 120 basis points. One member added that medium- and longterm interest rates increased by up to 110 basis points. Some members highlighted that the yield curve of real interest rate instruments also increased in all its maturities. Some members considered that this implies a tightening of financial conditions and reflects expectations of a more restrictive monetary policy stance. One member pointed out that the sovereign default premia rose significantly. One member highlighted that credit to the productive sector continued recovering. He/she added that despite an environment of higher interest rates, domestic financing to firms increased in July due to the gradual improvement in credit from commercial banks. He/she added that consumer credit continues increasing and that banks’ loan portfolio delinquency rates continue declining. Another member considered that, although it improved at the margin, credit to the productive sectors remained weak and below its pre-pandemic level and its long-term trend. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 9.25%. The Board added that with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board will assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy decisions based One member stated that the environment for conducting monetary policy has become more complicated, in view of inflationary pressures that still show no clear signs of dissipating, and tighter international financial conditions. He/she argued that since June of last year, throughout the entire inflationary episode associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine, Banco de México has increased the reference rate in a timely and decisive manner, including increases of 75 basis points in the latest decisions. He/she highlighted that this reflects the commitment to the central bank’s primary mandate. As for the ex-ante real interest rate, he/she mentioned that it is now around the upper bound of the range estimated as neutral, and should be brought into clearly restrictive territory. He/she pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase would achieve this objective and would reflect the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate, in a context of significant inflationary pressures. He/she stated that such reinforcement is also necessary to anchor inflation expectations, mainly longer-term ones. He/she underlined two challenges. First, that although adjustments in medium- and long-term inflation expectations during the year have been moderate, it is essential to act decisively to avoid an unanchoring process. He/she warned that, if this process were to materialize, it would affect price formation and significantly jeopardize the convergence of inflation to its target. Second, that monetary policy actions contributed to an orderly adjustment of financial markets, including the foreign exchange market, and prevented an impact on long term expectations. However, he/she warned that episodes of greater risk aversion and exchange rate volatility cannot be ruled out, and thus a prudent monetary policy is required to avoid possible negative effects on financial markets. He/she added that, looking ahead, the hiking cycle must continue and pointed out that the magnitude of subsequent increases should be discussed based on the evolution of inflation and its determinants. He/she highlighted that inflationary episodes have a regressive impact, affecting lower-income households the most, since they have less access to the formal financial system and, consequently, have fewer alternatives to protect themselves from generalized price increases. He/she recalled that food prices have risen in greater magnitude, intensifying the regressive effects, since lowerincome households tend to allocate a greater proportion of their spending to these products. He/she noted that it is essential for the central bank to prevent high inflation from becoming entrenched, as it would have persistent adverse repercussions on poverty, income distribution and, in general, on the well-being of Mexican families. He/she stated that this is why it is key for the Board to explicitly manifest its commitment to achieving the central bank’s primary mandate. Another member pointed out that, since the previous monetary policy decision, inflationary pressures, the factors that influence the forecasted trajectory for inflation, as well as its expectations, have deteriorated. He/she stated that additional factors are added to the deteriorated inflationary environment, at a global and local level, including a juncture of lower liquidity, high exchange rate volatility, greater risk aversion, as well as a deterioration in economic activity, and the possibility of new shocks stemming from the continuation or escalation of geopolitical conflicts. In his/her opinion, this environment implies that it will be necessary to continue increasing the reference rate, and that it should remain in a more restrictive level throughout the entire horizon in which monetary policy operates. He/she added that this would contribute to mitigate the deterioration of the price formation process and stop inflationary expectations from increasing, allowing inflation to converge to the target. He/she pointed out that although the unanchoring process seems to have started, adjustments at the margin in long-term expectations could indicate that pressures are somewhat contained. He/she considered it convenient to maintain the pace of monetary tightening that has been implemented given that, since the beginning of the hiking cycle, taking into consideration a 75 basis-point increase in the current decision, 525 basis points of increases would have been accumulated and the ex-ante real interest rate would finally be brought to restrictive territory. He/she added that a 75 basis-point increase would be consistent with the expected trajectory of inflation and would allow it to converge to the 3% target within the forecast horizon. However, he/she underlined that more adverse global conditions, in an environment of greater uncertainty, could lead the Governing Board to consider modifying the pace of adjustment. He/she warned that no scenario can be ruled out, and therefore it is fundamental to clearly communicate that: i) the reference rate will continue increasing; ii) the magnitude of the increases will depend on the conditions prevailing at the time of each decision; and iii) it will be necessary for the monetary policy stance to remain restrictive within the forecast horizon, to guarantee the convergence of inflation to the target. One member considered it necessary to adjust the monetary policy stance in light of the inflation levels and to avoid second-round effects. He/she underlined that it is essential to continue adopting a restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she mentioned that with an increase of 75 basis points, the target rate would decidedly lay in restrictive territory and that it is time to evaluate up to when and to what extent the policy stance will be tightened, and what will be the response to additional hikes by the Federal Reserve. He/she stated that the terminal rate of the cycle would need to be determined based on the ex-ante real interest rate rather than on the nominal interest rate. He/she stated that the maximum level for the ex-ante real interest rate in recent years was 4.4%, reached in 2018. Thus, he/she estimated that a possible terminal level of such rate in this cycle could be between 4.5 and 5%. He/she added that such level would have a significant restrictive effect on economic activity and an impact on economic agents' expectations. He/she mentioned that, given the level of inflation expectations, said real interest rate level would be reached with a nominal interest rate of between 9.75 and 10%, and thus a higher rate would be unnecessarily restrictive. He/she warned that this would imply having excessively high levels of real interest rates in the short term that might turn out to be even higher in the future, to the extent that the monetary policy stance affects inflation expectations. He/she considered it desirable for the hiking cycle to conclude by the end of 2022 and that the restrictive monetary policy stance is maintained throughout He/she pointed out that it is imperative to consider the lag with which monetary policy works and avoid an excessive tightening. He/she indicated that the restrictive policy would have just begun affecting credit, consumption and investment, and noted that the effect of this stance, along with the decline in international prices of commodities, makes it possible to foresee that inflationary pressures will begin to diminish. He/she warned that, if ending 2022 with an ex-ante real interest rate close to 5% is to be achieved, the pace of adjustments would need to be reduced, regardless of what the Federal Reserve may do. He/she expressed that decoupling from the pace of said institution’s interest rate hikes could be feasible as of the next policy decision since: i) Banco de México began its hiking cycle earlier and, considering the proposed hike, it would accumulate points in the federal funds rate are anticipated and Banco de México requires a smaller adjustment; iii) Mexico's ex-ante real interest rate is in restrictive territory, unlike that of the United States; iv) Mexico does not face demand-related or labor market pressures; v) the interest rate spread relative to the United States is close to historical highs and far above the spread calculated with the estimated neutral interest rates for both countries; and vi) Mexico maintains solid macroeconomic fundamentals. Another member highlighted the importance of having a restrictive monetary policy stance consistent with a complex inflationary landscape. He/she pointed out that the conditions are not suitable for slowing the pace of interest rate increases and that it could even be debated whether such pace should be accelerated. Although an increase of 100 basis points would send a strong signal and contribute to contain the deterioration of expectations, it is not advisable since: i) it would lead to an unnecessary increase in the relative stance; ii) an increase that is greater-than that anticipated by the consensus of analysts and market operators would generate uncertainty about future adjustments; iii) there would be the risk of reaching a very high terminal rate, with a pace of adjustment difficult to maintain that would require subsequent reductions, for which there would be no conditions in the coming months; and iv) it would be difficult to justify a strategy of front loading, bringing forward the interest rate hikes, given the uncertainty about the terminal level of the interest rate. He/she stated that although a significantly restrictive absolute monetary stance would not eliminate the inflation outbreak, it would prevent second-round effects from taking place and the risk of expectations becoming unanchored. He/she added that an increase of 75 basis points is barely enough to bring the ex-ante real interest rate further into restrictive territory, and thus any fears about reaching an excessively restrictive monetary policy stance, which affects the rate of growth of economic activity, may be ruled out. He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions become a secondary priority until inflation is brought under control. He/she argued that with the aforementioned adjustment, the ex-ante real interest rate would be at the maximum level reached during the restrictive cycles of 2008 and 2019. He/she added that in view of a more complex inflationary outlook, the terminal real interest rate should be higher, even more so than that anticipated by markets, and at a level near 6%, as his/her own models anticipate. Moreover, he/she argued that it is not possible to implement a hike lower than that of the Federal Reserve not because an automatic rule is followed, but because: i) synchronizing inflationary pressures between both economies demands a similar tightening; ii) a solid relative stance is necessary given expectations of additional increases by the Federal Reserve; iii) a premature decoupling could generate exchange rate volatility and be perceived as a sign of complacency; and iv) an interest rate spread of at least 600 basis points should be maintained at least until the end of the year to support the good performance of the Mexican peso in view of the appreciation of the dollar and the higher volatility. He/she stated that it should be communicated that it is very likely that the same pace of adjustment will continue in the next decision, adding that higher increases should not be ruled out if the inflationary outlook deteriorates even further. He/she pointed out that it must be highlighted that the magnitude of the increases will depend on the latest information, especially regarding observed inflation and its expectations, as well as forward-looking inflation indicators, such as producer prices and international price benchmarks for commodities. He/she emphasized that in order to avoid higher costs in the future, the commitment to the constitutional mandate must be strengthened until the inflation trend has moved past its inflection point, inflation expectations have stabilized, and inflation forecasts are no longer revised upwards. One member stated that, in line with the monetary policy regime, the stance should be adjusted so that the central bank inflation forecast reflects a more neutral and symmetric balance of risks. He/she stated that during this hiking cycle, Banco de México has acted in a committed manner, with timely and gradual increases in the reference rate, as well as robust and forceful hikes when conditions have so required. He/she argued that a restrictive monetary stance has already been achieved. He/she added that, although medium- and long-term inflation expectations have started to stabilize, they are still at high levels and within them they exhibit a bimodal distribution between 3.5 and 4%, which represents a significant challenge for monetary policy. He/she considered it necessary to maintain such expectations anchored. He/she pointed out that by increasing the pace of adjustments of the monetary policy rate, the ex-ante real interest rate was raised beyond the range estimated as neutral. He/she noted that an increase of 75 basis points would strengthen the absolute monetary stance and ensure that the nominal interest rate lies above the level of observed inflation, which is a necessary condition to achieve its convergence to the target. He/she emphasized that the nominal interest rate would also be above the expected levels of inflation within the forecast horizon, which is consistent with a downward trajectory of inflation. Regarding the relative monetary stance, he/she stated that inflation expectations in the United States have declined faster than in Mexico, and thus the ex-ante real interest rate spread between both countries has narrowed. He/she highlighted that the greater monetary tightening in the United States and the intensification of geopolitical tensions led to an increase in risk aversion and to greater volatility. He/she argued that the proposed interest rate increase would provide certainty that markets and the financial system will adjust in an orderly manner and avoid affecting the economy's price formation process. He/she stated that, looking ahead, each decision must be carefully calibrated, determining the appropriate monetary stance to guarantee price stability and ensure the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she underlined that all available information must be considered when determining the monetary policy stance. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as well as the possibility of greater effects on inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the presence of all its members, it decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 9.25%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times, with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board will assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy decisions based on the prevailing conditions. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Gerardo Esquivel and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 9.25%. The main reason behind my dissenting opinion regarding the monetary policy statement is that, in view of the deteriorating outlook for inflation and financial conditions, the significant correction in our inflation forecasts, and a balance of risks biased significantly to the upside, I consider it appropriate to provide an explicit guide that allows an alignment of expectations on the future path of the reference rate within the horizon in which monetary policy operates. As I have mentioned on previous occasions, communication is a key aspect of monetary policy. Following this premise, I believe that, in addition to mentioning that the reference rate will continue to be adjusted upwards, and that the magnitude of said adjustments will be evaluated by the Governing Board based on the conditions prevailing at the time each policy decision is made, on this ocassion, the monetary policy statement should mention explicitly and clearly that, in order to converge to the 3% target, the monetary policy stance must remain restrictive during the entire forecast horizon. Although a high level of uncertainty prevails, providing a guide on the future stance of monetary policy is necessary to enable the formation of expectations consistent with inflation’s convergence to the target.