Most members mentioned that a moderate recovery of the global economy is expected during the third quarter. They noted that this is partly due to the reopening of activities in China. Some members mentioned, as an additional factor, the rebound in the US economy. One member attributed this rebound to an increase in exports, and pointed out that domestic demand continued to decelerate. Nevertheless, most members highlighted the weakening of the European economies. Regarding labor markets, they stated that in advanced economies they continued showing strength. However, one member noted a gradual reduction in the tightness of the US labor market, given the slight decrease in the vacancy-tounemployment ratio and a moderation in the dynamism of non-farm payrolls. Another member stated that despite the significant wage increases, households’ purchasing power continues to be eroded by high inflation. Most members mentioned that global growth forecasts for 2023 continued to deteriorate. They highlighted that according to forward-looking indicators, there are signs of disturbances to international trade. Some members added that forward-looking indicators for manufacturing and services show weakness. One member argued that the global economic slowdown is the result of global monetary tightening, lower fiscal stimulus, and shocks derived from the conflict in Ukraine. Some members pointed out that a slowdown in fixed capital investment in the United States is foreseen. One member said that the real estate sector is already showing a significant weakening and noted that personal savings are at their lowest levels since 2015, which in his/her view may suggest a reduction in aggregate demand in the future. Among the risks to the global economy, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic, geopolitical tensions, and tighter financial conditions. One member mentioned that the probability of a global recession increased. Some members considered that the balance of risks for world economic activity remains biased to the downside. All members highlighted that pressures on commodity prices and disruptions in supply chains have shown signs of mitigation. One member pointed out that the above can be observed in indexes that measure supply-chain pressures, in pending orders, in delivery times, in input prices and freight shipments. Most members noted that in certain economies headline inflation decreased. One member mentioned that in some countries the inflation peak may have already been observed. However, most members warned that world inflation remains high and above the central pressures on core inflation persist. In this regard, one member pointed out the divergence across regions. He/she noted that there are economies where domestic inflationary processes have remained isolated from global pressures, some others where inflation continues rising, and others where it has started to decline. He/she considered that, although the declines in headline inflation have not yet passed through to the core component, they are relevant, as the level of headline inflation matters for secondround effects and the persistence of the inflation index components. He/she added that producer price indices, which usually precede core inflation dynamics, have improved in various economies. He/she concluded that, looking ahead, lower inflationary pressures are expected. Some members stated that convergence towards the central banks’ targets is still anticipated to take place between the end of 2023 and 2024. Nevertheless, one member warned that upside risks and uncertainty about the future evolution of global inflation persist. Most members stated that a large number of central banks continued raising their reference rates, some of them in a smaller-than-expected magnitude. They considered that in some economies it is possible that the pace of upward adjustments will moderate. Some members noted that certain central banks continued making large adjustments to their interest rates. Some members pointed out that certain Latin American central banks announced the end of their hiking cycles or are expected to reach it soon. In this context, one member reflected on the assessment of risks that central banks are facing: on the one hand, the risk of prematurely halting the tightening process, causing inflation to become more entrenched and more difficult to fight against, and, on the other hand, the risk that an excessive tightening will significantly affect economic activity or generate financial instability. Most members mentioned that reference rates are expected to remain elevated Regarding the Federal Reserve, all members stated that, in its most recent decision, it raised the federal funds rate by 75 basis points. Most members considered that said institution could slow down its pace of adjustments in the near future. Some members stated that it announced that future increases will depend on the accumulated monetary tightening, the lags through which monetary policy operates, and on the evolution of the economy and financial markets. Some members added that the chairman of said institution stated that they now foresee a higher terminal rate than previously anticipated. One member stated that he also mentioned that they will maintain a restrictive policy stance for a prolonged period. Another member added that he pointed out that they will follow a datadependent approach. Most members mentioned that interest rates increased around the world and that financial highlighted that financial markets continued showing volatility. One member noted that those of emerging economies continued registering some deterioration. He/she warned about the risks of a possible excessive monetary tightening and a global recession for international financial markets. Some members underlined the deterioration of liquidity conditions in fixed income markets. Most members noted a certain improvement in stock markets. Some members mentioned that this was due to better-thananticipated corporate earnings reports. One member stated that an additional factor was the perception that interest rates may have reached their peak levels. Most members highlighted the strength of the US dollar. However, one member pointed out that it depreciated at the margin. Nonetheless, he financial conditions, the US dollar’s strength could lead to: i) a higher servicing cost for debt denominated in that currency; ii) a higher passthrough of external inflationary pressures; iii) capital outflows from emerging economies due to lower risk appetite; and iv) greater risks to financial stability. Most members highlighted that, according to continued recovering during the third quarter. Some members stated that it exhibited a rate of expansion similar to that of the previous two quarters. Most members pointed out that said rate was higher than expected. Some members noted that economic activity has practically returned to its prepandemic levels. Most members stated that the three main economic sectors contributed to the recovery. However, they indicated that the recovery continues to be heterogeneous. One member noted that approximately 18% of sector activity is still more than 5% behind its pre-pandemic levels. Some members warned that the Mexican economy will continue facing an environment of economic weakness and high global uncertainty. One member added that the forecast of a moderation in economic activity in the last quarter of the year is maintained, although potentially smaller than previously expected. highlighted the favorable performance of the manufacturing sector. One member pointed out that it has been supported by increased automotive production. Another member warned that the construction sector has trended downwards in recent months. Most members noted that tertiary activities continue showing dynamism. One member stated that this was observed especially in services that are more closely linked to manufacturing activities. He/she added that the sectors more associated with in-person activities exhibited lower dynamism. On the demand side, most members noted that private consumption showed a reactivation in August. Some members highlighted the boost in consumption of domestic goods and services. As for the determinants of consumption, some members mentioned that remittances remain at high levels. One member pointed out that they have accumulated they show some signs of deceleration. Another member noted that the real wage bill also remains at high levels. In contrast, some members stated that the consumer confidence index is below prepandemic levels. Most members mentioned that gross fixed investment has shown weakness. Some members highlighted the stagnation of investment in construction. However, some members noted the improvement in the transportation equipment category. As for external demand, some members highlighted the good performance of exports, mainly of the automotive sector. Most members pointed out that unemployment rates are at low levels. One member mentioned that formal employment has maintained a positive trend. In this context, he/she considered that the labor market continued performing adequately, and another member that it continues showing strength. However, one member noted that the recovery of this market somewhat stagnated in the third quarter. Some members pointed out that indicators such as the labor participation rate are still at levels lower than those observed prior to the pandemic. One member indicated that, up to the second quarter of 2022, the employment rate in the informal sector was above another member mentioned that there are mixed signals regarding the performance of the labor market. Most members considered that slack conditions in the economy continued decreasing. One member noted that the output gap estimate is not statistically different from zero. However, another member stated that slack conditions still remain wide, given that the GDP of the third quarter of the year is still far below its long-term trend. He/she stated that slack is mainly due to the evolution of investment, as well as consumption, which, despite having surpassed its pre-pandemic levels, continues lagging behind its trend trajectory. One member argued that given the problems in measuring potential GDP, the output gap could be smaller than estimated. All members highlighted that, in October, members stated that this was due to a decrease in the non-core component. In this regard, one member mentioned that the reduction in headline inflation did not occur for the appropriate reasons. Some members pointed out that this decrease was due to the behavior of specific prices. He/she added that just over 40% of CPI items still register annual variations higher than 10%, which suggests generalized pressures. Some members stated that, in October, headline inflation was below Banco de México's forecasts. One member added that this was also observed with the September figure. Another member underlined that inflation has surprised to the downside relative to analysts' expectations. One member pointed out that there have been four consecutive fortnights of decreases in annual inflation. He/she noted that in October the annualized monthly rate was slightly above its historical average. He/she added that this indicates that pressures have eased with respect to those observed in the first half of the year. Nevertheless, another member considered that headline and core inflation continue to be affected by the accumulated pressures associated with both the pandemic and the military conflict. All members pointed out that core inflation continued trending upwards, reaching 8.42% in October. Most members highlighted that it has been increasing for 23 months. One member emphasized the historically high levels of inflation reached by this sub-index. Another member argued that it still does not show clear signs of having reached a peak. Some members mentioned that it continues facing considerable pressures. One member stated that the core component excluding processed foods registered a significantly lower and more stable annual inflation than that of the traditional core component. All members highlighted that food merchandise inflation is the one facing the greatest pressures. One member stated that it has registered double-digit annual variations during the last eight months. Some members expressed their concern that it continues increasing and that more than 70% of its items register annualized seasonally adjusted monthly variations higher than 10%. One member indicated that non-food merchandise also continues facing pressures. Regarding services prices, some members noted that they are responding to an increase in demand due to greater mobility. One emphasized that this upward trend is expected to continue for the following months. As an additional factor, another member mentioned the higher operating costs. Most members warned that food services prices are being subject to pressures. One member pointed out that among non-tradable goods these are the ones that have increased the most. Some members stated that pressures on food merchandise prices have passed-through onto food services prices. One member pointed out that these two items account for more than half of the variation in the core component. He/she indicated that significant pressures are also observed in tourism services. Some members noted that services inflation decreased at the margin. One member pointed out that this was due to a lower variation in telecommunications prices. Another member noted that the education and housing components have behaved similarly to what was observed prior to the pandemic. All members stated that non-core inflation declined. Most members mentioned that this was due to the behavior of L.P. gas prices. Some members noted that, in October, monthly non-core inflation reached historically low levels. One member pointed out that pressures on this component have remained low and stable for several months. Nevertheless, another member expressed his/her concern that the favorable evolution of this component is attributed mainly to the lower annual price increases of a specific energy item, which are partly explained by a base effect. Some members added that agricultural and livestock product prices registered smaller variations at the margin. One member warned that their inflation remains at doubledigit levels. All members agreed that some of the shocks that have affected inflation have shown signs of easing and pointed out the lower pressures on supply chains. However, one member stated that this has not been reflected in Mexico’s core inflation. Some members noted the decline in producer price inflation. One member highlighted that this reduction was of 300 basis points between June and October. He/she stated that this will eventually help core inflation to start declining. Another member pointed out that this decrease was particularly observed in the prices of intermediate goods in the industrial sector, whose annual inflation has accumulated four consecutive declines. He/she stated that in order for the inflationary problem to start to be resolved, external pressures, especially in the United States, must diminish. However, he/she warned that Mexico’s price pressures will not ease immediately due to growing domestic pressures, such as those derived from minimum wage increases. He/she mentioned that there is also an inertia of increases in the prices of non-tradable goods that will not be easy to control. He/she considered that there are some mixed signals of lower external pressures and increasing domestic pressures. One member stated that there are additional cost pressures stemming from labor markets, associated with the dynamism of employment and the high rate of growth of nominal wages, which is inconsistent with the inflation target. Another member added that commodity prices still remain at high levels and are exerting pressure on various production costs. inflation expectations increased. However, one member mentioned that those for the next 12 months decreased slightly in October. All members noted the upward adjustment in inflation expectations for the medium term. Some members pointed out that their dispersion has increased. One member stated that this indicates that there is progressively less consensus regarding a certain level. He/she pointed out that, in contrast to previous episodes, where the increase in short-term expectations did not pass-through onto longer-term ones, inflation expectations for the next four years have now reached the upper bound of the variability range. He/she mentioned that it would seem that inflationary expectations are more sensitive to upside inflation surprises. He/she pointed out that the above could be signs of a greater risk of unanchoring of inflation expectations. As for long-term expectations, most members noted that they remained stable, although above the target. One member stated that, for the core component, they increased between August and October. Some members noted that the distribution of longer-term expectations has become biased to values higher than the median. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, all members stated that they continued increasing. One noted that the higher breakeven inflation rate indicates that there is great uncertainty about the future of inflation. Another member mentioned that long-term inflation expectations lay at 3.25%. Most members highlighted that for the short term, forecasts for headline inflation were revised marginally downwards, while those for core inflation were revised slightly upwards. Some members pointed out that for the first time in several months the forecast for headline inflation was not adjusted upwards. One member stated that this indicates that the balance of risks is starting to be more consistent with central forecasts. However, some members remarked that inflation has not yet reached an inflection point. Meanwhile, some members considered it is likely to have reached its inflection point during the third quarter of the year. They foresaw that a downward trajectory of inflation is likely to materialize in subsequent months. One member noted that core inflation is expected to continue rising over the next months, reaching a peak in the fourth quarter of the year. With respect to upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the persistence of the core component at high levels. One member mentioned the persisting risk that the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict will continue exerting pressure on prices of different goods and services. He/she added that episodes of exchange rate depreciation, caused by possible bouts of volatility in international financial markets, cannot be ruled out. Another member stated that, given that the output gap could be smaller than estimated, demand-related pressures are likely to be present. Most members warned that greater pressures could be observed, given the increase in costs associated with hiring conditions and wage revisions. One member pointed out that revisions to contractual wages remain high, especially in the private sector, as they attained 8.2% in September, as compared to 4.5% registered in the public sector ones. He/she highlighted that said increases were higher than those observed in August, in a context in which the global labor productivity indicator has trended downwards for eight consecutive quarters. He/she stated that increases to the minimum wage expected for the next two years, lower labor productivity, and the high inflation levels foreseen for tackling inflation. Another member pointed out that, in his/her opinion, there are no widespread wagerelated pressures, and that they are rather circumscribed and reflect the heterogeneous economic recovery. He/she considered that, so far, no wage-price spiral is observed, given that, contrary to historical records, growth of real wages has currently been lower than price increases. He/she pointed out that some studies of international institutions suggest that wage-price dynamics, such as the currently observed, have not necessarily led to a wage-price spiral, but rather to the recovery of real wages once inflation starts to decline. He/she added that the largest wage increases are currently observed in sectors where salaries are more linked to the minimum wage, therefore said increments correspond to factors unrelated to the formation of inflation expectations. He/she concluded that, although there is no conclusive evidence that this type of pressures are being faced, it is important to continue monitoring the dynamics between inflation and wages. Regarding risks to the downside, one member mentioned the lower inflationary pressures that could derive from a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of the global economy and from the resolution of disruptions in production and distribution chains. Most members pointed out that the balance of risks for the foreseen inflation trajectory remains biased to the upside. One member mentioned that the balance remains considerably biased to the upside, as no change in trend has occurred. Another member noted that both observed and expected inflation determinants have started to be distributed closer around Banco de México’s central scenario. Most members highlighted that the Mexican peso has appreciated and showed more resilience than other currencies. They emphasized its orderly behavior in an uncertain and volatile international aversion. They pointed out that the resilience of the Mexican peso has been associated with the country’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals. Some members mentioned as additional factors the relatively high levels of the volatility-adjusted interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States. One member stated that this spread reflects the monetary policy actions implemented by Banco de México. He/she added that the above does not mean that there is a target for the exchange rate level. He/she pointed out that an economy with free capital mobility cannot simultaneously have an exchange rate target and an independent monetary policy. He/she emphasized that, by following a monetary policy focused on price stability, operating under a flexible exchange rate regime, the exchange rate must continue to work as a shock absorber for the economy. Most members pointed out that short-term interest rates of government bonds increased, while medium- and long-term rates registered limited adjustments. One member stated that the short-term increases respond to the reference rate’s hiking cycle, while medium- and long-term rates showed some volatility, in line with the dynamics of rates at the global level. Another member mentioned that the yield curve of real interest rate instruments registered significant increases, especially for shortterm nodes. He/she highlighted that Mexico’s financial conditions index continues reflecting tightness, due to persistent pressures in the debt market, sovereign risk, inflation, and economic growth. One member added that default risk premia decreased, in contrast to what was observed in other emerging economies. Some members highlighted the stock market gains, generated by the positive quarterly data reported by firms. Regarding commercial bank credit to firms, one member pointed out that it continued recovering gradually during the third quarter, with an improvement in firms’ demand, although lending conditions remained tight. He/she added that consumer credit continues with a positive trend in real terms, although a slower pace is anticipated in view of the foreseen economic slowdown. He/she underlined that banks’ loan delinquency rates have been declining. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the possibility of greater effects on inflation, and the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the Governing Board decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 10.00%. The Governing Board members added that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. In its next meetings, the Board will assess the magnitude of upward adjustments to the reference rate based on the prevailing One member stated that, since the last monetary policy meeting, the Mexican economy has continued facing a complex and uncertain environment, characterized by deep, generalized, and persistent inflationary pressures, as well as by tight monetary and financial conditions at the global level. He/she highlighted that, given the deep and persistent inflationary shocks, a tight monetary policy stance is required in order to contain inflation and to help it begin decreasing towards the central bank’s target. He/she pointed out that, in terms of the absolute monetary policy stance, a 75 basis-point increase in the reference rate would allow the ex-ante real interest rate to reach a level that is unequivocally in restrictive territory. He/she noted that it would send a clear message regarding the central bank’s commitment to fulfill its primary mandate of price stability. He/she added that, since core inflation has not started to decrease yet and the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the upside, monetary policy needs to be tightened further than it already has been. In terms of the relative monetary policy stance, he/she pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase would maintain the reference rate spread between Mexico and the United States at 600 basis points. In this regard, he/she stated that Mexico is a small and open economy with a high level of financial and commercial integration with the United States and, therefore, it is normal for the Federal Reserve’s actions to have repercussions on the Mexican economy. In this regard, he/she stated that the central bank conducts its monetary policy considering all inflation determinants and its expectations, including the actions taken by the Federal Reserve. He/she argued that both Mexico and the United States face significant inflationary pressures and are undergoing a cycle of monetary tightening, which does not imply that Banco de México mechanically follows the steps taken by the Federal Reserve. He/she considered that, although increases in long-term inflation expectations have been moderate, it is important to monitor that these do not continue being revised upwards, as it would make it difficult to achieve the primary mandate. Looking ahead, he/she considered that it would be important to further increase the reference rate in order to maintain inflation expectations anchored and to enable the reduction of inflation to its target. He/she added that the magnitude of future upward adjustments to the reference rate will depend on the prevailing economic conditions, considering the increases that have already been implemented in this hiking cycle and that the monetary policy stance is already in restrictive territory. Another member stated that the upward trend in the core sub-index and the increasing pressures it faces make the monetary policy outlook more complex. He/she mentioned that, despite the significant adjustments in the monetary policy stance, no inflection point has been observed in the inflation trend yet. He/she argued that, on the one hand, there are high and persistent inflation levels with a balance of risks biased to the upside, and, on the other hand, economic activity registers more dynamism than expected, with an output gap that continues narrowing. He/she added that inflationary pressures related to the labor market are observed as well. He/she underlined that all of the above occurs in an international context that has become significantly more adverse. With regard to the deterioration of inflation expectations, he/she expressed concern that they are above the inflation target, given that this can pose risks to Banco de México’s credibility. He/she considered that it is essential to communicate that the reference rate will continue increasing and that the magnitude of the upward adjustments will be determined based on available information, in order to achieve the convergence of inflation to its target. He/she stated that this would not limit the room for maneuver in the next monetary policy decisions, and could contribute to monetary policy effectiveness and, therefore, to minimize the disinflationary adjustment costs. He/she argued that sending a timely, clear and forceful signal is the only path to reducing the risk of an unanchoring of inflation expectations and to prevent the inertia of the inflationary process from becoming entrenched. He/she cautioned that, if this type of scenario were to materialize, it would be extremely costly in the medium and long terms. He/she expressed that all of the above more than ever requires adherence to the primary mandate and doing what is needed to enable the convergence of inflation to its target in the foreseen time frame, and to mitigate the deterioration of the price formation process and the upward revisions in expectations. He/she added that easing the conditions will not be possible until inflation starts to follow a clear and sustained downward trajectory and expectations return to levels close to the 3% target. He/she highlighted that, based on available information, it will be necessary to maintain a restrictive monetary policy stance throughout the planning horizon, which, in his/her opinion, should be communicated explicitly. One member considered it important to reduce the pace of upward adjustments given the balance of risks associated with monetary policy decisions, and to signal that the terminal interest rate level may soon be reached. He/she estimated that the recently observed strength of the Mexican peso provides an opportunity to do so. He/she expressed that, on the one hand, there is a risk that the implemented monetary tightening is insufficient, which would lead to a more persistent inflationary process that would be costly to revert, and, on the other hand, there is a risk of implementing an excessive tightening, which would affect financial and macroeconomic stability. He/she added that a high financial cost can affect firms, financial institutions and governments with high leverage, and would deteriorate the economic and employment growth outlook, which could increase risk premia. In this regard, he/she noted that different institutions have warned about the risks associated with an excessive tightening of global financial conditions. He/she cautioned that, considering the increases that have been implemented, the risk of an excessive tightening has increased, given that: i) the ex-ante real interest rate, at 4%, is in a clearly restrictive territory; and ii) if an ex-ante real interest rate between 5 and 5.5% were to be attained, it would be well above the estimated neutral interest rate, which would affect consumption, investment and credit. In contrast, he/she considered that the risk of an insufficient tightening has diminished, as a result of the reduction in different inflationary pressures worldwide, the recent decrease in producer price inflation, and the interest rate increases implemented during this cycle. He/she argued that, considering the described disjunctive, although the hiking cycle has to continue, it is necessary to reduce the pace of adjustment, calibrate adequately the next policy decisions, and lower the probability of the described risks materializing. He/she added that, even if the pace of upward adjustments is reduced, it could be possible to shorten or lengthen the cycle, if necessary. However, in his/her opinion, maintaining the current pace would considerably increase the risk of an excessive tightening, with a final interest rate that would be too high. He/she added that this decision would signal that the end of the cycle is still distant, which could negatively affect inflation expectations. He/she stated that monetary policy operates with a lag, and thus its effects will be more evident over the following months. Therefore, he/she considered that the upward cycle should end even before a significant reduction in inflation is observed. He/she argued that, to the extent that the central bank communicates that the policy stance is now restrictive enough, inflation expectations should begin to decrease, leading to additional increases in the exante real interest rate and to a greater tightening of financial conditions. Another member considered it necessary to continue consolidating a restrictive monetary policy, at the same rate as in the previous decision, in view of: i) the upward trend in core inflation; ii) the deterioration of inflation expectations; iii) a balance of risks for inflation that is considerably biased to the upside; and iv) an inflation forecast that anticipates a distant convergence to the target. He/she argued that reducing the pace of upward adjustments should only be considered if the inflationary outlook improves, specifically for its core component. He/she mentioned that the economy’s cyclical conditions do not justify relaxing the efforts to control inflation. He/she considered the deterioration of inflation expectations worrying, given that it suggests their possible unanchoring, which would weaken the main mechanism of monetary policy transmission. He/she stated that further increases in inflation expectations require greater efforts in adjusting the ex-ante real interest rate. He/she mentioned that a level of 6% or higher for said interest rate would be desirable as its final level, conditional on the evolution of data, particularly long-term inflation expectations. He/she pointed out that, to determine the final interest rate, previous monetary cycles should not be taken as a reference, as the inflation level is currently higher and its dynamics are more complex. He/she mentioned that the final interest rate should be determined with caution, as it could be the reference that would prevail over a long period of time. He/she stated that the interest rate spread should be maintained at least at and thus the adjustments to the federal funds rate must continue to be the floor. He/she argued that this is a well-founded decision and not an automatic reaction. He/she highlighted that said spread is justified, not by the behavior of economic cycles of México and the United States, which do not coincide, but by the synchronization of the inflationary cycles across both countries, characterized by a significant upward trend of the core component. He/she added that it will only be possible to decouple from the Federal Reserve when the inflationary dynamics diverge or when there is certainty regarding the Federal Reserve’s final interest rate. He/she added that a high spread would help to address: i) the increasing external uncertainty; ii) the risk of recession; iii) the tightening of global financial conditions; iv) the risk of an idiosyncratic shock derived from trade negotiations with the United States; and v) external inflationary pressures, which have been mitigated by the favorable performance of the Mexican peso. He/she pointed out that the inflationary outlook reveals mixed signals, and for said reason it is important to have clarity as to how these will be incorporated in the reaction function and in the monetary cycle outlook. He/she added that the forward guidance should be as explicit as possible, and should be carefully communicated and emphasize that this does not imply a commitment. He/she stated that, considering the available information, it should be communicated that the upward cycle has not ended yet, although there is the possibility of reducing the pace of adjustment. He/she warned that when the interest rate reaches its final point, it will remain at that level for some time, until inflation begins following a clear downward trend and the balance of risks improves. He/she pointed out that communicating this forward guidance message decisively would reinforce the central bank’s credibility. One member considered it necessary to continue tightening monetary policy for the following reasons: i) headline inflation remains high and its convergence to the target poses significant challenges; ii) core inflation maintains an upward trend and must be contained to allow headline inflation to converge to its target; iii) inflation expectations have continued to deteriorate, which has made it difficult for the real interest rate to increase proportionally to the implemented nominal interest rate adjustments; and iv) it is necessary to consolidate a more equilibrated balance of risks for inflation. He/she mentioned that a process from becoming entrenched and from affecting the price formation process in the medium term. In this regard, he/she noted that the recent increases in the reference rate have been greater than those observed in previous upward cycles, in both nominal and real terms. He/she indicated that, despite the shocks that have been observed, this has allowed the ex-ante real interest rate to achieve clearly restrictive levels and the nominal rate to reach levels above both observed and expected inflation, which will contribute to the process of convergence of inflation. He/she added that monetary conditions that affect the Mexican economy via the real interest rate and the real exchange rate overall show greater astringency as compared to other similar economies, which would also suggest that the monetary policy stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target. As to the relative monetary policy stance, he/she underlined that a synchronization of the monetary cycles between Mexico and the United States is conditional to the type of shocks being confronted, and thus is not mechanical, nor and end in and of itself. Looking ahead, he/she considered it important to monitor the evolution of the cyclical conditions of both economies. As for the next monetary policy decisions, he/she sustained that, given the high uncertainty regarding the inflationary shocks, it is necessary to maintain the required flexibility in each decision. Therefore, he/she argued that, at this moment, rather than providing a specific guide about the terminal level of the rate, a monetary policy stance that is consistent with a decrease in inflationary pressures, with an improvement in inflation expectations, and with inflation’s convergence, must be consolidated. He/she pointed out that these elements will be key to determine the adequate absolute, and consequently, relative, monetary policy stances. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the possibility of greater effects on inflation, and the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the Board decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. In its next meetings, the Board will assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments to the reference rate based on the prevailing conditions. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 10.00%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 9.75%. I consider it necessary to start reducing the pace of the hiking cycle. This would signal that we are nearing the cycle’s terminal rate and would also be consistent with the current balance of risks. We are facing two possible risks: an insufficient tightening (which could translate into persistent, costly-to-revert inflation) and an excessive tightening that would affect macroeconomic and financial stability. As the reference rate has been raised, the former risk has decreased, while the latter one has increased. The former, because external inflationary pressures have started to subside and because the ex-ante real interest rate already exceeds its neutral level considerably. It does not seem necessary to tighten much more. What is required is to allow the restrictive monetary policy stance that has been attained, and which works with a lagged effect, to continue operating. It is important to point out that the proposed increase would imply a decoupling from the Federal Reserve and a reduction of the interest rate spread with the United States. It is argued that, in order to prevent foreign exchange and financial instability, the abovementioned must be avoided. However, recently, the Mexican peso has appreciated significantly against the US dollar and other currencies. This represents an ideal opportunity to implement the referred adjustment with a minimal risk.