Most members stated that available indicators suggest that global economic activity slowed down during the second quarter, affected mainly by mobility restrictions in China and the repercussions of the military conflict. One member added that it was also affected by the tightening of financial conditions. Another member said that performance remains heterogeneous among countries and sectors. He/she noted that in the United States, the reduction of fiscal and monetary stimuli has started to affect some GDP components, such as residential investment, although consumption continues to show dynamism. One member indicated that said economy continues to recover, albeit with a reduction in consumer confidence and a weakening of growth expectations. Meanwhile, some members mentioned that labor markets in advanced economies continue functioning strongly, with increases in wages and in the number of vacancies. Most members noted that the outlook for global economic growth was revised downwards. One member mentioned that the conflict in Ukraine, the partial shutdown of activities in China and less lax financial conditions contributed to that revision. He/she pointed out that, nevertheless, an expansion of close to 3% is still expected for 2022 and 2023. Most members agreed that the outlook is uncertain. Some members stated that among global risks, those associated with the pandemic, the persistence of inflationary pressures, the intensification of geopolitical tensions and greater adjustments in economic, monetary and financial conditions, stand out. One member warned about the increasing likelihood of a pronounced slowdown, and even a recession, in the United States. Another member indicated that the contraction of the Chinese economy expected for the second quarter of the year may have implications for global demand. Most members noted that the balance of risks for global economic activity is biased to the All members highlighted the high levels that world inflation has registered. Most members mentioned that in some cases, levels unseen in decades have been registered. They also noted that inflation continued to be pressured by the persistence of bottlenecks, the effects of the geopolitical conflict and the recovery of demand. Likewise, they emphasized the high commodity prices, especially of food and energy products. One member added the boost to spending from fiscal and monetary stimuli provided in response to the pandemic. Some members highlighted that a more generalized increase in prices is observed. Most members stated that, in the United States, CPI inflation reached 8.6% in May. One member noted that core inflation declined marginally. Some members highlighted that in the euro area inflation rose to 8.1% in May and some members indicated that, in this context, global short-term inflation expectations continued increasing. One member pointed out that inflation convergence towards central banks’ targets continues to be expected for the end of 2023 and early 2024. Another member warned about the possibility of tighter labor market conditions. One member considered that the environment for inflation remains very complex and with a high degree of uncertainty. All members said that a large number of central banks have continued raising their reference rates. Some members detailed that such actions have the aim of moderating aggregate spending. All members mentioned that in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points and anticipated future adjustments. Most members added that such an increase had not been observed since 1994. Some members pointed out that it was larger than expected. Most members added that, based on financial market data, the federal funds rate is expected to reach levels above 3.5%. One member noted that such level is above the neutral range. He/she highlighted that the European Central Bank left the reference rate unchanged in June and announced that it would increase it by 25 basis points in each of its next two decisions. Some members mentioned that emerging economies also continued raising their reference rates. One member elaborated that, in most cases, the ex-ante real interest rate is still below its neutral level. He/she noted that, within this group, only Brazil, Chile and Mexico have positive ex-ante real interest rates. He/she added that, although in the first two cases the inflation rate is above 10%, Mexico stands out as one of the Latin American countries with the lowest annual inflation rate. Another member stated that a more accelerated reduction of monetary stimulus worldwide is still expected. All members noted that in this context, global financial conditions tightened further. Most members noted that the dollar strengthened, interest rates increased, especially at the shorter- term nodes, and equity indices registered losses, in a context of risk aversion. Regarding financial markets of emerging economies, some members noted that they presented a negative performance, with adverse effects on their currencies. One member also mentioned the negative impact observed in stock markets and risk premia as measured by CDS premia. Some members stated that yield curves flattened. One member added that outflows were registered in fixed-income and equity assets, mainly from China and other Asian economies. Some members mentioned that a more abrupt than expected monetary normalization processes could lead to further tightening and greater volatility in global financial conditions. One member pointed out that this could lead to capital outflows from emerging economies. Most members agreed that the economic recovery is expected to continue in the second quarter of 2022. Some members indicated that this is already being observed in certain timely indicators. One member stated that the recovery would be supported by the improved performance of tertiary activities. On the supply side, most members noted that industrial production continued recovering in April, given the favorable performance of the manufacturing sector. Some members added that industrial activity was driven by several of its components, although they specified that construction continues to show sluggishness. Some members highlighted that the negative effects on the automotive industry have diminished. One member pointed out that the capacity utilization rate in the manufacturing sector registered historical highs. He/she noted that in June there were fewer technical shutdowns in assembly plants, although the production of light vehicles has not yet regained its pre-pandemic levels. Some members emphasized that the recovery of services continues to show heterogeneity. One member noted a marginal moderation in retail activities and a greater dynamism in leisure, lodging and food preparation services. On the demand side, most members underlined that consumption continues to recover. They consumption remain at high levels, such as consumer confidence, the total wage bill, and remittances. Some members highlighted that for nine consecutive months the monthly indicator of private consumption has been showing small increases. One member pointed out that its growth has been driven mainly by the consumption of services and non-durable goods. Another member emphasized that consumption of goods and services has already surpassed pre-pandemic levels. Some members added that leading indicators, such as ANTAD (Asociación Nacional De Tiendas De Spanish) sales, and credit and debit card spending, suggest that private consumption continued to improve in the second quarter. Most members improvement in March, driven by the component of machinery and equipment other than for transportation. However, they pointed out that investment continues to show sluggishness, member mentioned the lag observed in both the construction and the transportation equipment components of investment. Regarding the external sector, most members highlighted the good performance of non- automotive manufacturing exports. One member detailed that this was due to increases in both volume and price. Another member highlighted the impact of problems on the supply of microprocessors on automotive exports in April. One member noted that non-oil imports have shown a significant upward trend, especially those of capital goods, while intermediate and consumer goods’ imports kept a positive trend, which has increased the trade deficit. Most members agreed that various labor market indicators have continued to improve, although the recovery remains incomplete. They also noted that unemployment, underemployment and labor participation rates, as well as continued to show progress. One member pointed out that this is particularly true for the northern region of the country and within the manufacturing industry. Another member indicated that in April, the national and urban unemployment rates were at low levels, in an environment in which the labor participation rate and the employment-to-working-age-population ratio continued approaching their pre-pandemic levels. One member added that some experimental indicators of vacancy levels show that these maintain a good pace of growth. In this context, some members noted that nominal wage revisions for IMSS-insured workers registered an annual increase of 11%, a new maximum, while wage revisions in the private sector registered an 8.2% increase. However, they emphasized that certain labor market indicators, such as employment levels, show weakness and remain below their pre-pandemic levels. One member noted that the number of inactive workers among the working-age population remains above the level observed before the pandemic. Another member added that relative to its trend level, the number of IMSS-insured workers has also shown weakness. Most members pointed out that slack conditions in the economy have decreased. They stated that these are expected to continue decreasing gradually. However, one member stated that Mexico's GDP is still lagging with respect to both the trend and the absolute level that prevailed prior to the pandemic. He/she added that some services, such as lodging, food preparation and leisure, still register levels of activity below their pre-pandemic levels. He/she stressed that there is still room for the economy to grow as some services continue to recover and some manufacturing industries regain the use of their installed capacity, without necessarily creating additional inflationary pressures. Some members agreed that the environment for economic recovery remains uncertain. One member said that, given the uncertainty regarding the evolution of the pandemic, the persistence of supply chain disruptions and inflationary pressures, and the expectation of a further tightening of monetary conditions, a complex global economic environment prevails, which keeps the balance of risks for economic growth biased to the downside. Most members mentioned that in the first fortnight of June, headline and core inflation registered annual variations of 7.88 and 7.47%, respectively, and remained at elevated levels. One member highlighted that most of the CPI components have accelerated their growth. He/she detailed that monthly inflation in May surpassed analysts' expectations and for the third consecutive year was positive whereas typically it used to be negative. Another member noted that inflation is well above the target and that pressures at the margin, measured by standardized monthly changes, persisted during May and June. Some members noted that certain indicators of central tendency reflect generalized pressures. One member detailed that in the first fortnight of June, 45% of the items in the CPI basket showed seasonally adjusted monthly variations above 10%. Regarding the different shocks that have affected inflation, this member indicated that the combination of the shocks derived from the pandemic and those associated with the military conflict, maintains an extremely complex environment and with a high degree of uncertainty. He/she added that inflation is suffering from the depth, simultaneity and longer duration of shocks. He/she considered that it is being affected by global factors and is particularly pressured by increases in international food references. Meanwhile, another member said that, although inflation in Mexico is part of a global phenomenon, it also stands out for being relatively contained and at a lower level than in other similar emerging economies as well as in advanced economies. He/she indicated that this is due to a less lax monetary policy stance, the absence of inflationary pressures on the demand side and the Federal Government's fuel price policy. One member mentioned that despite this pricing policy and a flexible and resilient exchange rate, which has allowed the economy to absorb part of the external inflation pass-through, a generalized inflationary phenomenon is being confronted, with inflation rates unseen in over 20 years and which have shown resistance to decline. responded mainly to inflationary pressures from abroad on energy and food prices, and to higher production costs. One member added the pressures related to the recovery of domestic consumption. In this context, some members highlighted that the core component maintains an ongoing sequence of increases since December food commodity prices, associated with the phenomenon of global commodity inflation. One member pointed out that this sub-index registers a double-digit inflation and highlighted, in particular, the effect on wheat and dairy products’ prices. Another member pointed out that the price increases of these commodities affect lower-income households to a greater extent, as they allocate a higher proportion of spending to consumption of such goods. One member indicated that if the food merchandise component were excluded from core inflation, as in other countries, the annual change in core inflation would still be above the inflation target, but at a much lower level. He/she added that this reflects that pressures on food services and non-food merchandise are lower than those on food merchandise. Some members mentioned inflationary pressures in the services component. One member considered it concerning that services inflation, which to a greater extent reflects domestic pressures, has maintained an upward trend for more than a year and is located above the target for headline inflation. Most members indicated that non-core inflation remains at high levels. Some members highlighted the pressures on agricultural and livestock products. With respect to inflation in energy prices, most members pointed out that it has remained relatively subdued by the policies set by the Federal Government. One member added that, because of the gasoline price subsidy, no multiplicative effects on other prices are observed. expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased considerably again. One member noted that inflation expectations for both years are well above the inflation target. Another member indicated that although inflation expectations for the end of 2022 and for the subsequent 12 months continue at high levels, the former remained close to their level observed during the previous month and the latter decreased at the margin. One member considered that short-term expectations have increased since June 2021 and stated that, in his/her opinion, they will surely continue to be revised upwards. Most members pointed out that medium- and increased slightly and remain at levels above the target. Some members indicated that the increase in long-term expectations is an alert regarding the beginning of an expectations’ unanchoring process, which is important to revert. Some members added that these expectations had remained stable for a long period. One member emphasized that long-term expectations for core inflation have remained stable. Most members stated that expectations drawn from market instruments continued adjusting upwards. One member specified that the ones for the average of 6-to-10 years still remain at low levels, although they have shown steady increases over the course of several months. Most members stated that given the greater-than- forecasts have been revised upwards once again. They pointed out that inflation convergence to the 3% target is still expected to be attained during the first quarter of 2024. One member noted that forecasts for the next four quarters already exceed market expectations. Another member pointed out that the seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly change is expected to lie above 10% in the second quarter of 2022, its highest value during this period of high inflation. He/she mentioned that the increase in inflation registered in most CPI components in recent months has generated doubts over when the inflection point could be reached. He/she noted that, recently, inflation was anticipated to peak between April and May, and to start declining beginning in June. He/she added that currently it is expected to reach its peak in August or September and headline and core inflations are estimated to begin declining in the fourth quarter of 2022. He/she underlined that the headline inflation forecast for said quarter was revised upwards by over 100 basis points. He/she pointed out that recurring forecast adjustments are due to a continuous accumulation of unanticipated shocks, which has been a problem during the last couple of years in Mexico and in other countries. Among upward risks to inflation, most members associated with the pandemic, greater pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices and on energy prices due to the ongoing geopolitical members highlighted the labor costs. One member pointed out that although a wage-price spiral cannot be confirmed, firms can be expected to pass through part of their higher labor costs onto final consumers, in response to the growing demand. Another member considered that the cost increase could be reflecting the all-time highs registered in capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector. Some members emphasized as a risk that core inflation persist at high levels and a depreciation of the exchange rate. Most members mentioned that there is high uncertainty regarding the time it will take for the effects of these shocks to start to fade, and added that the occurrence or the intensification of additional disturbances cannot be ruled out. Among downward risks, some members pointed to the possibility that the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices (PACIC, for its acronym in Spanish) will have a greater-thananticipated effect, while one member stated that its impact would be marginal and would be mainly associated with the gasoline subsidy. He/she underlined that the viability of this measure will depend on whether it can be financed without affecting the fiscal balance. Another member mentioned, among downward risks, the following: i) a decline in the intensity of the military conflict; ii) an improvement in supply chains; and iii) a greater-thanexpected effect from the negative output gap. One member stated that the withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimuli at the global level would contribute to mitigate inflationary pressures worldwide and, consequently, domestic ones. Another member stressed that it is worrying that conjunctural risks, such as climate-related factors, logistical problems and input costs, showed a greater deterioration than that perceived during previous inflation episodes, which suggests a concurrence of risks greater than previously observed. Most members considered that the balance of risks for the expected inflation Most members emphasized that the negative behavior of domestic financial markets was in line with that observed at the global level. They highlighted that the exchange rate showed an considered that its trading conditions deteriorated somewhat at the margin. Some members recognized that the exchange rate depreciated slightly. However, they pointed out its resilience, given the country’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals and the broad volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States. One member added that its favorable behavior is also due to lower idiosyncratic risks relative to other economies in the region. Another member noted that so far this year the Mexican peso has appreciated slightly. One member pointed out that forward-looking indicators for the Mexican peso show improvements both according to market metrics and analysts’ expectations. Most members pointed out that short- and long- term interest rates increased. Some members highlighted the flattening of the yield curve. One member stated that its slope is at low levels, in line with the international trend. He/she added that the real yield curve has declined, especially for shorter terms. He/she indicated that foreign capital inflows to from high inflation levels will continue. Another member highlighted that default premia increased given the environment of higher risk aversion. Some members pointed out that the stock market registered a decline of more than 2%. One member expressed the need, in this context of high risks and high uncertainty, for the economies characterized by a high degree of financial and commercial integration with the rest of the world, and that are exposed to external shocks, to maintain a solid macroeconomic policy stance at all times. He/she pointed out that, within the scope of Banco de México’s attributions, this implies pursuing low and stable inflation and safeguarding the strength of the financial system. He/she underlined that the relative monetary policy stance is appropriate, which along with solid macroeconomic fundamentals, such as fiscal discipline and sustainable external accounts, allows the economy to face possible negative external shocks. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk of contamination of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and of the price formation process. Most members also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy, stemming from the ongoing tightening of global pressures associated with the geopolitical China, as well as the possibility of greater negative effects on inflation. Based on these considerations, all members voted for raising the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 7.75%. Most members emphasized that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within The Governing Board expressed that it will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times both with the orderly and sustained convergence of inflation to the target, as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board added that for the following monetary policy decisions, it intends to continue increasing the reference rate and will evaluate taking the same One member considered that the recent monetary policy decision of the Federal Reserve and the recent volatility in global financial markets lead to a proportional response in order to preserve the relative monetary policy stance, promoting stability in domestic markets. Likewise, he/she considered that looking forward, the absolute stance will be increasingly important and the relative stance will be less so. He/she argued that this is because, first, the current decision places the real interest rate above the level considered as neutral, and second, there is enough space for an eventual reduction of the spread between the reference rates in Mexico and in the US. He/she emphasized the importance of a gradual transition to a moderately restrictive absolute stance in order to prevent the current inflationary phenomenon from generating second-round effects on the price formation process, but stressed also the importance of avoiding an excessive tightening. He/she pointed out that the real interest rate, which for Mexico is among the highest in the world, affects different variables, such as credit, investment and durable goods’ consumption. He/she forewarned that it is necessary to avoid an excessive tightening, which may result counterproductive even to preserve macroeconomic and financial stability, and therefore, to control inflation. He/she considered that the increase observed in emerging economies’ risk premia is associated with the deterioration in their economic outlook and in their public finances, which partly derives from monetary tightening and reflects the limits of monetary policy to preserve macroeconomic stability in emerging economies. He/she mentioned, as additional reasons, that the inflation rebound is caused by global factors and thus an excessive tightening in Mexico would bring little gains in terms of controlling domestic inflation, and that unlike other countries that provided ample fiscal and monetary stimuli, Mexico does not register an out-of-control growth of aggregate demand. He/she mentioned that during the following quarter, there may be conditions to begin dissociating from the pace of the Federal Reserve’s rate increases, given that: i) the volatility adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States is among the highest in the emerging economies and is at all-time highs; ii) from a medium-term perspective, the Mexican peso stands out for its sound performance and low volatility, which reflects solid macroeconomic fundamentals; iii) Mexico began its normalization process earlier and is closer to the zone considered as restrictive; iv) unlike other emerging economies and the United States, Mexico does not face demand- or labor market-related inflationary pressures; and v) inflation in Mexico is less distant from its target, as compared to other countries. Another member mentioned that given the deterioration in the balance of risks and the persistence of high inflation levels, this decision, rather than a change in the pace, will give the necessary boost to attain an interest rate trajectory consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target. He/she underlined that, although the monetary policy adjustments that have been implemented allow the relative position with the United States to be solid, given the recent, larger than expected increase in the reference rate of the United States, and given tighter financial conditions worldwide, as well as an increase of perceived risk aversion, the relative monetary policy stance must be thoroughly monitored, while inflationary pressures persist. In this regard, he/she mentioned that the shocks associated with the armed conflict continue affecting commodity prices, while the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in China and the subsequent restrictions to mobility continue affecting the reestablishment of supply chains, and it remains unclear if they could be lifted in the short-term. He/she considered that it is inevitable to act forcefully to address the inflationary pressures that are perceived in the convergence trajectory of inflation to its target and which have caused a deterioration in the inflation forecasts, although the period of convergence remains constant. He/she underlined that given the lag at which monetary policy operates, the ex-ante real interest rate may need to lie above the upper threshold of the range for the neutral rate for the stance to be more effective. He/she added that looking ahead, it is necessary to carefully assess if another increase of a similar magnitude is necessary which would ensure the anchoring of inflation expectations, allow the ex-ante real rate to adjust more efficiently as compared to the expected inflation trajectory and prevent the emergence of second-round effects on price formation. He/she indicated that the actions taken, complemented with the adequate use of communication tools, have been more effective, and that it is important that this continues, especially in periods of high uncertainty, given that an orderly adjustment of financial markets is necessary in view of Banco de México’s decisions. One member stated that Mexico is currently facing an even more complex inflation environment. He/she forewarned that, since the last monetary policy decision, the expected inflation trajectory at year end has been revised by over 100 basis points, that the balance of risks to inflation maintains a considerable upward bias, and that the possibility that inflationary shocks will be longer-lasting, that they will intensify or that new shocks will emerge, cannot be ruled out. He/she considered that in this environment, a faster rate of tightening is urgently required to achieve a restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she added that the effects of the pandemic on world inflation, a greater international monetary tightening and the deterioration of inflation expectations, call for maintaining this rate of tightening at least during the following monetary policy decision. He/she mentioned four factors to be considered in fighting inflation. The first factor is to take the monetary stance to a restrictive region. He/she point out that although the current hiking cycle began in June 2021, inflation expectations increased, so that the monetary policy stance is barely in the lower part of the neutral range. He/she mentioned that, after the the neutral range, and, given a new possible upward revision in the expectations, this increase will not be sufficient to reach a restrictive monetary policy stance. Thus, an adjustment of a similar magnitude will be necessary in the next decision. He/she emphasized that the cyclical conditions become secondary and no effort must be spared in controlling inflation. Second, he/she noted that a necessary but not sufficient condition for inflation to decline in Mexico, is that it declines in the United States. He/she expressed that inflation in the United States reached very high levels, which pushed the Federal Reserve to increase its reference rate by 75bp. He/she pointed out that Mexico’s relative monetary policy stance has been enough to confront the episodes of higher volatility. Therefore, he/she considered that the Federal Reserve’s increase must be matched, in order to maintain the interest rate spread between the two countries. Third, the support, albeit marginal, of other efforts to reduce inflation, such as the PACIC and especially the fiscal stimulus to the price of gasoline. The fourth is characterized by a combination of patience and luck. Patience in waiting for the current shocks to dissipate and luck for new shocks not to emerge. He/she sustained that the expected inflection point in the headline and core inflation trends during the fourth quarter does not depend exclusively on Banco de México, thus it is important to remain cautious. He/she expressed the opinion that the current challenges demand a communication policy that is free of ambiguities, with precise qualitative and quantitative information about the future policy actions. Furthermore, he/she pointed out that, given that the monetary tightening works mainly through the expectations channel, it is important to have and effective communication. This opens the discussion to improve the communication strategy towards a more robust framework. He/she pointed out that some pioneering central banks have a forward guidance in which, in addition to the inflation and growth forecasts, they publish the reference rates’ trajectory, which is consistent with the inflation forecast. He/she considered that such communication policy could strengthen the monetary policy transmission. The above assuming that said trajectory would not imply a commitment regarding future decisions, but rather only a guide over its possible course. He/she noted that an explanation could be added on how this path could be changed in response to a number of events. He/she argued that measures of this kind should be thoroughly analyzed and, if implemented, it should be done in a cautious manner. Another member recalled that from the beginning of the current cycle, it was pointed out that the challenge was for inflationary pressures, which at the time where considered to be transitory and generated by supply shocks, not to affect price formation and the anchoring of expectations. He/she added that the relevance of expectations, especially those for longer terms, in monetary policy transmission, was highlighted, and that these could be affected by persistent and high levels of inflation, even in the absence of demand pressures. He/she added that it was emphasized that the central bank’s credibility helps to maintain expectations anchored and contributes to a more efficient monetary policy. He/she pointed out that twelve months later, there are high levels of inflation, unseen in more than 20 years, a generalized inflationary phenomenon which affects a large number of goods and services, and which has shown resistance to decline despite the adjustments in the monetary policy stance, and the most concerning, the beginning of the unanchoring of medium- and long-term expectations. He/she highlighted that all of this has taken place despite two factors that have contributed to reduce additional inflationary pressures: a flexible and resilient exchange rate, which has allowed the economy to absorb part of the pass-through of external inflation, and the energy price policy implemented by the Federal Government to limit their increase in real terms. He/she considered that it is essential to take firm and forceful actions to restore confidence in the commitment to convergence to the target within the forecast horizon. He/she considered it necessary to take the reference rate to restrictive territory, and that increasing the rate of adjustment of monetary policy cannot be postponed. He/she argued that regarding the expectations channel, there are studies that show that, even in the face of supply shocks, reference rate increases contribute to mitigate the effects on longterm expectations. He/she added that in the face of inflationary pressures from abroad, a 75 bp increase would also reinforce the exchange rate channel. He/she considered it fundamental that communication allows the anticipation of the more restrictive monetary conditions needed to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target, given the growing risks to price stability. He/she expressed that only with the proposed increase and anticipating more restrictive monetary conditions can the central bank’s commitment to its constitutional mandate be endorsed and the anchoring of inflation expectations guaranteed. He/she argued that the way to induce lower interest rates in the future, as well as an expansion of financing and credit, to the benefit of economic activity and employment, is precisely by raising the reference rate in a timely and sufficient manner, and by avoiding more severe rate increases in the future. He/she warned that, if this is not done, the social cost in terms of production and employment will undoubtedly be much higher. He/she stated that the main current challenge is the high level of inflation. One member considered that monetary policy in Mexico has continued to face a highly complex environment. Given the high social and economic costs derived from inflation, and given that these affect the most vulnerable population to a greater extent, it is essential to act with the necessary determination to achieve low and stable inflation. He/she argued that the confluence of factors, such as those associated with the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, among others, has led to a generalized inflationary shock of great magnitude, which could have long-term effects on the dynamics of inflation in Mexico and he/she added that, in such an environment, the possibility of price formation contamination may increase. He/she warned that an unanchoring of inflation expectations, mainly of those for longer terms, would make convergence to the target more difficult. He/she pointed out that international monetary and financial conditions are in circumstances unseen in several decades, especially in terms of the Federal Reserve's pace of monetary tightening, which could have significant repercussions on global and domestic financial markets, including the exchange rate, and could make it difficult to control inflation in Mexico. In view of the deteriorating environment, it is necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance and confirm the commitment that the necessary actions will be taken so that inflation expectations remain anchored and a deterioration of the price formation process is avoided. He/she expressed that, at the present juncture, there must not be any doubt about the central bank’s determination to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon. This, considering that it is important to address the described scenario in a decisive manner, in order to comply with Banco de México’s obligation with the Mexican population. He/she stated that, looking ahead, the evolution of all inflation determinants should continue to be considered, including inflation expectations, especially longer-term ones, slack conditions and the evolution of financial markets as well as the relative monetary policy stance. He/she considered that in the next monetary policy decisions, Banco de México should continue the cycle of reference rate increases, assessing whether it is necessary to take the same forceful measures based on the outlook for inflation and its expectations. All of the above, in order for Banco de México to adopt the necessary actions to comply with its constitutional mandate of maintaining low and stable inflation. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the risk of contamination of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and of the price formation process. It also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of significant uncertainty, and inflationary pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict and with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in China, as well as the possibility of greater effects on inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate, on this occasion, by 75 basis points to 7.75%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. For the next policy decisions, the Board intends to continue raising the reference rate and will evaluate taking the same forceful measures if conditions so require. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Gerardo Esquivel and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 7.75%.