Indicators of consumption recovered slightly in August and September, after falling steeply in the previous quarter.
Consumers, however, have remained cautious in the face of tighter credit conditions, decline in real earnings and worsening of external environment.
Industrial production is slowing gradually, still sustained by placement of orders, particularly those related to deal with the energy crisis.
The surveyed sample also evidenced increasing concern on unemployment.
This result reflected mainly the sales of non-durable consumer goods.
It should be noted that industrial production showed stability in August compared to August 2000, evidencing that this sector overcame the restrictions in energy supply through the rationalization of consumption, substitution of energy sources, and trading of excess energy among industrial sectors.
Among the durable goods, it should be noted especially the performance of car industry.
Even after the reduction in the production, inventory is still increasing, as a result of plummeting car sales in recent months.
Inventory in the factories is also high, which may lead to a cut down in production, as attested by recent decisions of collective holidays determined by several carmakers.
In August, despite positive evolution of industrial production, capacity utilization declined as compared to July.
Industrial employment and real wage also fell in August.
In September, in terms of daily average, new lending provided by the domestic financial system from its free resources presented an expansion in general compared to August.
The primary contraction in the month is _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ consistent with slowing economic activity, the level of interest rates, and uncertainties in the external environment.
This recent improvement in the overall trade balance is associated with the slowing in domestic economic activity and the exchange rate depreciation, leading to import reduction and maintenance of the export growth, even though at a moderate pace.
The expansion in commodity sales remains notable, mainly meat and soy, as a consequence of an enlarged market opportunity resulting from livestock diseases in Europe.
In concluding, economic activity remains at a low level, due to the slowing process started by the end of the first quarter of the year.
Recent outcome which might indicate a possible reversal of this trend, as shown particularly by the consumption indices, is still incipient, and has not yet incorporated fully the effects of the international crisis.
Therefore, one cannot draw any conclusion as to the start of a new trend.
In addition, in shaping the expectations for coming months, the decision of carmakers to reduce their output should be incorporated, as well as the impact of such a decision on the other sectors of industry.
A slowing demand due to the lower credit expansion, and to the drop in consumers confidence, have more than offset the effect of the energy crisis on the aggregate supply, generating an output gap which contains inflationary pressures and improves the trade balance mainly by means of reduction in imports in view of difficulties in the international environment to expand exports.
External environment Data released last month showed that the U.S. economy has been in a slowing trend since the second half of 2000, even before the attacks of September 11th.
In this regard, capital spending remained declining, with a reduction in the output of capital goods and stability in orders to factories.
In this context, and taking into account the absence of inflationary pressures, monetary and fiscal policies were loosened.
This financial support, added to the tax refund proposal, may represent a considerable fiscal incentive.
Expectations that government measures to support recovery in the economic activity will be effective in the medium run are not yet explicit in the business outlook, as measured by the indices of the National Association of Purchase Managers.
The index relative to the services sector reached 50.2 in September, which was still regarded as insufficient to indicate a consistent reversal of trend.
Consumers expectations as surveyed by the Conference Board have deteriorated, falling to 97.6 in September from 114 in August.
Consumers' sentiment, as evaluated by the University of Michigan, suggested an improvement as the preliminary figure for the index rose to 83.4 in October from 81.8 in September.
It should be pointed out that the military reaction to the attacks and fears for further offensive actions in the U.S. territory have increased the uncertainties regarding the recovery in economic activity, contributing to an even weaker performance than it would be expected for the short run in this stage of economic cycle.
In the euro area, indicators showed that the slowing economic activity has persisted in the period.
The recent increase in the annualized quarterly moving average of the M3-- a leading indicator of inflation and first pillar of the monetary policy conducted by the European Central Bank-- is being interpreted as a transitory phenomenon and resulting from statistical problems in the measurement of the indicator, thus not regarded as a deterioration in inflation prospects.
Entrepreneurs' expectations about the economic outlook of the major countries in the region remain low.
The evolution of the Japanese economy has not been favored by the international scenario, leading the Bank of Japan to intervene in the foreign exchange market in an attempt to hold the Japanese currency against the dollar, as well as to increase the liquidity in the domestic market to stimulate the economy.
In Argentina, uncertainties regarding the ability of its economy to recover remain, together with the maintenance of a downward trend in demand and supply.
The widening of spread of Argentine securities has affected other emerging market papers, as perceived by international investors.
In summary, the process of slowing in the U.S. economy, which had already affected other industrial countries, with negative impact on the emerging economies, mostly for those within its area of influence, tends to be exacerbated by the consequences of the September attacks, delaying therefore the start of economic recovery.
Prices In September, inflation measured by the main price indices abated, reflecting the reduction in agricultural prices and, especially, the easing of pressures derived from adjustment of administered prices which weighed considerably on these indices in the two previous months.
This result was due to a smaller increment in the administered prices and to a fall in agricultural prices, particularly fresh products.
Nevertheless, this sector contributed to 0.19 percentage point in the IPCA variation, affected by the rise in urban bus fares in Recife and Salvador, intermunicipal bus fares in five of the eleven capitals surveyed for the price collection, water and sewage in Rio de Janeiro and electricity prices in Belm, Brasilia and Goinia.
Upward pressures from exchange rate, however, persisted on the prices of soy and its by-product, in addition to supply problems due to off-season effects in some products such as rice, beans and cattle.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ especially regarding those still affected by off-season factors.
Nonetheless, these pressures are localized, and there are no expectations of a generalized price increase, taking into account the weak demand and the absence of indexation mechanisms in the economy.
The second, with a shorter maturity, was fully sold.
Average yields have been _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
In October, in spite of the shortening of maturity of the securities to 2 years from 5 years, demand was below the supply in both events in the month.
Within 19 working day period, the central bank intervened for sixteen times in the open market, aiming at administering the short-term interest rate.
In addition, the central bank carried out two go-arounds to purchase LFT to reduce the liquidity shortage in the system.
Prospective assessment of inflation Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
In relation to the fiscal policy, it was assumed that the primary surplus targets for the consolidated public sector will be met, as stated in the Economic Program of the Government.
Monetary Policy Guidelines Industrial production in August shows signs of accommodation of the economic activity at a level lower than the one registered at the beginning of the year, as a result of the decelerating trend starting in the first quarter.
This deceleration has implied an asymmetric decrease in the use of factors of production.
On the one hand, capacity utilization in the industry has been lower in various regions of the country, falling for the fifth consecutive month.
On the other hand, employment indicators have indicated stability in the number of job opening in August, after a period of increases from March to May this year.
Likewise, seasonally adjusted open unemployment rate presented a slight reduction in August.
A more accentuated reduction in capacity utilization may be reflecting the lagged reaction of employment to the pace of economic activity and the effect of the energy crisis.
Alternatively, the stability in the employment may indicate that the slowing economy is perceived as temporary.
This possibility is reinforced by consumption indicators, which signaled a slight recovery in August and September, after strong reduction in the previous quarter, what could point to a possible reversal in the trend.
However, these consumption indicators are incipient, not incorporating fully the impact of the international turmoil, mainly after September incidents.
Consumers remain cautious, as indicated by the Index of Consumer's Intention in October, in the face of tighter credit conditions, reduced real income and deteriorated external scenario.
Industrial production has been sustained by placement of orders, particularly those dealing with the energy crisis.
In addition, as the prospects for the coming months are drawn, the decision of the carmakers in reducing their production should be considered, as well as the impact on the other sectors of industry.
Therefore, under the effects of several shocks on the economy, and particularly the recent events in the United States, it is premature to conclude on the recovery in the level of activity.
Uncertainties on the external scenario increased recently.
In the industrial countries, as a response to the incidents of September 11th in the United States, a slowdown in the consumption is observed, notwithstanding the drastic cut in interest rates made by the major central banks.
Financial assets markets remain volatile, after sharp falls observed in the weeks that followed the September events.
Capital flows responded negatively to the events and a decrease in the flows of international trade is projected as a result of a lower level of activity in the world economy.
In Argentina, the difficulties remain.
The sovereign risk premium reached a level as high as 1,800 basis-points in the weeks before the elections of October 14th.
In Brazil, deterioration in the external scenario and concerns on capital flows put pressure on exchange rate.
On positive side, oil prices may respond to the slower growth in demand, by remaining at levels significantly lower than those observed this year.
Inflation expectations for 2002, measured by the medians of the responses surveyed by the central bank, were raised recently and reached a plateau considerably higher than those of Copom.
Since these expectations may be interpreted as indicators of the actual projections made by price and wage setters in the Brazilian economy, the recent rise might indicate future pressure on prices.
In _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ fact, entrepeneurs expectations indicated in polls seem to reflect more intensely the current difficulty in passing through cost increases to prices.
In comparing analysts' expectations and the Copoms projections, three relevant factors should be considered.
There is the risk that additional depreciation may cause a passthrough to prices and an increase in the projected inflation for this year and the next.
In the relevant horizon, some factors may contribute more directly to stabilize exchange rates.
For instance, recent measures taken to reduce liquidity in the financial system and a lower demand for hedging from companies seeking protection for their liabilities exposure to exchange rate risk.
In this sense, lower volatility in the exchange rate tends to minimize such a defensive behavior.
Moreover, improvements in trade balance and current account may indicate increasingly a trend towards a larger and permanent supply of resources in foreign currency over the medium-term, and increased confidence in the Brazilian economy for a sustainable growth in the coming years.
Second, analysts projections consider a higher passthrough of the recent or year-to-date accumulated depreciation to prices next year.
Therefore, in the Copoms evaluation, slowing demand due to lower credit expansion and to lower consumers confidence has more than offset energy crisis effect on aggregate supply.
This has produced an output gap whose effect may contain inflation pressures.
Moreover, Copom uses Selic rate constant over its projection period as a methodological reference while the median of the analysts projections considers a gradual reduction of this rate.
And finally, some analysts believe that higher inflation in 2001 shall put pressure on inflation next year.
It is important to observe, however, that the increase in inflation this year is due primarily to a combination of adverse shocks which would not necessarily persist over the coming months.
There are solid evidence of a smaller inflation inertia in the Brazilian economy in recent years.
The projected fall in inflation for the fourth quarter this year, after a higher level in the third quarter, reinforces this assumption.
Copom understands, however, that monetary policy is adequate to meet the inflation target for the next year.
This conclusion contemplates external uncertainties, demand stability in a level lower than expected early this year, associated to a still unclear prospects for economic recovery, which may limit the possibility of passthrough of exchange rates to the inflation.
