An increase in petroleum prices is to blame for these results, reflecting the increase in this product price.
Regarding semi-manufactures, an increase in prices was observed while quantities exported diminished in past months.
Aggregate supply indicators point to a growth throughout the year, with upturns under average utilization of installed output capacity, employment and industrial productivity.
In October, industrial production resumed growth, overcoming the drops observed in August and September.
Among industrial sectors, transportation material recorded the higher growth rate, followed by mechanical industry, rubber, electric materials, and by communication and mineral extraction sectors.
An analysis by use categories confirms the better yearly performance of consumer durables and capital goods production, reflecting improved credit conditions, increased investment and better exports performance.
Some industrial categories which manufacture intermediate goods are operating close to their full installed capacity.
As regards the labor market, the trend of increased employment and productivity persisted, accommodating the recent salary negotiations without affecting costs.
For the thirteenth consecutive month, formal employment expanded in the month of October, with creation of 883 thousand job positions in the year.
With exception of the building industry, all sectors displayed employment growth.
The market kept volatile, with sharp drops in prices, a movement amplified by commodities investment funds, which inverted their positions in the derivatives market and turned to bet in lower petroleum prices.
The FOMC explanations of its decision strengthened expectations on future interest rate drops, as evidenced by futures interest rate contracts.
The signs of recovery in the Japanese economy are still weak.
Regarding the Euro Zone countries, economic activity keeps indicating deceleration while inflation keeps its upward trend, reflecting increased import prices, mainly of petroleum.
In the exchange market, after three European Central Bank interventions in the first half of November, the Euro appreciated in the second half of the month and reached, in the first week of December, its higher price against the United States Dollar over the past three months.
In Argentina, domestic demand remained weak.
The confidence crisis of the past months increased the sovereign risk premium and domestic interest rates.
In response, the Government adopted two sets of economic measures.
The first, in October, aimed at encouraging investment and consumption, favoring, in consequence, fiscal revenue and employment.
The measures taken in November were turned towards the necessary structural reforms in labor and social security legislation.
The pact agreed between the central Government and those of the Provinces, coupled with approval of the 2001 budget, enabled the completion of the IMF financial assistance agreement.
The rise in price of non-food products was restricted to some products only, with emphasis to gasoline and electric energy, which contributed with 0.21 percentage point to the total index change.
In the case of electric energy, the increase resulted from rate adjustments in Rio de Janeiro and Porto Alegre.
Insofar as IPC is concerned, the impact of gasoline, and that of electricity and urban bus price adjustments in Rio de Janeiro reached 0.41 percentage point.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
The combination of these factors may enable a better perception of the Brazil risk and promote international liquidity conditions in line with the need to finance the current transactions balance of payment deficit.
Even though, the working hypothesis keeps being the one of maintaining the Brazil risk premium at its current level.
These operations were in keeping with the objective of fully rolling the maturing exchange security debt, considering final interest and the nominal updated redemption value.
Six-months and one-year LTN both displayed maximum interest rates at the opening in November 28, and retreated systematically over the following days.
This excess liquidity was partially offset by payment, to the Sole Account, of amounts related to privatization of Banespa and increased selling position of securities, from the Central Bank, in its committed operations.
Analysis of supply and demand conditions reveals no significant pressures on inflation.
Indicators of aggregate demand display expressive growth over the year, a trend reinforced by preliminary data on the fourth quarter.
With this, in the year 2000, the beginning of a more vigorous and sustainable period of growth is consolidated.
The increased aggregate demand is driven by higher exports of manufactures and growth in the consumption of durable goods.
Investment indicators, in turn, fail to display expressive growth in However, an itemized analysis of these indicators indicate that this performance is mainly due to the stagnation of the relatively highly-weighted construction industry.
This means that the higher contribution to investment comes from sectors concerned with increasing production and installed capacity, helping diminishing potential unbalances between supply and demand, with effects on prices.
Regarding fiscal policy, the goals established for the consolidated public sector primary result keep being permanently and consistently achieved, building a fundamental buttress of economic stability.
The continued fiscal effort, reflected in the goals established for the subsequent years, is playing a relevant role in strengthening the confidence of agents in the set of public policies, in particular, adding more freedom to conduction of the monetary policy and contributing to curb inflation.
Aggregate supply indicators point to a growth throughout the year, with upturns under average utilization of installed output capacity, employment and industrial productivity.
In the external sector, recent developments have been positive, though the main uncertainties are far from vanishing.
Petroleum prices started a sharp decline, in both the spot and the futures market, suggesting the closing of a two-year cycle in which this commodity was responsible for the main foreign shock affecting the Brazilian economy.
The U.S. economy seems to confirm lower growth, although there are doubts on how smooth this process will be.
Given the strong fiscal conditions and the careful monitoring history of the U.S. monetary authority, the slowdown tends to be moderate.
This less strict monetary policy, in a context of soft slowdown, in case it comes to be confirmed, tends to favor international liquidity.
Perception of sovereign risk shall also gradually improve in line with the perception that the Brazilian economy fundamentals are solid is consolidated.
Still regarding the foreign sector, among the uncertainties that were mitigated, the ones related to the foreign funding of Argentina may be included.
The recent agreement reached with international banks and organizations improved the funding profile and opened avenues to resume the countrys growth in the next year.
The recent behavior of inflation confirms Copoms perception of a low degree of inertia built into the process of domestic price formation.
The stability of inflation expectations along the year ratifies the ability of the economy to absorb shocks without excessive welfare costs.
Notes revised by the Board.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign exchange policy actions.
