This performance may be related to the impacts of the energy crisis and of the instability in international markets, which fostered the deterioration of economic agents expectations.
However, more recent information related to the consumer behavior indicates that the harsh initial reaction, expressed in face of the expectations of economic activity rationing, has already been minimized, contributing to some recovery of general indicators of commerce.
Nevertheless, the retraction on the sales of durable goods, specially electronics, remained, given the unfavorable evolution on the credit conditions and also energy rationing effects.
Default indicators remained higher than in 2000, although monthly evolution indicates stability or decline.
These factors had already significantly and negatively impacted the index in June.
As a result, the IIC reached 90.87 in July, compared to 81.70 in the previous month, still in the pessimistic region, although posing recovery both in present and future intentions.
Despite the result, the level the installed capacity usage, as calculated by the National Confederation of IndustriesCNI, based on information from twelve States, remained stable between April and May.
The expectation is that, in June, industrial production fell, grounded on the retreat on the production of auto-vehicles and agricultural machinery, as well as on waved cardboard dispatching.
Nonetheless, credit, investment and employment indicators still do not significantly reflect signs of deceleration.
Consequently, the share of non-earmarked credit outstanding on the total will rise to a large extent.
This performance, after the observed drop in concessions in the previous month, may be partially explained by the substitution of external loans for domestic ones, by the liquidity reduction in the non-banking credit market, which stimulates the demand for banking loans, and by the increased demand for overdraft account loans in both segments.
Regarding corporations, credit has contributed to the adequacy of production to conditions determined by the energy crisis, and is responding to cash-flow recovery needs, given reduced demand and consequent inventory formation.
The evolution of investment remains favorable, as assessed by the domestic absorption of capital goods and production of inputs to supply civil construction.
Until May, a favorable trend was in place in the labor market.
In the same period, imports, on the other hand, increased at a faster pace than exports, which hampered the replication of the surplus observed in the same period of A medium term improvement in the trade balance is expected due to the actual decreasing growth rate observed in both export and imports, more accentuated, however, in imports.
The current conditions of world growth have negatively impacted Brazilian exports as to what demand and prices are concerned.
Depressed international prices of food and raw materials commercialized by Brazil unfavorably reflected on the terms of trade in April and May, seasonally adjusted series, with direct impacts on countrys receipts.
In spite of that, exports have registered increased shipment volumes of some export items, such as soy, chicken, meat, and sugar.
The reduction in the domestic activity level expected to occur until the end of the year should accentuate this cooling trend in imports, contributing to a balanced result in the trade account.
The impacts of the reduction in the electricity supply on the future evolution of production are directly related to the capacity consumers have to rationalize and self-generate energy, in addition to the intersectoral transfers of excess supply and the use of alternative electricity sources.
The expressive adhesion of the Brazilian population to the rationing program, with targets to residential and commercial sectors being outperformed suggest that the effects of the energy crisis may be smaller than initially expected.
Yet, projections on GDP growth for 2001 have already incorporated the slowing pace of economic activity.
To conclude, the deceleration of the industrial sector, particularly the transformation segment, may be specially due to the reduction in demand as a response to lower consumer confidence, associated not only with the rise in interest rates and to the reduction of financing tenures, but also with restrictions deriving from reduced energy supply.
Investment, credit demand and employment levels, however, have not been fully affected by this cooling evolution.
In June, consumer price indices were mainly influenced by the increase in administered prices.
Those pressures, however, were partially attenuated by the deceleration in food prices.
The evolution of wholesale price indices, on the other hand, basically reflected the passthrough of the exchange rate.
Wholesale prices, both agricultural and industrial, mirrored the exchange rate depreciation.
It shall be stressed the pronounced increases in iron, steel and its by-products, mechanicals, electric material, plastic substances, cereals and grains, and crops for exports.
Increases in administered prices are expected to continue to impact price indices in July, mainly from telephone, fuel, electric energy and, to a smaller extent, urban and interstate bus tariffs.
The influence of the minimum wage increase, effective after April, shall be added to these factors and is likely to especially impact the IPCA, due to the two-month lag to incorporate data from the monthly employment survey released in May.
Regarding IPA, the effects of the exchange rate depreciation tend to be important, in addition to the pressure resulting from fuel price increase.
The international economy is still on the cooling trend.
The United States economy does not exhibit recovery signs yet, although executives expectations improved in June.
Early expectations of recovery beginning in the second half of 2001 were postponed to the last quarter of 2001 and first quarter of The Euro area economies have not succeeded in the maintenance of the growth pace and also show deceleration.
The Japanese economy still does not show signs of resurgence.
In Latin America, the economies are suffering from the weak performance of main world economies and from the rising uncertainty towards Argentina.
In this context, East Asian countries have also been strongly affected by the reduction of the level of world demand, but they are less internally imbalanced than they were in 1997 and In the United States, the demand maintains its decelerating trend, although at a lower pace.
In June retail sales recorded the sixth positive monthly variation out of the last seven months.
However, the trajectory of the accumulated 12-month variation remains waning, similarly to orders to industries and commencement of housing construction.
Indicators of executives expectations signal improvements in the next months, with rise in NAPM indicators for both the processing and non-processing sectors and in Conference Board Leading Indicators.
The Euro Area economic performance still points to a loss of dynamism, while consumer price inflation continued on the upward trend.
Entrepreneurs expectations in the three main countries of the region still indicate a downward trend.
In Argentina, macroeconomics fundamentals still point to a waning economic activity.
Supermarket and shopping centers sales dropped in May comparatively to the same period of last year, as did civil construction.
Supply indicators corroborate the recession environment.
In this context, the government announced the fiscal policy program to reach a zero deficit.
This program included measures to reduce public workers salaries and to increase the rate of the Financial Transactions Tax.
However, uncertainties regarding political support to the program still have not promoted substantial changes in the path of domestic interest rates and of Argentinas sovereign risk.
The spread between the three month rate and the Selic rate decreased to 190 points from 410 points.
It was also observed a downward parallel movement in the curve, of approximately 80 points, for higher tenures.
Due to the aggravation of the uncertainties in Argentina, the curve started to present successive upward movements.
Of the six public auctions of NBCE settled between June 20th and July 17th, three of them were placed with one-year maturity, two with two-year maturity and one with five-year maturity.
Three selling offers of fixed income securities, with five-month tenure, were placed between June 20th and July 17th.
The average tenure of issuance of federal securities reduced to 32.4 months in June from 43.8 months in May.
This reduction is related to the increase in the volume of NBCE placements, especially with one-year tenure, and of five-month LTN, in addition to the reduction of NTN-C auctions tenure to 7 years, in average, in June, from 20 years in May.
In the same period, the average maturity of the securitized debt grew to 35.2 months from 33.6 months.
This was due to the net redemptions in FIFs portfolios in May, June and July and to the direct placements of LFT to Banco do Brasil and Caixa Econmica Federal in June and July.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
Regarding the net effects of electricity shock on the inflation rate, modeled based on the impact on the aggregate demand and supply, the previous assumptions were maintained.
It shall be stressed that the fiscal performance has been granting the achievement of the primary fiscal surpluses above to the established fiscal targets.
The fall of pace of demand growth was accentuated at the end of the second quarter and beginning of the third quarter, revealed by recently announced commerce indicators.
The deceleration in the economic activity reflects the effect of a sequence of shocks that impacted the Brazilian economy, such as the cooling of global economy growth, the Argentina crisis and the electric energy shocks.
The unraveling of these shocks along the past weeks deserves attention.
The management of the use of electric energy has been successful, with companies and consumers demonstrating considerable advances in the process of rationalization of its use.
There are signs that the negative effect of the rationing of energy upon the economys supply may be less than expected.
As a result, the cooling of the growth pace in the past months shall have been driven by a fall in demand and not by reduced supply, given the effects of the various shocks on consumers expectations.
In Argentina, in spite of the implementation of a set of measures aiming at improving public accounts, the profile of the public debt and the competitiveness of the economy, the risk premiums in the financial market remain high.
Bank loans are still growing, yet at a lower pace than previously observed, but still significantly.
Inasmuch as the decelerating growth of the demand for goods and services has been more pronounced, continued expansion in banking loans may be reflecting credit substitution - among others, foreign or domestic non-banking loans by domestic loans extended by the banking sector.
In this case, current credit growth shall not be posing additional pressures upon inflation.
The depreciation of the exchange rate since the beginning of the year may be attributed to the diverse external and domestic shocks the economy has experienced and to the perception of a worsening in the balance of payments.
In this sense, although the likelihood that the formation of the exchange rate entails a parcel of proper dynamics is not rejected, the perception that the observed behavior of the exchange rate is tied to fundamentals, some being temporary, is becoming predominant.
The potential passthrough to prices is one of the reasons justifying monetary policy reaction, translated into increases in interest rates to neutralize this effect.
Even though overall inflation __ projections have been revised upwards, they have not been following the speed of exchange rate depreciation, what is in line with the expectation that a share of this depreciation will not be transmitted to consumer prices.
In spite of that, core inflation as measured under the symmetric trimmed-mean methodology, has increased in the past months.
The analysis of the items composing the core inflation in June points to a generalized pressure on prices, distributed among many product categories.
In this sense, it is important that the monetary policy remain vigilant so as to avoid the propagation, in 2001 and 2002, of price realignments resulting from the shocks and exchange rate devaluation.
In sum, Copom concluded that the pressures on inflation, the increase of the core inflation in the past months and the risk of passthrough to inflation, also via administered prices, recommend a tightening in monetary policy by means of an increase in interest rate, so as to ensure convergence of inflation to the targeted trajectory.
