This plummet, which confirms a downtrend commencing in March, reflects the negative impacts of the energy crisis.
However, a waning of new credit operations is expected in the short-run due to less favorable conditions materialized into higher costs to the final borrower and to higher risk aversion upon concessions, which in turn mirror the recent hikes in basic interest rates and in uncertainty.
Yet, according to the monthly employment survey also carried out by IBGE, labor costs decreased in March.
The positive performance of domestic capital goods production in April, in particular the production of electrical energy equipment, was replicated in other investment indicators.
Exports of sectors with higher capacity utilization level, such as metallurgy and paper and pulp, fell compared to June 2000, offset by increased exports of meat and soybeans.
It is expected that the electrical energy rationing bring about deeper impacts in exports of semi-manufactured goods, inasmuch as some of the sectors participants are electricity-intensive consumers.
Exports of manufactured goods shall also be impacted, although to a smaller extent, due to the likelihood that domestically produced inputs be substituted by imported ones.
Weaker industrial activity levels are expected to reduce imports.
Impacts shall be felt in all usage categories.
Such trend should be lessened in the case of raw materials due to the depression in some of the domestic production and therefore its substitution by imported ones.
As to capital goods, an increase in imports of alternative energy generation equipment may occur, with impacts on the imports of fuel.
Nevertheless, non-related capital goods imports are expected to decline.
Even though the electric energy rationing shall induce a reduction of exports and imports, the differentiated impact of the slowdown in the industrial activity in each of those categories should allow for a better-than-expected performance of the trade balance.
The analysis of the recent evolution of the activity level reveals that the economy was already signaling a loss in dynamism in the months preceding the electrical energy crisis.
Awareness of the crisis has intensified the cooling process of the economic activity, not only due to direct rationing effects but also to the deterioration of agents expectations, as captured by consumer and entrepreneurs surveys, which indicate cut downs in both consumption and investment.
However, the intensity of the rationing impact on the activity level will depend, among others, on the rationalizing capacity of companies, on energy self-generation, energy sources substitution and inter-sectoral transfers of production.
A slower pace of economic growth is expected, nevertheless.
As a consequence, impacts in export and import flows may result in improvements on the trade balance in the following months.
In May, the main monthly inflation indices declined, driven by the performance of food prices, which reversed the significant ascentobserved in March and April.
The several readjustments of administered prices, on the other hand, contributed to the maintenance of monthly variation above the levels verified in the same month of the previous year.
The passthrough of recent exchange rate depreciation to prices has been in motion, although concentrated in the retail level and in few products, such as wheat by-products, beer, steel boards and copper wires.
The passthrough has also reflected in the increase of administered prices, in particular, gasoline prices.
The largest individual impact was of 0.07 percentage point from readjustments of electric energy tariffs.
The deceleration in price growth rates was generalized due to the larger supply of products such as beans, potatoes, tomatoes, onions, fruit, poultry and eggs.
Administered price readjustments are expected to strongly influence IPCA variations in June and July, in particular the inclusion of urban bus tariff readjustments in So Paulo, as well as water and sewage services also in So Paulo, fixed telephone tariffs throughout the country and electrical energy in some capitals.
On the other hand, food prices shall continue on a downward trend, attenuating the increase of the general index.
Finally, the effects of energy rationing on the economy's price indices tend to be diminished, as already observed, and due to the perspectives of cut-downs on consumption in the following months which will likely curb the passthrough of cost hikes to prices and price increases due to supply shortage.
More recent information have ratified the cooling trend of the international economy, especially the United States, with Japan still facing difficulties to surpass its economic recessive trajectory as external demand weakens.
In the Euro Area, the recent Monetary Policy expansion aimed at stimulating inland demand as a means to offset the loss in exports dynamism, although the inflationary scenario tends to bind expansion of future credit supply.
In Argentina, the deepening of the recessive scenario has been postponed by positive exports performance, while the instability in the financial markets has waned after the revision of the IMF agreement and the sovereign debt swap.
New economic measures were released in mid-June, aiming at reactivating of the economy.
In the United States, the economic indicators still do not suggest a response of the expansionary monetary policy implemented since January 2001, showing deceleration of the activity level.
Annual inflation rates recorded growth, not detected in the core inflation.
The Euro Area performance indicates a loss of dynamism due to the contraction of domestic and external demands.
Price trajectory evidences inflationary acceleration.
Corporations confidence index in Germany and France pointed to expectations of economic activity deceleration, while in Italy the indicators foresee recovery.
Macroeconomic indicators in Argentina persist on a less than favorable evolution, except for the commercial performance.
After a feeble recovery in March, demand indicators retracted in April.
In addition, the Argentine government designed a foreign trade transitory regime to be operated by means of a convergence factor.
Such factor is to be calculated by the Central Bank of the Argentina Republic on a daily basis, considering the simple average of the difference between the parity of dollar and euro in Londons interbankmarket, and it will be used to increase the import costs and create a bonus for exports.
The market experienced a relief as a consequence of the announcement of the debt swap in Argentina, immediately contributing to the drop in the premium embedded in the future interest rate in Brazil.
In this period, a lower impact in the movements of the exchange rate in the interest market was observed.
In the week between June 11 and 15, the curves slope presented gradual increases.
The spread between the one-year term DI rate and the Selic target increased to 505 bp in June 15, from 392 bp in June In June 18, the curve showed an impressive increase in the slope to tenures lower than four months and also a significant upward parallel movement for higher tenures, with the _ reaching 635 bp.
This movement was_ essentially due to uncertainties that generated an adverse impact on the secondary market of sovereign debt for emerging countries.
The average tenure of the issues wase reduced to 43.8 months in May from 47.3 months in April.
This reduction is associated with National Treasurys decision to offer fixedrate securities LTN.
The average tenure of the stock of debt increased to 33.6 months in May from 32.0 months in April, essentially due to the approximately 3-month increase in the average tenure of the Selic-indexed debt.
The remaining of the debt, mostly composed of dollar-indexed and price-indexed securities, was in financial institutions portfolios.
Financial Investment Funds have changed their portfolios in the past months more significantly compared to financial institutions.
The net redemption of LTN in April and May and the significant exchange rate devaluation observed in the last month explain such movement.
The low volume registered in the last three months may be explained by the absence of fixed securities auctions in March added to the low offered volume of these securities in the other two months, besides the high volatility of the interest rates.
Along with the fixed-rate securities market, the future interest rate contracts presented a liquidity reduction in May.
The daily average of negotiated contracts of future DI reduced to 163 thousand from 194 thousand.
The DI future contract for October continued to concentrate negotiations.
The daily turnover of term DI remained stable in 2.0 thousand contracts, again without new contracts redemptions.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
Adjustments for public transportation were also reassessed, taking into account increases in bus fares above expectations.
Therefore, the hypothesis for the evolution of food prices was changed to incorporate some deflationary pressure in June and to follow the average of the other prices for the remaining of the year; The inclusion of the term structure of domestic interest rates in the inflation forecast models, as specified in the June 2001 _, demands the specification of_ hypotheses as to its slope.
Regarding the electricity shock, results yet preliminary of the modeling efforts point out to a reduction in the economic growth rate this year.
Net effects on inflation, on the contrary, tend to be minor, especially when compared to the effect of other shocks such as that of government managed prices.
In May, the IPCA captured price deceleration for these items, whose fall should be completed by June.
Thus, some of those items were included in the core, raising it.
Economic activity continued to grow robustly in the first quarter, followed by an apparent moderation at the beginning, and a substantial drop at the end of the second quarter.
Industry led the expansion, and the growth of capital goods production suggests an increase in the investment rate.
The marginal deceleration is confirmed by the consumption indicators of April and May and by the reduced demand for credit.
The reduction in energy consumption has been well assimilated by society, although its implications may differ between individual consumers and activity sectors.
The energy crisis also has different effects on each macroeconomic variable.
There is no doubt that it will have negative effects on output growth this year, but the magnitude of this impact is difficult to quantify.
On the other hand, there is a growing consensus that the net impact on inflation tends to be lower.
Another important consequence of the energy crisis is to alter expectations, due to its contribution to domestic political instability.
Besides these domestic uncertainties, the external scenario remains troublesome.
The global economy still does not shown signs of recovery in growth.
The United States and the Euro Zones economies still lack strength, while Japans remains stagnant.
Oil prices remain high, despite the recent fall.
Therefore, despite the resultant slackening of monetary policy in these economies, the environment of risk aversion remains.
The country completed an important lengthening of part of its short-term public debt, making room for advances in the economic stimulus and fiscal reform program.
A return to economic normalcy, however, depends on the confirmation of an improving fiscal outlook and consistent signs of economic recovery, which will take some time.
The exchange rate deserves a detailed discussion.
In the first months of the year, part of the gradual depreciation of the exchange rate could be explained by the perception of deterioration in the balance of payments and other domestic and external uncertainties.
The worsening uncertainties in this period had strong repercussions on Brazils risk perception, lifting the costs of raising capital abroad.
Moreover, the balance of payments' performance was not particularly favorable.
The negative outcomes for the trade balance reflected the strength of domestic demand in opposition to the global economic deceleration, suggesting that imports would remain strong, while exports would face foreign demand constraints.
As a result, the expected magnitude of the current account deficit was rising, while the expected flows of foreign direct investment were declining.
Therefore, it was natural to expect that the foreign exchange market would seek a new equilibrium.
The potential pass through from exchange rate depreciation to prices was one of the reasons for the reaction of monetary policy in the period, with an increase in the interest rate to attempt to neutralize these effects.
Inflation expectations, although they were revised upward, did not accompany the pace of depreciation, indicating that part of the latter was not perceived as permanent and, therefore, should not be transmitted to final prices.
However, the total impact of the pass through from depreciation to prices should also include the effect on the adjustment of tariffs and other managed prices, especially of gasoline.
In this more general context, the exchange rate depreciation is estimated to contribute with at least 1.5 percentage points to the expected inflation for this year.
More recently, however, the dynamics observed in the foreign exchange market changed.
Over the last few weeks, the domestic price of the dollar rose considerably.
This despite the fact that, in this period, the forecasts of the economic impact of the energy crisis became less pessimistic and there was some improvement in the external scenario.
Basic interest rates fell in the United States and in Europe, and Argentina successfully completed a debt swap operation.
Therefore, those who otherwise would purchase foreign currency only in the future prefer to do so right away, whatever the current price might be, since they believe that procrastination may be too costly.
Although this self-feeding process of exchange rate depreciation is not sustainable in the medium run, it may have nefarious consequences for the economy while it lasts, by distorting consumption and investment decisions, affecting corporate balance sheets, and, most of all, changing relative prices and threatening the inflation targets.
Copom determined that measures should be implemented so that price formation in the exchange market ceases to present the characteristics of a speculative bubble.
These measures include an elevation in the cost of maintaining speculative positions and the adoption of the disposition to irrigate the market with additional resources, stemming from reinforcements to the financing of the balance of payments, in order to provide the adequate liquidity for price formation and to avoid the anticipation of future demand for defensive or precautionary reasons.
These actions will be backed by the implementation of important structural measures in banking and taxation.
Inflation measured by the Broad Consumer Price Index IPCA accumulated 2.42 percentage points up to May.
The second alternative was chosen because, although more complex, it indicates more clearly a proactive approach in seeking a reversion of the present situation.
The downward bias was introduced in the understanding that the measures to be announced might contribute to a rapid reversion in inflation expectations.
