This mirrors the evolution of the international economy scenario in addition to the impacts of the energy crisis, and its effects on the interest and exchange rates.
Such factors impacted economic agents expectations.
The deterioration of entrepreneurs' and consumers expectations throughout the second quarter of the year triggered demand indicators to more intensively reflect this adjustment path of the economy, showing negative variation both in the seasonally adjusted monthly results and in the comparisons with the same months of the previous year.
Compared to the same period of 2000, in the first three months of the year the retail sales in So Paulo expanded, reverting to show negative results from April until July.
However, the retail sales of autovehicles have presented accentuated oscillations in the monthly outcomes as a result of peculiar features, such as sales promotions to reduce inventory.
In the past monthly results, special notice should be attributed to the distinct evolution of supermarket, pharmacy and perfumery sales, with some recovery in June and July after falling in May.
Noteworthy was the distinct evolution of its two components, with current intentions posing some recovery, possibly due to the perception that the effects of the energy rationing were not so drastic as previously expected, and with future intentions declining once more, associated with more pessimistic expectations due to the reduction of the real income and to the worsened conditions of consumer credit.
Even though the direction of the GDP evolution could be anticipated, given the presence of factors unfavorable to the economic conjuncture in the second quarter, the magnitude of the reduction was larger than expected.
Among other factors, the weak performance of the processing industry and communications were pointed out as the main drivers of the frustration of the expectations concerning the GDP evolution in the period.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ To a large extent, the GDP outcome reflected the evolution of the industrial sector.
Among the categories, an expressive reduction was observed in the production of durable consumer goods and intermediate goods.
In fact, employment indicators have evolved more favorably than expected.
Information from the Ministry of Labor and Employment confirmed the favorable evolution in the job market in June.
In the manufacturing sector, however, industrial surveys indicated trend reversal, with the number of positions being reduced in June.
According to the Industrial Confidence Index, released on a quarterly basis by CNI, the perspective for the industry for the next months is not favorable.
Surveyed on a quarterly basis, the indicator declined in July, basically motivated by the energy crisis and persistent hikes in the exchange and interest rates.
The evolution of new operations reflects contained demand for consumption and investment, given the rise of credit costs and higher selectivity of financial institutions, associated with the rise of uncertainties and default rates.
Nonetheless, both exports and imports decreased in July, considering daily averages, remaining on the downward trend of growth commencing in May, compared to the same period of In July, exports decreased mainly due to semi-manufactured products, led by pulp, iron, steel and crude aluminum, products more directly affected by the electric energy rationing.
The shipment of soy and soy bran in July was hindered by strong rains in the region of the Paranagu Harbor, the main soy shipment harbor in Brazil, causing shipped volumes to fall if compared to July In August, the shipment of soy returned to normal conditions.
It shall be stressed the continuity of increased shipment of exported chicken meat, beef and pork meat, raw tobacco and corn, the latter not exported in 2000 due to problems in the harvest.
Regarding imports, only durable consumer goods rose in July, especially due to increased imports of auto-vehicles.
Reflecting the cooling of the domestic industrial growth, imports of raw material _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ and intermediate products fell, in particular transportation equipment and accessories, and, to a smaller degree, capital goods.
Relatively to investments in the country, the index which takes into account domestic absorption of capital goods and production of inputs to the civil construction declined at the end of the first half of 2001, even though indices accumulated in 2001 still show growth.
The mechanisms to adjust to these shocks should be mentioned.
Firstly, the fast and substantial worsening of expectations which highly impacted consumption expenditures, especially regarding the items sensitive to credit, which require commitment of future income.
This fact, associated with high interest rates and the perspective of a deepening of the Argentina crisis, reflected in the industrial output and investment flows.
Nonetheless, three positive aspects should be noticed in this picture.
The first one is related to the evolution of employment indicators, which, although mirror adverse shocks, do so discretely.
The second refers to price evolution, not evidencing generalized hikes as a consequence of supply shocks, as previously speculated.
The last one refers to the recovery of the trade balance, although incipient.
Prices Administered price readjustments, partially influenced by the exchange rate devaluation, were the main factors to determine the evolution of inflation in July.
Food prices also influenced the index, by continuously reflecting off-season effects and the impact of the exchange rate variation in some items, such as soybean oil and wheat by products.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ tariffs, in the electric energy in So Paulo and Curitiba and in fixed telephony throughout the country.
As a consequence of these hikes, the administered prices solely contributed to 0.9 percentage point of the monthly variation of the IPCA.
The evolution of the IPA reflected, notably, the recent exchange rate devaluation, with special notice to monthly results in crops for exports and oleaginous, among the agricultural products, and "oil and grease, "flower and by-products and "fuel and lubricants", among the industrial others.
External environment The decelerating pace of US economic activity does not show signs of reversal in the short run, contributing to the dissemination of the economic deceleration in other countries.
In this context, the Euro Area presents signs of deceleration, with the possibilities of a Japanese economic recovery in the short run tending to be minimized.
The emerging economies are affected both by the direct negative impact of the reduction of the external demand and by unfavorable change in the risk perception of international investors.
The investments tend to remain contracted, with the production of capital goods decreasing during the first seven months of 2001 and the orders of new telecommunication equipment and computers significantly negative in June.
The unfavorable expectations of entrepreneurs and consumers signal, in conjunction with the other analyzed indicators, the trend of delayed economic recovery relatively to initial expectations.
The wholesale and consumer price indices in July presented negative variation, which may be associated with the evolution of international energy prices and the domestic price of gasoline, as well with the reduction of the demand.
The Euro Area economies have shown a reducing trend in the growth rates of retail sales, what has contributed, jointly with the performance of exports, to the contraction of the industrial production.
The weaker performance of these economies has reflected in the descending trajectory of price indices, which have also been responding to lower oil prices.
The Japanese economy remains with no signs of recovery.
It shall be stressed that the yen has shown appreciating trend vis-a-vis the American dollar inasmuch as the perspectives for longer deceleration in US become more evident.
In sum, despite the actions implemented aiming to revert the decelerating scenario of economic activity in industrial countries, no clear signs of reversal until the end of this year can be observed.
In Argentina, the congress approved the zero deficit program and the government still tries to preserve the credibility in its capacity to recover economy growth.
Demand and production indicators do not reveal the retrieval of economic activity, although the fiscal result of June positively contributed to the accomplishment of the target agreed with the IMF in December.
Afterwards, the announcement of the new agreement with the IMF and the release of data indicating deceleration in the economic activity translated into the main reasons for the downward move of the slope of the interest rate curve.
In the period between July 16 and August 20, a significant reduction was observed in the interest curve slope in regard to tenures shorter than 90 days.
The spread between the Over-Selic rate and the Futures DI to October reduced to 140 bp from 660 bp, reverting the expectations of an eventual interest rate shock in the short run.
For tenures higher than 180 days, the spread reached approximately 150 bp.
In regard to exchange rate pegged securities, the Central Bank of Brazil maintained the strategy of integrally rolling over principal and final interest payments.
In this context, there were three offers of five-month fixed rate securities.
Within a 25 working day period, the Central Bank intervened six times in the open market, aiming at administering the short-term interest rate.
Prospective assessment of inflation The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
After 2002, the hypothesis that the prices of oil by-products in the domestic market shall follow market inflation is considered; _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
Monetary Policy Guidelines Recent data and other indicators regarding the activity level have confirmed the continuity, in the last months, of the cooling economic trend observed since the end of the first quarter.
This reflects the impact of both the international scenario and the energy crisis on expectations and domestic economy.
The contribution of each of the various factors to the economic deceleration is difficult to be assessed.
Nonetheless, the reduction in the aggregate demand seems to have been the main factor to respond for the worsening economic performance, if compared to the restriction imposed to aggregate supply stemming from the energy crisis.
The reduction in the demand may be explained by the worsening of the external scenario, by the reflex of the energy shortage on the expectations and by the recent tightening of the monetary policy.
The perception that the deceleration of the world economy shall be longer than forecasted in the beginning of the year, in conjunction with the evolution of the Argentina crisis have contributed to the downward revision of expectations concerning the Brazilian economic growth, with negative impacts on the aggregate demand.
These expectations were also influenced by the energy crisis, which affected entrepreneurs and consumers confidence.
Monetary policy actions, in addition to the direct impact of the interest rate hikes on the demand, also reflected in market's expectations, as revealed by the steepening of the slope of the interest rate curve since last March.
The shift in expectations accelerated the impact of _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ the monetary policy.
This cooling in the demand may pose downward pressure to the inflation rate in 2001 and Notwithstanding the fall in inflation expected in the near future due to the scenario of economic deceleration, the response of the exchange rate continues to be a source of concern.
There are still risks of an exchange rate passthrough to domestic prices stemming from accumulated depreciation since the beginning of the year.
These risks become more intense as the depreciation starts to be perceived as permanent and the demand recovers.
In the short run, uncertainties concerning the exchange rate market have not been dissipated.
In the medium run, given the transitory nature of the shocks and economic policy reaction, it is reasonable to assume that an improvement in the Balance of Payments will materialize.
The core inflation remains at a high level, although having presented some decline.
The analysis of the items incorporated into the calculation of the core inflation in July points out to a pressure on prices, distributed among various categories of products.
Copom concluded that, if on the one hand the cooling economic activity impose downward pressure onto inflation forecasts, yet to be confirmed, on the other hand, the increase of the core inflation in the last months and the existing risks of passthrough pressures, inclusively via administered prices, recommend caution on managing the monetary policy.
Under these circumstances, Copom decided that the monetary policy is currently adequate to assure convergence of the inflation to the targets.
