The performance of retail activity reflects consumer perceptions.
Consumer Intentions Index in the Metropolitan Region of So Paulo, released by the FCESP, dropped to 101 in May from 106.3 in April.
This drop is attributed to the internal political crisis and to the deterioration of the external scenario.
Since the survey encompasses expectations from the beginning of May, the index had not yet reflected the negative impacts caused by the energy crisis.
Financial system credit indicators still do not clearly suggest cooling in activity level.
On the supply side, the most encompassing data refers to March, reflecting, up to that period, the strong expansion of the economic activity.
This dynamism in the first months of the year reflects, in part, the good performance of exports and explains the high level of imports.
Up to April, the trade balance presented significant growth of exports by increased shipments of beef and soy in grain and soy bran, due to plant health measures in European countries.
The manufactured goods performance remained similar to that of the last months of 2000, mainly exporting products linked to the automobile industry.
Deserve special mention fuel exports, item that gained importance since the end of 2000, as a result of the strategy that aims at swapping oil by products in surplus in the Country.
Imports also kept the performance of the last months, largely due to the maintenance of industrial growth, responsible for the rise of the expenses with acquisition of important items of capital goods, raw materials and intermediate goods.
The increase of auto imports was equally significant, resulting from trade agreements and from the rise in imports originated from Asian countries.
The signs of gradual accommodation of economic indicators, mainly demand ones, would not jeopardize the desired expansion of economic activity this year.
To the contrary, this slowdown would be beneficial to the economic environment by improving price performance excessively impacted by agricultural prices - and the trade balance.
However, one has to consider the future perspectives given now the energy crisis.
The implications, at this first moment, refer to the deterioration of the expectations and its unfolding on the flows of expenses and credit.
The perspectives are of intensification of the process of consumption deceleration since May, mainly in relation to the goods whose sales involve future income commitments.
Considering a longer horizon, the cooling of consumption will be conditional to the magnitude of the effect of the crisis on incomes and job levels.
Regarding credit, a slowdown in the volume of new concessions is expected in the short term and a fall in the medium term.
This behavior will be conditional on the increase in lending rates and bank spreads, in the imminence of an augmented risk of default.
Additionally, the demand for credit, as much for consumption as for investments, might be affected by the evolution of the income.
For the industrial segment, which has operated in a higher level when compared to the previous year, the energy crisis implies the reduction in the pace of expansion.
However, the possibility of transferring energy consumption between sectors tends to reduce the impacts of the rationing on manufacturing.
Moreover, processes of rationalization, substitution of energy sources and intensification of self-generation of electric energy shall contribute to the same objective.
It must be observed that these processes, as well as the absence of accurate sectoral coefficients of energy-output relations in the various segments, make it difficult to precisely quantify the impacts of rationing on industrial production.
In light of the above, even if the manufacturing is not strongly affected, the rationing of electric energy might cause contraction in exports as well as in imports.
Exports of basic products shall not be significantly affected, as much for using relatively less electricity than industrialized ones, as for the fact that a substantial part of the exportable production occurs outside the rationing area.
Among the main semi-manufactured products exported, there are the metallurgical products which intensively use electric energy.
Nevertheless, some companies are self-sufficient in energy generation.
It is likely, however, that exportable surplus be reduced.
The manufacture production might suffer the direct impact of lower energy supply and also of reduced supply of raw materials and intermediate goods domestically produced, which might be replaced by imported inputs.
Regarding imports, a fall in acquisitions of raw materials and intermediate goods is expected.
This reduction, however, can be attenuated by the substitution of domestic supply by imported goods.
In a similar way, the reduction in capital goods imports might be offset, in part, by the necessity to substitute energy generating equipment and to speed up the required investments to overcome the energy crisis.
For fuels and lubricant, the import reduction, due to the contraction in economic growth, might be mitigated by the necessity to substitute electric energy for energy generated from oil by products.
Therefore, both, exports and imports shall be impacted from cuts due to rationing and to the reduction in the activity level.
Finally, regarding prices behavior, the immediate effect refers to the impact of surcharges on energy bills of households, already estimated to be around 0.15 percentage point in Junes IPCA.
It shall be highlighted that this effect will be the opposite at the end of the process.
As to the indirect impact of rationing, it shall be considered, on the one hand, the restrictive perspectives on supply and the consequent rise of costs.
On the other hand, the further contraction of consumption flows and of investments tend to minimize prices pressures.
In April, the price indices continued to be affected by the same factors observed in March.
The main responsible for inflation in the period were food products, especially those of animal origin.
The indices were also pressured by the exchange rate movement in the last months.
The inflation increase in April was due mainly to the food price behavior.
The latter was a consequence of the draught and the losses of bean crops, as well as of the domestic effects of expanded meet exports, along with the impacts on the wheat byproducts from exchange rate depreciation.
The result was influenced by the contribution of 0.23 percentage point of the tradable goods, as milk, bean, poultry and bread.
Among the non-tradable products, foods were responsible for 0.11 percentage point and the domestic employees contributed with 0.08 percentage point.
In the case of administered prices, the increase in energy costs and in water and sewer charges were compensated by the reduction in alcohol and gasoline prices.
For the near future, a drop in agricultural prices is expected.
The behavior of administered prices will impact inflation results, given, among other factors, the surcharge on electric energy bills and the previously expected increase in electricity tariffs, the increase of bus fares in the city of So Paulo, and the increase in telephone tariffs, in June.
The international economy remains in deceleration, due to the performance of the United States and the stagnation of Japan, while the rise in spot and future prices of oil remains as a key concern regarding the inflation path.
In Argentina, the government has seek to revert negative expectations regarding the overall economy, while the countrys aggregate demand and industrial output has remained at low levels.
This movement was mainly caused by the uncertainty regarding both economic and political impacts, in the medium term, of the energy crisis and the election process next year.
These auctions were used to fully rollover principal and interest payments.
The other securities were fully placed.
The National Treasury offered fixed income securities at only two instances given that both Selic rate and volatility remained high.
Five year tenure LFNs were offered in four instances.
This difference can be explained by the low volume of public offerings and also the interest rate variation in the month.
Along with the public securities market, the future interest rate contracts showed less liquidity.
The daily average of future DI decreased to 194 thousand contracts from 235 thousand in March.
The October future DI remained the focus of the transactions.
The turnover of term DI contracts was also reduced to 2 thousand contracts from 3.3 thousand, with no new transactions.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
This assumption is equivalent to an upward shift in the Brazil risk curve when compared to last meetings projected trajectory.
The electrical energy shock was initially modeled as a typical supply shock, reducing the growth rate and pressuring domestic prices.
First quarter GDP growth was adjusted according to data released by the IBGE.
The strong economic activity at the beginning of 2001, in the context of growth deceleration observed in the economies of our trading partners, has influenced the level of imports, that grew at a faster pace than our exports.
Hence, more pressure has been exerted on the current account balance and on financing requirements of the balance of payments, with a negative impact on the exchange rate.
A series of particularly unfavorable events in both domestic and external scenarios are added to this environment.
Among them, the Argentine crisis, domestic political instability and more recently the announcement of energy supply limitations in three out of the five of the countrys geographical regions.
These events have contributed to maintain the exchange rate under pressure, since this variable immediately responds to risk perceptions of economic agents.
The magnitude of recent exchange rate depreciation makes it more difficult, at least potentially, to keep consumer price inflation at low rates.
The heating of aggregate demand observed in 2001 was accompanied by domestic credit expansion in the last months.
Although some economic indicators suggests a contraction in aggregate demand at the margin, it is not yet the case with credit operations.
Despite the moderate increase in default levels and returned checks, the overall quality of financial institutions assets has not been affected.
It is clear, however, that the impacts on aggregate supply will be severe, given the initially expected magnitude and duration of the reduction in energy consumption.
This characterizes a supply shock.
In principle, this shock shall reduce more rapidly the quantity supplied of goods and services than the quantity demanded, which tends to lead to inflationary pressures and lower GDP growth rates.
However, it is not a trivial task to adequately quantify these effects and their repercussions.
For instance, the fall in supply will depend upon the capacity of the economy to adjust to the new environment by means of energy substitution, self-generation of electricity and rationalization of usage.
Besides, should domestic demand not fall at the same pace of supply, which is probable, then the exceeding demand could be matched by imports or lead to price increases.
The inevitable initial reduction in output growth tends to countervail the inflationary pressures over time by restoring supply and demand equilibrium.
On the other hand, if aggregate demand is strongly affected by deteriorated expectations, then inflation and the trade balance would be less affected than output.
Monetary policy shall seek to neutralize the secondary effects of energy rationing on inflation, particularly those whose impacts are to be felt in The primary consequences of this shock are not limited to the direct impact on price indices from higher energy costs.
They also encompass the expected change in relative prices of goods and services due to the downward shift in supply, that tends to raise the indices.
The secondary effects include eventual propagation movements generated by the initial price increases and have to be fought to avoid the offsetting of relative price changes, which would, by its turn, lead to additional price adjustments.
In the external scenario, uncertainties remain, despite signs of improvement.
In the case of Argentina, the attentions remain focused on the swap of short term debt for longer term instruments, and this situation should change only in June, after the settlement details are made public.
In the United States, the new reduction of 50 basis points in the basic interest rate tends to improve global liquidity conditions and growth outlook for the world economy.
This favors the continuity of adequate external financing of the current account balance, even in the context of lower direct investment flows.
In the internal scenario, Aprils inflation was higher than expected, again as a consequence of food price increases.
Some agricultural products had substantial price increases explained by the currency depreciation.
This was the case of beef and poultry, whose exports were raised by strong external demand, and also the case of wheat and its by products.
In the initial weeks of May, however, improvement on weather conditions and crops made available at market place have led to a substantial reduction in food prices.
The trajectory of core inflation, calculated by the trimmed- mean method, showed a reduction in April, although its level is still high.
Estimates for administered price changes were revised upwards, mainly due to the adverse evolution of international prices of oil.
Taking all together, administered prices shall have a 2.4 percentage point impact on 2001 inflation.
In sum, the Brazilian economy is facing several simultaneous adverse shocks, whose net effects on inflation need to be identified.
Signs of demand slowdown are being observed since the increase in interest rates and the deterioration of expectations.
In the opposite direction, there are the potential inflationary impacts of the continued exchange rate depreciation and of the energy shock, yet to occur.
