The strong growth of aggregate demand encouraged investments.
The increase in aggregate demand has been partially met by goods produced abroad.
International trade experienced a noticeable increase in volume.
The Committees communiqu referred to the need of a swift and firm response to be given by monetary policy in an environment of stronger reduction in consumer and company confidence, which is already affecting industrial production.
Petroleum international price keeps volatile.
Prices in the demand market were higher in the first weeks of February, yet futures markets exhibit expectations of lower prices along the year.
Finally, Argentina is recovering the agents confidence in the country, as suggested by the performance of interest rates and cost of Treasury securities placements held since the beginning of the year.
A reduction in the fuel variation rate, that had a significant impact in December, was offset by an increase in foodstuffs and school fees, both of seasonal character.
Important also were pressures stemming from price adjustments in urban bus fares of some capital cities, higher electricity prices, and incidence of ICMS on energy, in Belm.
Regarding IPC, the increase was mainly due to items such as education, foodstuffs and miscellaneous expenses, in addition to the contribution given by urban bus fares in some capital cities.
In four traditional public offers, the National Treasury sold LTNs maturing in twelve and eighteen months.
Yet, in a single firm offer auction, twenty-six months LTNs were sold, the most extended term for securities of this type.
The Central Bank performed in the period a full rollover of exchange securities updated principal to mature, by means of three NBC-Es auctions with maturities of two, three and four years, respectively.
The result of such events makes evident that economic agents are demanding exchange hedge for longer terms.
In addition, four competitive offers of LFTs took place in the period, the first with a term of four years and the remaining three with five-year terms.
This hypothesis, coupled with lower interest rates in the United States, drop of petroleum prices and an appreciation of the Euro before the Dollar, may enable a gradually improved perception of the Brazil risk The GDP growth was adjusted according to data published by IBGE.
However, the majority of excluded items, for being in the upper tail of the distribution, belong to food in the household and education.
The increases observed in such items are typically temporary, that is to say, not likely to repeat in the next months.
This analysis is corroborated by the IPCA cores calculated by exclusion.
Consumption demand keeps steady, supported by credit expansion and improved expectations.
Investment demand, that had being channeled to durable goods, gives signs of turning also towards the construction industry, judging by the increase in demand for capital goods and other inputs of such industry.
Public sector consumption keeps stable, with a consistent fulfillment of the targets set to the fiscal policy.
The faster rhythm of exports is in keeping with expectations for this time of the year, though still insufficient to reach a trade balance surplus, given the fast pace of imports, mainly those related to intermediary and capital goods.
Aggregate supply is following the rhythm of increased demand.
Industrial production keeps vigorous, reflecting an increased utilization of installed capacity, though failing to imply detectable hindrances to the maintenance of growth in an environment of price stability.
Perspectives for the agricultural harvest remain positive, with a high in grain production forecasts, though for some crops, such as rice and beans, estimates have been revised downwards.
The labor market exhibits improvements, with smaller unemployment rates and without unbalances that may imply pressures from the cost side.
Summarizing, the supply and demand balance fails to suggest any pressure on price indices over the horizon relevant to the inflationary targets regime.
However, a firm economic growth has affected the trade balance, the aggregate result of which is declining since the last third of 2000, affecting expectations of the exchange market.
In contrast, conditions for the trade balance financing keep favorable and the Brazil risk evaluation abroad keeps improving, given the quality of domestic fundamentals and despite a reduction in the flow of direct investments forecasted for this year.
The prevalent foreign environment exhibits relevant ongoing uncertainties.
The recent behavior of petroleum international prices, after the production cut by the OPEC member countries, resumed a significant volatility.
The pace in which petroleum international prices are dropping has been lower than the one forecasted by futures markets.
Since the domestic petroleum by-products price adjustment arrangement for 2001 is directly linked to international prices, and since such by-products have significant weight in IPCA, this foreign price volatility make domestic inflation estimates imprecise.
Regarding the world economy, perspectives of lower growth in industrialized countries seems to be ratified, given a deceleration in the rhythm of activity in the United States, as shown by recent statistics.
As expected by the markets, these perspectives have led to a milder monetary policy in the United States with the aim of avoiding undesirable brisk moves.
The recent behavior of inflation is in keeping with COPOM perceptions.
However, for the third consecutive year, the change of administered prices, in whose formation inertial components are predominant, shall largely exceed the value of the inflation target for this year.
Readjustments in electrical energy prices granted at the beginning of this year to regions not included in IPCA, for instance, were above the aggregate inflation measured by general price indices in the twelve previous months.
Another important price is that of fuels, which shall change on a quarterly basis according to the average petroleum price and the exchange rate.
Considered these factors, administered prices contribute with about half of the value of the 2001 target.
Notes revised by the Board.
