Therefore, the result in September still does not reflect the repercussion of the attacks to the U.S.A. on the formation of domestic expectations.
The overall investment indicators in the country exhibited signs of cooling in July, mainly regarding imports and exports of capital goods, whereas domestic production of capital goods still showed some dynamism, geared by the effects of the energy rationing, which bolstered the production of energy generation equipments.
The production of raw material for the building industry leveled off in the month, after plunging in the previous bimester.
In the month, negative growth was observed in 13 of a total of 20 industrial sectors and 3 of the 4 usage categories.
Positive growth was observed solely in the production of capital goods.
Notwithstanding, industrial surveys indicate reduction in employment in this sector.
This performance, however, continued to reflect a positive flow resulting from transactions settled previously, as new loans fell for the second consecutive month, a response to the environment of uncertainties together with the maintenance of lending rates on an upward trend.
In August, collection of taxes and contributions remained at a growing pace, mainly due to the effects of tax collection on capital income and financial turnover, as tax collection on corporate revenue has been growing at a lower pace, reflecting the deceleration of the economic activity.
Noteworthy, after May, exports and imports started to grow at lower rates, reflecting, simultaneously, but at a different intensity, the effects of deceleration in the Brazilian and global economies.
In August, exports was improved by aircraft re-exports, similarly to August 2000, although growth in sales of basic products continued to be remarkable, mainly poultry, beef and pork, together with _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ the recovery in exports of semi-manufactured products, resulting from the recovery in sales of iron and steel products and the continuing sugar export growth.
Shipment of manufactured products fell once again compared to the same month of As to market destination, the best results were achieved with countries holding a smaller share of Brazilian exports, confirming the diversification of destination of Brazilian sales in 2001, at the same time as the sales to the main markets, United States and Mercosur, slowed.
Regarding total import volumes, purchases of capital goods were the sole segment to increase comparing to August In terms of daily average volumes, only the acquisition of fuel and oil surpassed August 2000 results.
The reduction in purchases of consumption and intermediate goods reflects the slower industrial output growth in the country and the recent depreciation of the exchange rate.
To conclude, the deterioration in the external front and the adjustment of the economy to the energy crisis triggered a process deceleration in economic activity, which is still on.
As a result, the observed and projected growth rates for the Brazilian economy for 2001 is lower.
The labor market is starting to adjust, albeit gradually, to this environment, which shall exert additional pressure to the real wage bill, already affected by the impact from administered price adjustments.
The deterioration of credit conditions, with more selectivity, shorter maturities and higher interest rates, does not favor demand recovery.
The fiscal position remains favorable, yet with prospect for continued decelerating revenue growth.
The recent trend in trade suggests recovery of surpluses, mainly reflecting the downward trend of imports inasmuch as the international environment, even prior to the attacks to the United States, was unfavorable for exports .
External environment To evaluate the world economic outlook after the attacks to the United States on September 11 is more difficult as it tends to be tightly linked to the impact of such actions upon the North American economy.
Although premature, the analysis is based on the acute expectation of unfavorable influence on consumer confidence and the prospects for deepening the slowing in the short run.
Alongside monetary loosening, the government signals the adoption of expansionary fiscal policy, partially using the primary surplus, which tends to _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ produce positive impacts over the medium term, fostering the recovery stimulated by an easier monetary policy.
Until early September, U.S. economy remained on a decelerating process and statistics released did not signal recovery in the short run.
The consumption remained as the main pillar of demand, albeit on a downward trend, as investments decreased significantly since the end of The accentuated drop in investments has been recorded in the levels of inventory and fixed assets, such as facilities, machinery and software.
It shall be stressed that this adjustment is considered relevant for the correction of imbalances impelled by the high growth period.
The positive fiscal results have been inferior to initially expected, reflecting tax reduction, the change in collecting dates and the lower activity level.
Trade has also been influenced by the deceleration growth, resulting in lower rates of import growth.
Additionally, global repercussion of the fall in U.S. economic activity has translated into lower export growth rates.
The evolution of price indices does not evidence existence of inflation pressures, enabling interest rate reduction.
In the Euro Area, statistics point to the contagion from the deceleration process in the United States.
Country specific indicators relative to July and August and entrepreneurs' perception, translated into the fall in confidence indicators of the three major economies in the region Germany, Italy and France-, suggest the maintenance of this trend in the next quarter.
The Japanese economy remains with no signs of recovery in the activity level although the yen has been showing appreciation trend.
Eastern Asian economies, which tend to present high dependence on both American and Japanese demand, are searching for measures to countervail external sector retraction, with China and South Korea featuring as the most successful.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ from investors.
The Argentine economy remains in recession, despite internal efforts and financial support programs by international financial institutions.
In synthesis, the trend of cooling in economic activity is observed at a global level, led by the United States.
This scenario tends to become deepen in the short run, as a function of the recrudescence of American consumer and corporate spending contraction, in response to the attacks on September Nonetheless, the easing, already in progress, of monetary and fiscal policies in the United States should contribute to mitigate the contracting output trend in the medium term, with positive impacts for the world economy.
Prices In August, the adjustment of the administered prices continued to exert pressure on the main inflation indices, albeit at a lower intensity, thus contributing to lower monthly changes as compared to July.
Considering consumer prices, electricity price adjustments in So Paulo, Curitiba and Belm, together with the rise of fuel prices at a national level put forth the most significant impact on the monthly outcome.
As to wholesale prices, in addition to the impact from fuel prices, it shall be stressed the pressure from the increase in cereals and grains and crops for exports, among agricultural products, reflecting, in part, the effects of the exchange rate variation.
The retreat in the monthly outcome was due to the lesser impact of administered price adjustments, which concentrated in July.
The impressive hikes in wheat flour, bread and pasta prices reflected both wheat price increases and the exchange rate variation.
Still in the food sector, price increases were associated with off-season effects.
This percentage reflects the variations in the labor market after the minimum wage adjustment in May.
Based on the analysis of July and August indices, a conclusion may be drawn that the hikes observed stemmed from pressures arising from specific groups.
A generalized rise among sectors is not evident, nor are continuous upward movements, which evinces the absence of indexation mechanisms in the economy.
Taking into account this fact, together with the waning of pressures derived from administered price adjustments, a prospect for significant reduction in inflation rates is expected for the coming months.
Between August 22 and September 9, the spread between the Over-Selic rate and the Futures DI to January reduced to 190 bp from 340 bp.
Nonetheless, after the attacks to the U.S. on September 11, this trajectory reverted, with the spread increasing to 320 bp on September On that date, a higher slope was observed in the whole extension of the curve.
In September, the strategy of rolling over integrally the principal and final interest payments of exchange rate indexed securities, preferably with placements of NTN-D, has started.
On September 13 and 14, a total of three placements of five-month NBCE was realized to meet the demand for hedge.
The large quantities offered and the yields accepted sanctioned an increase of the exchange rate coupon.
On August 29, a five-month LTN auction was settled.
Stemming from the effects of the terrorist attack on September 11 in the market, the National Treasury decided to cancel the LFT and LTN auctions scheduled for that day.
The additional placements of NBCE offset the net redemption of National Treasury securities.
Within a 19 working day period, the Central Bank intervened for ten times in the open market, aiming at administering the short-term interest rate.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ Prospective assessment of inflation The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ on the external front, the ssumption for the average risk premium measured as the difference between the yield of Brazil's Global Bonds and the United States Treasury Bonds with equivalent duration calculated by linear interpolation was revised to incorporate a declining path from current levels to a plateau near 700 basis points from the second quarter of 2002 on.
Monetary Policy Guidelines _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ Recently released indicators confirm the slowdown trend in demand as a result of the set of shocks that affected the Brazilian economy.
The drop in demand may be explained by the worsening in the external scenario, by effects of the energy crisis on expectations and by the recent tightening in monetary policy, yet enough for GDP to grow moderately this year.
After an expected increase in inflation in July and August, basically due to the hike in administered prices, the IPCA and other indices already show marginal decrease, with reduced variation in market prices.
Notwithstanding the downward pressure on inflation stemming from the activity slowdown, the exchange rate remains under pressure.
In the international scenario, adverse expectations prevail.
The recovery of the U.S. economy had been postponed as indicated by recent released data.
With the recent attacks on September 11th, the probability that this recovery will be delayed for the third quarter of next year is higher.
In Europe, following the developments in the U.S. economy, the reduction trend in the pace of economic activity will be accentuated.
The Japanese economy will not present signals of recovery in the short run.
It is still premature to predict the effects of U.S. crisis in the world economy and in Brazil.
The improvement in the result of the trade balance, as a result of weaker aggregate domestic demand and depreciation of the real, and the recovery of economic growth on the second half of next year will intensify the ongoing narrowing of current account deficit and improve the quality of its financing.
In the meantime, the new agreement between the IMF and Brazil will provide support for the financing of the Balance of Payments.
The IPCA core inflation registered the second consecutive monthly reduction.
Inflation expectations, as surveyed daily by the Central Bank with the participation of a number of institutions, exhibited small marginal increase for 2001 and _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
The increase in the projected inflation for the next year results exclusively from the path of exchange rate and energy and oil products prices .
In this sense, the shocks that affected the Brazilian economy this year will still have reflexes on next year inflation.
Copom recognizes that there are risks of a passthrough of the recent exchange rate devaluation on domestic prices next year, as long as the exchange rate remains under pressure.
However, Copom understands that the monetary policy is currently adequate to maintain market prices under control and to neutralize secondary effects of the supply shocks.
