The labor market reflects this context and suggests the companies adjustments.
Confidence index in the manufacturing industry and consumers, that recorded a mild increase in March, does not suggest a deepening of deceleration of the U.S. economy.
It shall be emphasized that price indices do not suggest inflationary pressures, despite the volatility in international petroleum prices, so that the cuts in the interest rates by the Federal Reserve tends to contribute suitably to the performance of the economy, with a diminished inflationary risk.
The uncertainties regarding the recovering of Argentinas economic fundamentals and the resumption of growth contributed to increase the volatility in local financial markets, with higher interest rates on government bonds placements and also increasing spreads on external placements, notwithstanding the changes proposed by the new economic team.
The unfavorable GDP results of the fourth quarter of 2000, which contributed to the contraction of the annual GDP and also to fiscal deficits larger than the previously expected.
This environment influenced negatively the risk assessment of international agencies leading to rating revisions.
As a result, losses were inflicted to fixed-income instruments.
These auctions were used to fully rollover principal and interest payments due in maturing instruments in April19.
The choice of two placements intended to meet the demand for hedge at alternative maturities.
The average maturity of securitized debt decreased to 31.4 months in March from 32.2 months in February.
The average maturity of the Federal Government issues reduced to 21.2 months in March from 45.5 months in February, due to the small offering of LFTs and to the shorter term of the auctioned NBCEs.
The downfall was observed in every group of securities and was due to the smaller volume of public offers and to the deterioration in expectations.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
The expected changes in telephone charges and public transportation fares were also reassessed.
The timing and the size of projected changes in the item domestic employees was adjusted in light of the new methodology adopted, in April, by IBGE.
The recent deterioration of Brazils risk premium is expected to revert during the year.
Comparing to last meetings scenario, however, it is introduced a small upward shift in the Brazil risk curve.
GDP growth was adjusted according to recent data released by IBGE.
The strong demand in the last months has had an impact on the trade balance with imports growing at a faster pace than exports.
In this context, the deepening of external uncertainties along with a more unstable domestic political scenario has contributed to maintain the exchange-rate under pressure.
Due to a complex combination of factors, outlined above, the passthrough from exchange-rate variation to domestic prices is subject to considerable uncertainties.
First of all, the estimates for administered price changes were revised upwards.
Public services charges will likely be raised by more than previously expected.
Those tariffs pegged to the general price indices should be affected by the more pronounced influence of exchangerate variation on wholesale prices.
As a whole, administered prices tend to account for 2 percentage points in this years inflation, which characterizes a major supply shock.
Second of all, first quarter inflation stayed above both Central Bank and market expectations.
This was mainly due to unfavorable performance of food prices.
A closer look at inflation, however, suggests that there is room for a partial reversion of the adverse effect of some food prices.
Improvement in weather conditions as well as the crops reach the marketplace shall contribute to this reversal.
Likewise, there is not yet a clear evidence of an increase in the exchange-rate passthrough.
For some products like poultry meet and beef, the observed passthrough has been slightly above expectations.
For other products, however, such as electronic appliances, characterized by high import content, the observed passthrough has been below expectations.
Nevertheless, the deterioration of agents expectations indicates the possibility of greater pressure for passthrough in the future.
To the extent that the GDP growth stabilizes at a more moderate level, this pressure should be mitigated due to greater difficulties to transfer these costs to the price of final goods.
With respect to positive changes in the scenario, it shall be underlined the broadening of the fiscal effort embodied in the budget guidelines proposal for the next two years, and the additional cut of half of a percentage point in the US basic interest rate.
The latter shall mitigate the impact of the US growth deceleration on the world economy and will improve global liquidity conditions.
The domestic interest rate term structure shows a steep positive slope.
As a result, a reduction in the supply of credit by financial intermediaries is expected, which in turn may lead to a moderation in the rate of economic growth.
The most recent activity indicators of retail sales reinforce the prospects for stabilization of economic activity level.
In case this trend is confirmed, which seems probable, there should not be additional inflationary pressures for this and next year.
Copom considered that the understanding of the basic concepts that guide its actions should be reinforced.
The main objective of the Central Bank is to control inflation according with the targets established by Government, is the Central Banks main objective.
Differently from the previous policy regime, the level of the exchange rate is not the target of the Central Bank, likewise no other specific price in the economy.
Hence, exchange rate variations are only relevant to the extent that they may affect the IPCA inflation rate.
The main policy instrument of the Central Bank is the interest rate.
Other monetary policy instruments are only complementary.
For instance, in case of liquidity shortage and high volatility, the sporadic intervention in the foreign exchange market can be instrumental to allow a consistent price formation.
The same applies in the case of dollar-indexed bonds.
The impact of monetary policy on inflation is not instantaneous.
The lag between Central Banks policy action and its effect on the economy requires Copom to take preemptive action by anticipating inflationary pressures, instead of reacting based on lagged information.
The risk is of being late in the process of controlling inflation, which leads to higher uncertainty, with damage to economic activity and potential economic growth.
Nevertheless, the Central Bank aims at the central point of its annual targets.
This is analogous to a riffle shooter that would be_ content with hitting the target board, but always seeks to hit the bulls eye, and not its surroundings.
To assess when the Central Bank may use its tolerance interval requires the identification of the causes leading to the deviation.
If the underlying cause is a demand shock, then the interest rate must be adjusted to bring aggregate demand back to its pre-shock trajectory.
If the cause consists of a supply shock, the consensus among the majority of central banks is that second-round effects should be fought, but not the direct effect of the shock on the price level.
Thus, in the case of a negative shock, action should be taken to let the deviation from target be only temporary.
The reasoning is symmetric for positive shocks.
It is necessary to be careful to avoid mixing-up changes in the price level with deviations of the inflation trajectory.
For example, a supply shock with a one percentage point impact on the price level would imply an increase of one point in the twelve-month inflation rate.
By definition, this increase would remain embodied in the inflation rate for the next twelve months, fading out at the end of the period, provided that second-round effects were avoided.
This requires that monthly inflation is brought back to levels consistent with the desired path in the months right after the shock.
The tolerance interval serves the purpose of guiding Central Bank action under these circumstances, by helping to calibrate the speed of convergence to the desired trajectory for inflation.
The important aspect is to have confidence in bringing inflation back to its target path.
In practice, classifying the shocks is not always an easy task.
Current economic conditions encompass a combination of pressures.
On one hand, one should take into account the effect of an expanding domestic demand in the last months, within a context of world economic growth contraction and increasing risk aversion.
On the other hand, the overall adjustments in administered prices impact production costs and represent a supply shock to the economy, whose second-round effects need to be controlled.
By its turn, the depreciation of the exchange rate has an impact on both, the production cost of goods, which use imported inputs, and also on the demand for tradable goods.
The turbulent environment has reinforced the defensive nature of economic agents reactions to events in Argentina, and, to a lesser extent, to the domestic political environment.
This suggests the temporary nature of part of the current pressure on the exchange rate.
