This downwards trend was interrupted in January, in response to expectations of production cuts by OPEC country members.
Recent demand and supply indicators in the United States support the expectations of deceleration in the economy.
Retail sales, new buildings and orders to manufacturers, when analyzed according to the twelve-month change, show a declining path.
Consumer credit, that was displaying growing rates until October, recorded stability in November.
The deceleration trend failed to reflect in aggregate labor market statistics up to this moment.
However, the increase in industrial employment in December was significantly lower that the yearly average.
In Japan, the signs of economic recovery kept feeble, with weakened consumption, decelerated trend in industrial growth and drop in monthly trade balances.
Regarding the countries in the Euro area, the growth trend shows some evidence of deceleration.
Retail sales sustained positive, though decreasing, rates when compared to those of the same period of the previous year.
Performance has been uneven among associated countries, with an expressive consumption increase in France _ a milder_ expansion in Germany.
Inflationary pressures tend to weaken with the reduced petroleum prices and the recent appreciation of the Euro.
The domestic interest rates receded due to the announced accord with the International Monetary Fund in December, reflecting, in addition, the drop of interest rates in the United States.
Regarding consumer prices, the increase was pulled by administered prices, including electricity prices and urban bus fares in Rio de Janeiro, alcohol and higher gasoline prices at the end of November.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
A stronger deceleration in the United States economy tends to generate a more favorable trend for interest rates and petroleum prices.
Depending on the magnitude of such effects, the risks to the Brazilian economy stemming from future developments of the United States economy may offset each other.
In the period from December 19 and January 15, the Central Bank fully rolled the maturing exchange securities, including updated principal and final interests.
It shall be stressed that, along the past two years, there was increased exposure of the Central Bank in exchange securities and, simultaneously, a reduction of the National Treasury exposure.
A slight downwards trend was observed in the aggregate of both issuers.
The average rate of LTN placements displayed a systematic drop for all terms.
In the period, the monetary impact of definite operations with federal public securities was null.
This way, contrasting to what had happened in recent times, the net redemption of competitive debt was not significant.
Available aggregate demand indicators show a consumption demand practically at the same level along the second half of The demand for investment, on the other hand, is displaying signs of recovery in the second half of the year.
The targets set for fiscal policy are being consistently attained since the end of The increase in exports, although not sufficient to secure surplus in the trade balance, had been an important factor for the growth of aggregate demand.
Summarizing, the aggregate demand is adequate, with its composition indicating recovery of investment levels.
Such investments are not higher because of a sluggish recovery in the building industry that, notwithstanding this, is showing a positive reaction along recent months.
The labor market keeps its expansion trend, without displaying imbalances that may suggest pressures from the costs side of the economy.
Summarizing, the supply and demand balance fails to suggest any pressure on price indices over the horizon relevant to the inflationary targets regime.
However, the steady economic growth has impacted the trade balance.
Particularly, as already stressed by this Committee, the expanded level of activity is pulling the imports of intermediary goods and, in the second half of 2000, came to significantly affect the imports of consumer goods.
The foreign environment prevalent in the beginning of this year is positive, in spite of some ongoing uncertainties.
The recent behavior of international petroleum prices, despite the production cuts announced by OPEC, suggests a weakening of the upward price trend started two years ago.
In Argentina, a new wave of confidence made possible a reduction in domestic interest rates and spread between operations in pesos and American dollars in this beginning of year.
In the United States economy, a reduction in the rhythm of growth is being confirmed.
However, the intensity of this deceleration remains uncertain.
The recent softening of the United States monetary policy, although being an evidence of a stronger deceleration risk, demonstrates the resoluteness of the monetary authority in avoiding brisk movements that would affect the whole world economy.
Therefore, the risks for the Brazilian economy stemming from future developments in the United States seem to be balanced, despite depending on the magnitude of different effects.
A stronger deceleration jeopardizes our foreign financing and exports and, consequently, our perspectives of growth, while tending to generate lower interest rates in the United States and a more favorable path for international petroleum prices, thus favoring lower inflation.
The recent behavior of inflation is in keeping with COPOM perceptions.
The recent inflation results, as well as the stable market expectations regarding the future behavior of inflation, confirm the Committee perception that domestic prices have already incorporated, to a large extent, the depreciation experienced by the Real in the last quarter of 2000 Considering this analysis of the macroeconomic domestic and foreign environment in this beginning of year and the main risks associated with it, a conclusion was reached that the perspectives for 2001 and 2002 are in keeping with the declined inflation required by the inflation targets set.
Notes revised by the Board.
