It should be mentioned that taxes that are more directly related to the level of economic activity performed below the overall average collection, reflecting the deceleration of economic activity.
In summary, there are indicators showing that economic activity has already absorbed the impacts caused by the deterioration of the external environment and the energy crisis, what points to a gradual recovery in growth.
This interpretation is also supported by the favorable performance of formal employment, enhanced by positive expectations related to year-end sales, previously postponed by the uncertainties affecting decisions of consumers and producers.
External environment Economic indicators in industrialized countries show that the deceleration of the economic activity, in place since the beginning of this year, has been replaced by a contraction, beginning at the end of the third quarter.
In the Euro area, national and regional indicators available point to a significant reduction in the growth rate for the third quarter.
Japans GDP declined in the second quarter, leading the Bank of Japan to reduce its growth projections for the current fiscal year.
Demand indicators are still showing decline.
Expectation indicators in the manufacturing sector, as measured by NAPM, declined to 39.8 in October from 47 in September, once more indicating economic contraction.
In the services sector the reduction measured by NAPM in the same period was from 50.2 to 40.Consumer confidence was also affected, and the index declined by 28.5 points between August and October reaching 85.With the slowdown in the economic activity and the reduction in the energy prices, especially petroleum, inflation indices declined, widening the space for a more expansionist monetary policy.
Several U.S. statistics indicate a scenario which lacks dynamism, with the likely repetition of the negative GDP result in the two following quarters.
Recovery should start from the second quarter of 2002 on with the full effects of the fiscal and monetary policy measures.
In the Euro area, world economic slowdown negatively affected the activity level.
Notwithstanding, retail sales and trade balance results increased in August.
In regard to the first, annual growth _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
In the main countries of the Euro area, business expectations remain unfavorable, with emphasis on the 12 percentage points reduction in the Italian indicator, between August and September.
In Japan, the contraction of the main indicators of domestic demand factory orders, residential home construction initiations and spending-, together with the cooling down of the external demand, the deflation, and the lack of supply reaction to the zero interest rate monetary policy, form a scenario of continued recession.
In Argentina, continued recession makes it more difficult to reach the zero deficit target between October and December, mainly due to the reduction in tax collection.
The government initiated a debt swap program with local creditors, aiming at reducing interest rate burden.
This program was interpreted by the rating agencies as a selective default, resulting in additional lowering of the countrys ratings.
The difficulties in Argentina reflected in the sovereign risk indicators, with the spread of the Argentine bonds and US securities surpassing 3,000 basis points.
Prices In October, the inflation rate measured both by the general and the consumer price indices increased once again.
This upward movement reflected mainly the readjustment of fuel prices and the increase in the prices of cigarettes, rice due to a smaller than expected harvest -, and meat - caused by off-season problems and exchange rate effects related to export growth.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ monthly variation of index.
The lower supply of important agricultural products, caused by off-season problems and by smaller than expected harvests, together with the influence of the depreciated exchange rate and the readjustment of fuel prices were the main reasons which explain the hike in wholesale prices, especially beef, rice, oranges, and fuel.
For November, a smaller increase is expected for all indices, although the results will still be influenced by pressures posed by October readjustments, particularly of fuel and cigarettes.
The prices of meat and its by-products will continue to increase due to the reduction in supply, affected by off-season problems and the increase in exports.
The readjustments of electric energy in Lights distribution area, added to urban bus fares hikes in Rio de Janeiro and prices of medicines, will also be observed in November results.
The reduction in interest rates was stimulated by improvements in the prospects for the domestic economy.
The more optimistic forecasts for the Balance of Payments, the exchange rate appreciation, and the expressive fiscal surplus built up the basis for a more favorable perception of the fundamentals of the domestic economy, leading to the decoupling of Brazils sovereign risk from Argentinas.
As a result, the spread between the Over-Selic rate and the three-month Futures _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
Likewise, the one-year interest rate spread decreased to 150 bp from 560 bp.
The improvement in the domestic scenario led to a lower demand for hedging.
In addition, there were three auctions to rollover expiring exchange rate indexed securities in November.
The strategy adopted was to lengthen the issuance tenure.
The National Treasury continued to offer six-month LTN on a weekly basis, recommencing at the beginning of October.
The improved prospects for the domestic economy accentuated the demand for fixed rate securities.
During a 21 working day period, the Central Bank intervened nine times in the open market, aiming at administering the very short-term interest rate.
Assessment of inflation trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in the light of newly available information.
The inflation core calculated _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
Regarding fiscal policy, it was assumed that the primary surplus targets for the consolidated public sector stated in the Government Economic Program will be achieved.
Monetary Policy Guidelines Positive expectations regarding the Brazils economic performance in 2001 and 2002 contributed to the appreciation of the Real as well as to the reduction in Brazils risk.
Brazils risk premium as measured by the yields differential between the Global 04 and the U.S. Treasury bond of equivalent duration also improved, as may be observed by the drop higher than 250 bps in the period.
Therefore, the upward trend observed until mid-October reversed, which becomes more important when compared to the increased risk of emerging countries, specially that of Argentina.
Particularly, the expectation of a reduction in the current account deficit _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ and an improvement in the countrys external financing, supported by the monetary and exchange policy adjustments, contributed to the appreciation of the Real as well as to the reduction of Brazils risk.
Besides the direct benefit of the drop of international crude oil prices on inflation, there is still an indirect benefit caused by the lower pressure on the exchange rate market, given the weight of this item in our imports.
The expectation regarding the economic growth also improved.
A reduction in the slope of the term interest rate came along with a lower exchange rate pressure and a drop in Brazils risk.
Despite the favorable performance of the economy, there was not a correspondent improvement in the prospects for inflation.
Firstly, the IPCA in October registered an increase higher than that expected, reflecting a higher passthrough of the exchange rate depreciation occurred during the year to prices.
The increase in inflation in 2001 tends to feed the expected inflation for 2002 through its inertial component.
Indeed, the indicators of the core inflation, calculated under the symmetric trimmed-mean average method, remains at a high plateau.
Secondly, the lower slope of the term structure of the interest rate also contributes to demand recovery, what could lead to larger pressure on the prices in This effect may attenuate the downward impacts of the recent appreciation of the Real upon the inflation in Finally, the perspectives regarding the readjustment of the contractual prices next year remain high.
Besides, the reduction of the subsidies to the cooking gas prices is being considered, which implies in price increase.
In summary, the improvement in several Brazilian economic indicators was not accompanied by an improvement in inflation forecasts despite the favorable effects of the exchange rate appreciation and the drop in international oil prices.
The hikes in contractual prices expected for 2002 represent a supply shock that adds to the secondary impact of the shocks occurred this year on the prices.
This imposes narrow limits to the free prices inflation indicator next year.
