Contributed to the growth in consumption, the reduction in interest rates, stimulated by cuts in the Selic rate, as well as the growth in the level of employment, evidenced by the reduction in the open unemployment rate and by the growth in rates of formal employment.
Noteworthy, however, that although that movement favors the increase of the total wage bill, it occurs in a moderate pace.
The credit expansion has stimulated, above all, sales of durable goods, segment in which the unitary value of goods is relatively higher, which makes their sales more susceptible to financing operations.
The analysis of seasonally adjusted statistics reveals greater dynamics in the evolution of investment indicators, comparatively to those related to consumption.
That behavior, to the extent that it reflects decisions towards augmenting productive capacity, indicates that economic agents expect sustainable and prolonged growth.
Investment in January, exhibited positive overall evolution.
The main impact of the demand warming is observed in the trade balance.
Part of_ this increment, however, reflects not only growth in domestic demand, but also expansion of the exported quantity of manufactured goods, with a net positive effect, although lagged, over the trade balance.
In particular, it can be cited, greater uncertainties as to the pace of deceleration of the US economy, reflected in part in the rapid decline in stock prices traded in its stock exchanges, and the confidence crisis in important emerging markets like Argentina and, in a minor degree, Turkey.
The world economy has been marked by the deceleration in the United States and by stagnation of the Japanese economy, whereas European countries have sustained a moderate growth path.
The international scene has also been influenced by volatility in oil prices.
This volatility is not expected to be reduced in the short run, given uncertainties over the world demand and the possibility of new cuts in OPECs production, in addition to the cuts already announced in January and March.
Monetary policy in the US was marked by three consecutive cuts this year of 0.5 percentage point each in the fed funds rate.
The US economy is going through a rapid deterioration in private confidence and an increase yet moderated in the unemployment rate, while the inflation rate remains stable.
The monetary easing may affect positively the economys performance in the second half, although the magnitude and duration of the current deceleration are proving greater than expected by the majority of analysts few weeks ago.
The emerging economies, although yet in a recovery cycle after the 1997 crisis and 1998, tend to suffer the impacts of a loss of dynamism in world trade and of the higher risk aversion of investors, associated with a larger degree of world uncertainty.
In relation to Argentina, the economy experienced a period of growing uncertainty about the growth capacity in the short run, and about the political support for the fiscal adjustment proposed by the government.
The recent instability led to a dual change in command in the Ministry of Economy in March, and to an ample ministerial reform, facts which did not contributed to maintain the levels of external confidence and sovereign risk perception.
The behavior of prices in the first two months of the year was influenced by seasonal factors as readjustments of enrolment fees and tuitions, as well as by increases in raw food products.
Also important were increases in urban bus fares and electricity, as well as water and sewage service fees in certain state capitals.
It is to be observed that the IPA, IPC and INCC registered lower variation rates, compared to January.
This reduction was mainly caused by lower labor costs.
It is to be observed that supply of certain products, as meet and milk, will contribute in a less intense degree to contention of prices, in relation to the pattern registered in 2000, given the occurrence of specially favorable meteorological conditions this year.
Yet, it is to be considered the readjustments already predicted in contracts, in certain administered prices, to become effective from June, and the recent evolution of the exchange rate, reflecting the deterioration in the international scene.
In the period between February 14 and March 20, the Central Bank maintained the strategy of rolling over entirely the updated principal of NBC-Es and NTN-Ds.
In the period, it was carried out only one public offer of LFTs, of five-year tenure.
The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in accordance to the new information available.
That revision was motivated by three factors, beyond the already mentioned gasoline price.
First, the adoption by IBGE of the usual methodology for the calculation of the item Domestic Employee from April.
Second, the estimated increase in urban bus fares in 2001 was reviewed upwards, since in some cities there were no adjustments last year.
The baseline considers that the recent increase in Brazils risk premium shall be reverted over the year.
The same behavior was presented by the IPCA core calculated by exclusion.
In this case, the inflationary pressure originated from the exchange rate channel could elevate the inflation rate this year.
The main impact of aggregate demand expansion has been on the trade balance.
Although imports partially respond to the increase in manufactured exports, it is undeniable that the demand pressure has affected the imported quantum.
For the whole year, the trade balance will essentially depend on the growth differentials between Brazil and its main trade partners, and on the path of the real exchange rate.
The reduction in the trade balance and the corresponding increase in the current account deficit have contributed to weaken the exchange rate, despite the fact that external financing needs have increased only moderately.
More recently, the exchange rate has been affected by the uncertainty in the external conjuncture, particularly in relation to the magnitude of the downturn in the United States economy and to the political crisis in Argentina.
The recent behavior of the exchange rate, therefore, results from a combination of temporary as well as more persistent factors.
The recent currency depreciation raises the important issue of the passthrough from the exchange rate to domestic prices.
Since the floating of the _ in 1999, the degree of_ passthrough has been declining steadily, given that only the part of the exchange rate variation perceived as permanent is transmitted to prices, without changing significantly inflation expectations.
However, sharp exchange rate depreciations, albeit reflecting mainly the uncertainty in the markets, can increase the degree of passthrough, to the extent that part of the depreciation can be perceived as long-lasting.
