The chairman first provided the following explanation for calling an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting. (1) The instability in global financial markets stemming from the fiscal problem in some European countries such as Greece had recently heightened further, and the strains in discussions over the May 8-9 weekend about how to respond to this situation in various forums, such as a G-7 conference call, a meeting of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council of the European Union, and a BIS meeting of central bank governors in Basel. Governor Shirakawa conveyed the message that the following commitments were made at the BIS meeting, which he was attending: (1) central banks in major economies would work together as needed to address pressures in funding markets; and (2) to this end, five central banks in North America and Europe -- namely, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank -- would reestablish facilities to provide U.S. dollar funds. The governor gave instructions that the Bank should consider a possible measure in response. (2) In this situation, in a joint statement released on May 10 JST, these five central banks announced the reestablishment of temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap facilities and the Bank announced that it would consider a similar measure soon. (3) The chairman decided to call an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting pursuant to Article 17, paragraph 3 of the Bank of Japan Act to consider the reestablishment of a temporary U.S. dollar swap agreement with the Federal Reserve and a scheme that would make it possible to provide U.S. dollar funds as needed. Strains in global financial markets had been increasing since the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, 2010, as evidenced by the decline in U.S. dollar liquidity, particularly in Europe. Yield spreads between government bonds issued by some European countries and those issued by Germany had widened, stock prices in major economies -- particularly of U.S. and European financial institutions -- had fallen considerably, and the euro had depreciated substantially against the U.S. dollar and the yen. In U.S. dollar short-term funding markets, the federal funds rate and Libor had risen, and Three-month spreads between FX swap-implied U.S. dollar rates and U.S. dollar Libor had also widened, reflecting the difficulty in dollar funding. Japanese banks' funding in foreign currencies had not suffered any disruptions, and there had been no large impacts on the funding by foreign banks in the Tokyo market. However, some financial institutions had become less willing to invest in markets, and therefore it was necessary to monitor how the strains in global financial markets would affect the Tokyo market. With the aim of further facilitating money market operations and maintaining the smooth functioning of the money market, as well as ensuring stability in financial markets, and in view of the recent situation in the global financial markets and its possible impact on liquidity in Japan's financial markets, the staff made the following proposal to reestablish a effective through January 31, 2011: the Bank should reestablish the Principal Terms and Conditions for U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral and the procedure for selection of eligible counterparties in the operation, as well as a U.S. dollar-yen swap agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The staff explained that the reestablishment of the operation would form part of coordinated measures announced on May 10 JST by six central banks, including the Bank of Japan, to address the elevated pressures in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets in Europe. Members first discussed recent developments in global financial markets, and confirmed that, reflecting the further worsening of the Greek problem, strains in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets in Europe reemerged after the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, and there were concerns that these might spread to other markets and financial centers. Based on discussions regarding the staff proposal, members agreed that the effects on Japan's financial markets of the strains in European financial markets had been limited, and there had not been disruptions in Japanese banks' funding. However, they also agreed that it would be appropriate to reestablish the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation as a preemptive measure, given that such a move would form part of internationally coordinated measures. Some members said that strains in financial markets were partly attributable to the fact that policy responses to the Lehman shock and the subsequent recession had worsened fiscal conditions around the world, and the deterioration in these conditions could not be settled quickly. They underscored the need not only to implement monetary policy measures but also to make continued efforts toward fiscal consolidation while recognizing the importance of fiscal discipline. One member commented that the Securities Markets Programme, which the ECB had announced in response to the current situation, was a measure to address the malfunctioning of securities markets. Regarding the guideline for money market operations until the next meeting to be held on May 20 and 21, 2010, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent, as only a limited number of economic and price indicators had been released since the previous meeting. The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) The government welcomed the Bank's swift response, which would form part of coordinated measures of G-7 central banks to ensure stability in financial markets. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) The government welcomed the Bank's measure, as a swift and appropriate action, that it would reestablish the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation -- with a view to stabilizing rapidly changing financial markets -- in coordination with central banks in North America and Europe. (2) The government would continue to carefully monitor developments in global financial markets as well as their effects on the Japanese economy, and respond appropriately to the situation. (3) The government hoped that the Bank would continue to aim at overcoming deflation swiftly and underpin the economy by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while sufficiently exchanging views and working together with the government. Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public. To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote: