The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its first quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and abroad. In their view, both the real sector and financial sector in China were moving in the direction intended by the macroeconomic management policy, the economy grew in a stable manner, while the growth of the general price slowed down. On the international side, although the European debt crisis abated and the global economy recovered moderately, uncertainties remained.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast economic growth, keeping the general price level stable, and preventing financial risks according to the requirements of keeping the financing volumes at a reasonable level and making counter-cyclical adjustment in a prudential and flexible manner. A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes. Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to improve their financial services to better serve the real economy. The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote the sound development of the financial markets. Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and explore an effective way to that end; to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, increase the two-way flexibility of RMB exchange rate fluctuations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee presided over the meeting. Other Committee members present at the meeting included Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Yi Gang, Mr. Du Jinfu, Mr. Shang Fulin, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. Xiang Junbo, Mr. Jiang Jianqing, Mr. Qian Yingyi, Mr. Chen Yulu and Mr. Song Guoqing. Mr. Zhu Zhixin and Mr. Ma Jiantang were absent from the meeting on business leaves. Presidents of the PBC Shenyang Branch, Chengdu Branch and Xi’an Branch joined the meeting as non-members.