The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its second quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and abroad. In their view, China’s economic and financial sectors were developing in a generally stable manner. The economic growth was within the range of the policy target while the growth of the overal price level slowed down. Given the difficulties and setbacks in global recovery and capricious development of the European debt crisis, large uncertainty remained in the global outlook.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to monitor the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, conduct timely and well-designed fine-tunings according to the situations, and strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast growth, economic restructuring and managing the inflationary expectation. A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all-system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes. Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to optimize their credit structure, prevent financial risks and improve their financial services to better serve the real economy and ensure a stable and relatively fast economy growth. The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote sound development of the financial markets. Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, to enhance flexibility of RMB exchange rate two-way fluctuations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, presided over the meeting. Other Committee members present at the meeting included Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Yi Gang, Mr. Shang Fulin, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. Xiang Junbo, Mr. Jiang Jianqing, Mr. Qian Yingyi, Mr. Chen Yulu and Mr. Song Guoqing. Mr. Zhu Zhixin, Mr. Du Jinfu, and Mr. Ma Jiantang were absent from the meeting on business leaves. Presidents of the PBC Shenyang Branch, Chengdu Branch and Xi’an Branch joined the meeting as non-members.