The Board of Directors of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru (BCRP) decided to maintain the 
reference rate at 7.75 percent. This decision does not necessarily imply an end to the BCRP’s 
monetary  tightening  cycle.  Future  reference  rate  adjustments  will  be  conditional  on  new  
information about inflation and its determinants. In April, month-on-month inflation was 0.56 percent and core inflation was 0.20 percent. 
Year-on-year inflation fell from 8.40 percent in March to 7.97 percent in April, while core 
inflation decreased from 5.92 percent in March to 5.66 percent in April, both above the 
upper limit of the inflation target range. The  significant  increase  in  international  food  and  fuel  prices  since  the  second  half  of  
2021,  accentuated  by  international  conflicts,  has  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  global  
inflation in magnitudes not seen in many years and towards levels significantly higher 
than the inflation targets of central banks, both in advanced and other economies in the 
region. In the Peruvian case, there were transitory inflation effects due to restrictions in 
the supply of some food items and heavy rainfall in March.  The  downward  trend  in  year-on-year  inflation  is  forecast  to  continue  in  the  following  
months,  with  a  return  to  the  target  range  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year,  due  to  a  
moderation of the impact of international food and fuel prices, a reversal of agricultural 
supply shocks, and declining inflation expectations in the rest of the year. One-year-ahead  expected  inflation  decreased  from  4.30  percent  in  March  to  4.25  
percent in April, above the upper limit of the inflation target range.  The leading and expectations indicators for economic activity reflect conditions similar 
to those in the previous month, with the majority persisting in pessimistic territory. The outlook for global economic activity has moderated; however, global risks remain 
due to monetary tightening in advanced economies and international conflicts. The  Board  is  particularly  attentive  to  new  information  on  inflation  and  its  determinants,  
including the evolution of inflation expectations and economic activity, to consider, if 
necessary, changes in the monetary stance. The Board reaffirms its commitment to adopt the 
necessary actions to ensure the return of inflation to the target range over the forecast horizon. The Board also decided to maintain the following interest rates on its window facility operations 
in domestic currency with financial entities: 
 
i. Overnight deposits: 5.25 percent per year. 
ii.  Direct security/currency repo and rediscount operations: i) 8.25 percent per year for the first 
10 operations in the last 3 months and ii) the interest rate set by the Monetary and Exchange 
Operations Committee for operations in addition to these 10 operations in the last 3 months. 
In addition, the Monetary and Exchange Operations Committee may establish higher rates 
based on the amount of the operations. The BCRP Board’s next monetary policy session will take place on June 8, 2023.