The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 3rd regular quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted that the Chinese economy had maintained rapid growth momentum during the first half of this year with steady improvement of both domestic and external demands. The PBC continued to implement sound monetary policy, and strengthened its support to economic development while at the same time taking concrete measures to prevent and mitigate financial risks. At end-June of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17 trillion yuan, up 14.7%. Loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB12.8 trillion yuan, increased by RMB870.1 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB186.2 billion yuan over the same period of last year. Generally speaking, the financial industry was in stable operation during the first half of this year, and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
It was pointed out that close attention should be paid to developments of the world economic and financial situations in the second half of this year. While the sound monetary policy stance should be maintained, various measures should be adopted to appropriately adjust money supply and improve credit structure, so as to ensure the Chinese economy further develop in a sustained, rapid and healthy manner.
It was unanimously agreed that RMB interest rates should be maintained stable in the near term considering current domestic and international economic developments.
It was emphasized that the commercial banks should strengthen their efforts in transforming operational mechanism and increasing incentives for loan marketing to timely meet reasonable demand for liquidity and credit for technical innovation purposes of those enterprises with sound credit standing and marketable products. Financial services to the small and medium-sized enterprises should be further improved. At the same time, more channels should be explored to increase the proportion of direct financing, improve financing structure of the enterprises and strengthen funding capacity of the small and medium-sized enterprises.
Mr. Dai Xianglong, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee chaired the meeting. Other members present at the meeting included Mr. Liu Tinghuang, Vice Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, Mr. Wang Chunzheng, Mr. Zhang Zhigang, Mr. Jin Liqun, Mr. Ma Yongwei, Mr. Xiao Gang, Mr. Zhu zhixin, Mr. Jiang Jianqing, Mr. Shang Fulin and Mr. Li Yang. Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan sent his representative to participate in the meeting. Presidents of the PBC branches in Guangzhou, Wuhan and Chengdu also attended the meeting.