The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 4th quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted that supported by steady expansion of public demands, the Chinese economy had maintained its rapid growth momentum during the first three quarters of this year. The PBC has continued to implement the sound monetary policy while the commercial banks gradually established and improved their incentive and restraint mechanisms to promote loan marketing, resulting in acceleration of the growth of monetary credit and strengthening of financial support to economic development. At end-September of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17.7 trillion yuan, up 16.5%. Outstanding balance of loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB13.3 trillion yuan, increased by RMB1403.5 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB496.8 billion yuan over the same period of last year, a record high growth of the last four years. Generally speaking, the financial industry remained in stable operation and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
It was pointed out that continual attention should be paid to developments of both the domestic and international economic and financial situations in the 4th quarter of this year. While the sound monetary policy stance is maintained, a mix of policy instruments should be flexibly used to appropriately adjust money supply on a timely basis.
It was emphasized that more efforts should be made to improve financial services, strengthen credit control and enhance credit structure with a view to preventing duplicated construction. Meanwhile, excessive growth of investment and credit in real estate development in some areas should be closely monitored.
It was forecast that increased loans of all financial institutions would reach RMB1.6-1.7 trillion yuan with broad money (M2) growing by 16%-17% in 2002.
It was unanimously agreed that the Renminbi interest and exchange rates should be basically maintained stable in the near term taking into consideration of current economic and financial developments.
Mr. Dai Xianglong, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee chaired the meeting. Other committee members present at the meeting included Mr. Wang Chunzheng, Mr. Zhang Zhigang, Mr. Jin Liqun, Mme. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. Li Kemu, Mr. Zhu zhixin, Mr. Jiang Jianqing, Mr. Shang Fulin and Mr. Li Yang. Presidents of the PBC branches in Guangzhou, Wuhan and Chengdu also attended the meeting.