The 2002 first quarterly meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee convened recently reviewed the implementation of monetary policy in 2001. It noted that confronted with an obvious slowdown of global economy, China maintained steady economic development by pursuing policies of stimulating domestic demand. By the end of 2001, broad money M2 stood at RMB15.8 trillion yuan, up 14.4%. Loans by financial institutions reached RMB11.2 trillion yuan, up RMB1.3 trillion yuan or 11.6% from the beginning of the year. The monetary and credit aggregates were basically commensurate with the economic development and the sound monetary policy continued to play an important role.The meeting discussed monetary policy measures in 2002. In the first year after China's entry into WTO and the economic development and monetary policy operation are confronted with some new uncertainties. Economic situations and changes should be closely watched and analyzed, and the sound monetary policy should be continued to strengthen support for economic development so as to prevent further slowdown of economic growth and promote the economic growth in a sustained, rapid and healthy way. It was projected in the meeting that the growth of money supply in 2002 will be around 13%, the cash injection will be within RMB150 billion yuan and the growth of RMB loans by financial institutions will be around RMB1.3 trillion yuan. The meeting agreed that the targets are appropriate.The meeting called for flexible use of interest rate policy to influence money and credit demand according to the economic situations. It emphasized the need to watch closely the fluctuations of major currencies, basically maintain RMB exchange rate stability, improve exchange rate formation mechanism and maintain strong balance of payments position.The meeting proposed that in order to meet the challenge associated with WTO accession and facilitate the transmission of monetary policy, the reform on wholly state-owned commercial banks should be accelerated. The wholly state-owned commercial banks should enhance loan marketing to cultivate and select customers and aggressively explore the credit market. Their branches and sub-branches should be asked to make and implement business plans so as to improve efficiency of resource allocation. The business assessment on branches and sub-branches should be enhanced to improve the safety, liquidity and profitability.The meeting was chaired by Dai Xianglong, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee. Members of the Committee and heads of relevant government ministries including Wang Chunzheng, Zhang Zhigang, Jin Liqun, Xiao Gang, Guo Shuqing, Ma Yongwei, Zhu Zhixin, and Zhang Enzhao attended the meeting. Presidents from the Guangzhou Branch, Wuhan Branch and Chengdu Branch of the PBC were also present at the meeting.