The second quarterly meeting in 2002 of the monetary policy committee of the PBC was held in Beijing recently. The meeting pointed out that the economy performed stable in the first quarter by keeping the sustained and rapid development momentum. The PBC has adopted a series of measures including cutting interest rates both on deposits and loans, strengthening open market operations and intensifying guidance on credit policy to promote appropriate growth of the monetary and credit aggregates. The broad money (M2) at end-Q1 increased by 14.4 percent to RMB16.4 trillion yuan; while loans in local and foreign currencies by financial institutions grew by RMB349.8 billion yuan to RMB12.3 trillion yuan, representing an acceleration of RMB64.2 billion yuan. The monetary and credit aggregates are basically commensurate with the needs to sustain economic growth.
The meeting further pointed out that facing with the favorable recovery of global economy and domestic demands, the sound monetary policy should be continued through flexible use of a broad mix of monetary policy instruments to increase money supply and strengthen financial support to economic development.
The meeting urged that special attention should be paid to expand access to credits by the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and county-level economic agents. The solution of the problem needs cooperation among the enterprises, the commercial banks as well as authorities in different sectors. The credit information system and capital raising system for SMEs should be established. Commercial banks should improve the credit rating and credit authorization system for SMEs in line with their characteristics by appropriately decentralizing the authorization on liquidity loans to SMEs and cultivating SME customers to prevent credit concentration risks resulting from excessive provision of loans to large enterprises.
The meeting emphasized the needs to further improve monetary policy transmission and promote the state-owned commercial banks to enhance both the incentives and restraints on loan marketing to actively meet the rational liquidity demands from those profitable and creditworthy enterprises with marketable products. The share of direct financing needs to be increased gradually and efforts should be made to further improve financing structure of the enterprises and convert more savings into investment.
The meeting advocated maintaining the stability of RMB interest rates in the near term given the current domestic economic and price situation. At the same time, market-based interest rate reform should be steadily proceeded and the floating band of lending interest rate to SMEs needs to be widened.
In line with the Rules on Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China and with the approval of the State Council, presidents of two wholly state-owned commercial banks, Liu Mingkang, Zhang Enzhao and Wu Jinglian will withdraw from the Monetary Policy Committee as their term has expired. Instead, Jiang Jianqing, Shang Fulin and Li Yang will join the Committee as new members.
The meeting, hosted by Dai Xianglong, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, was presented by Liu Tinghuan, Vice Chairman of the Committee and other Committee members including Zhou Xiaochuan, Jin Liqun, Xiao Gang, Guo Shuqing, Jiang Jianqing, Liu Mingkang, Zhang Enzhao, Wu Jinglian and Li Yang. Zhang Zhigang and Shang Fulin submitted written commets. The Presidents of the PBC's Guangzhou, Wuhan and Chengdu branches also attended the meeting.