Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.
Sydney – 7 February 2023
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
						Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
						Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
						Markets), Ellis Connolly (Head, Payments Policy Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis
						Department), Michael Plumb (Head, Banking Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International
						Department)
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that global inflation
						remained very high, but looked to have peaked. Goods inflation had slowed noticeably in many advanced
						economies as supply chain and other upstream cost pressures had eased. However, services inflation
						remained high. Some of the strength in core inflation reflected strong domestic demand. Lower prospective
						growth in demand was expected to reduce both goods and services inflation over time. Similarly, although
						wages growth in advanced economies remained well above the average of recent years, indications were that
						it, too, might have peaked in some economies.
Members observed that a significant development for the global outlook had been the reversal in COVID-19-containment policy in China in mid-December 2022. The disruptions
						from the final phase of restrictions in November and the wave of illness in December had led to weak
						activity there in the December quarter. But early signs were that population mobility and economic
						activity had recovered quickly in January. The accelerated reopening of the economy had brought forward
						the expected recovery in consumption and supply capacity in China, removing some of the downside risk to
						the global outlook. Also noteworthy was that the Chinese authorities had refocused policy on supporting
						growth. Some of the announced measures would support activity in the property sector, which had been very
						weak.
The earlier reopening and other policy shifts in China had also led to expectations for higher steel
						production, and had lifted prices for iron ore and coking coal. These increases stood in contrast with
						the developments in most other commodity prices, which were below their recent peaks. Gas prices and
						thermal coal prices were sharply lower than a few months earlier, partly because favourable winter
						weather in Europe had reduced energy demand there. Other upstream costs, including for shipping, had also
						fallen further.
Members noted that global growth had slowed during 2022, in part reflecting the end of the initial
						bounce-back from the pandemic. However, the synchronised global tightening in monetary policy, high
						energy prices and cost-of-living pressures had also weighed on demand in the latter part of the year and
						would continue to do so over the period ahead. Growth in Australia’s major trading partners was
						therefore expected to remain well below its historical average over the coming two years. Some downside
						risks to growth in the major global economies had abated, including those stemming from China’s
						previous approach to containing COVID-19.
Growth in consumption in the major advanced economies had slowed over 2022. Members observed that
						households had reduced the rate at which they were saving from current income in order to cushion
						consumption as real incomes had fallen, and the buffers were diminishing. Housing markets were
						substantially weaker and had led the downturn in activity in several countries. Conditions in labour
						markets were starting to ease, though labour demand was still rising and labour markets remained very
						tight, with unemployment rates around historical lows and vacancy rates high.
Members acknowledged that the global outlook was subject to a number of uncertainties, and there were
						plausible scenarios for both stronger and weaker growth and inflation than expected. The earlier
						reopening in China and clearer signs of a peak in energy prices and inflation elsewhere had focused
						attention on some of the positive factors for growth. Against that, the rapid and synchronised tightening
						in monetary policy could slow growth by more than expected. Regarding inflation, it could decline quickly
						in the face of slower growth and improved supply conditions. On the other hand, energy prices remained
						high, and if inflation expectations were to become de-anchored, it would be much more difficult to return
						inflation to target.
Turning to the discussion of the domestic economy, members observed that domestic inflation was high and
						broadly based at the end of 2022. Headline inflation had reached 7.8 per cent over the year to
						the December quarter. Trimmed mean inflation was 6.9 per cent over the same period, higher than
						had been expected. While global inflationary pressures had started to ease, this had yet to translate
						here. An easing in inflation was expected over the months ahead, although strong domestic demand in some
						areas was continuing to push up prices.
Inflation in goods-related sectors remained high, with consumer durables inflation picking up in the
						December quarter, especially for clothing and vehicles. Inflation in services had picked up further,
						reflecting both strong demand and rising labour cost pressures, as well as the further pass-through of
						earlier rises in other input costs. Increases in prices for hospitality and travel-related services had
						been particularly pronounced. CPI rent inflation had increased further in response to tight rental market
						conditions; by contrast, inflation in new dwelling construction costs had continued to moderate from high
						rates. Electricity and gas prices rose strongly in the quarter, partly because government subsidies had
						delayed some of the increase from the preceding quarter.
Members observed that the December quarter inflation outcome pointed to there being more near-term
						underlying domestic inflationary pressure than previously thought, which was reflected in the revised
						forecasts. Further out, the outlook for headline and underlying inflation had been revised slightly
						lower, reflecting the expected effect of the Australian Government’s Energy Price Relief Plan in
						mitigating some of the increases in energy costs. Based on a technical assumption that the cash rate
						rises to 3¾ per cent over time, headline inflation was expected to decline to
						4¾ per cent by the end of 2023 and return to around 3 per cent by mid-2025.
						Underlying inflation was expected to decline to around the top of the target range by the end of 2024.
					
Members noted that wages growth had continued to pick up. Private sector wages growth had been stronger
						than expected in the September quarter and a stronger outcome than previously forecast was expected for
						the December quarter. This was supported by information from liaison contacts, with around one-third of
						private sector firms reporting wage increases above 5 per cent. Growth in the Wage Price Index
						was expected to rise to 4¼ per cent by late 2023, before easing to around 3¾ per cent
						by mid-2025 as conditions in the labour market ease. Members noted the high degree of uncertainty around
						this forecast.
Employment had continued to grow strongly in prior months, though not as rapidly as in the first half of
						2022 when the economy was reopening. Members noted that labour supply had expanded, with the
						participation rate around its historical high and an increase in net overseas arrivals over the second
						half of the year. The unemployment rate remained at around 3½ per cent. Youth unemployment and
						broader measures of labour underutilisation also remained around multi-decade lows. The unemployment rate
						was expected to start picking up from around the middle of this year, to reach 4½ per cent by
						mid-2025. This would still be below the rates seen in the years prior to the pandemic.
Members observed that output growth had slowed during 2022 as the recovery from the pandemic had largely
						run its course. Year-ended growth was expected to slow to around 1½ per cent over 2023 and
						2024, as higher interest rates, the higher cost of living and declining real wealth slowed growth. This
						outlook was largely unchanged from three months earlier.
Consumption growth was expected to slow further in coming quarters, due to both the completion of the
						post-pandemic recovery and the current pressures on household finances. In particular, recent increases
						in interest rates and still-high inflation would constrain real disposable incomes. Declines in net
						wealth, driven by lower housing prices, would also weigh on spending. Members noted that recent retail
						sales data indicated that growth in spending on discretionary goods had been moderating and retail trade
						volumes had declined a little in the December quarter. Liaison with retailers suggested that conditions
						had been mixed in January.
The outlook for business investment remained positive, supported by a large pipeline of projects. While
						shortages of materials and related supply-chain issues had eased, firms were still contending with cost
						increases and difficulties securing labour, particularly for construction. These factors had also slowed
						the pace of dwelling investment. At the same time, demand for both detached and higher density housing
						had declined. The softening in investor demand for higher density dwellings had occurred despite rising
						yields on units, with rental market conditions remaining tight. Immigration was expected to add to rental
						demand over the medium term, although a partial offset could be an increase in the average household size
						from its current low levels.
Export and import volumes increased strongly over 2022, reflecting the return to international travel
						after Australian travel restrictions were lifted. International travel was expected to continue to
						recover in coming quarters, especially now that quarantine requirements in China had been removed.
						Members noted that an increase in the number of foreign students in Australia partly explained recent
						upward revisions to population growth; their spending was also expected to lift services exports.
						Furthermore, the Australian economy was being supported by the relatively high terms of trade, which were
						expected to be a little higher in the near term, given the increase in some commodity prices following
						China’s reopening.
Public spending had provided significant support to the economy over prior years, in response to the
						pandemic and more recently from flood-related assistance. Public demand was expected to be sustained at a
						high level over the coming year; the decline in public consumption as the pandemic and flood-related
						support rolls off was expected to be largely offset by capital investment programs.
Members concluded their discussion of the outlook by noting several sources of risk and uncertainty. The
						outlook for domestic growth and inflation remained highly uncertain, with plausible scenarios for both
						stronger and weaker outcomes. The boost to domestic activity from Australia’s high terms of trade
						could be greater than expected. On the other hand, the implications of economic contractions and
						disinflation elsewhere could unfold differently from the central forecast.
The competing forces affecting the outlook for consumption could net out to either stronger or weaker
						outcomes than currently forecast. Members observed that monetary policy affected activity and inflation
						with a lag and through several channels. The effects on the cash flows of the roughly one-third of
						households with mortgages generally comes through faster than the effect on the broader economy and
						inflation. The effects on households were also uneven. Some households had substantial savings buffers or
						were benefiting from the tight labour market and higher wages growth. It was not certain how far
						households would be willing to reduce current saving rates or draw down on extra savings accumulated
						during the pandemic to cushion consumption from the effects of declining real incomes; these accumulated
						buffers represented a larger share of household income in Australia than those remaining in many
						economies. On the other hand, many households were facing tighter budgets because of higher interest
						rates and the rising cost of living. Moreover, it was uncertain how far the earlier substantial equity
						built by homeowners from the run-up in housing prices would mitigate the effect of the current decline in
						housing prices on future spending decisions.
Members acknowledged that the forecast decline in inflation was also subject to a number of uncertainties.
						The fall in global goods inflation had not yet been evident in Australia, although it was expected to
						occur. It was possible that falls in goods prices in absolute terms could see inflation return to the
						middle of the target range by mid-2024. However, there were also upside risks to inflation, given its
						current broad-based nature. Price- and wage-setting behaviour could become more sensitive to strong
						demand and high inflation, given that households, firms and policymakers could be more attentive to
						rising costs when inflation is already high. There were upside risks to wages growth and it was possible
						that inflation and wage expectations could move higher, which would make the task of bringing inflation
						down more difficult.
Members observed that central banks in several advanced economies had slowed the pace of policy rate
						increases, noting signs of a moderation in inflation and economic activity, and citing the risks of
						over-tightening given the lags in the transmission of monetary policy.
Market participants’ expectations for the path of policy rates in most advanced economies over the
						year ahead had been little changed since the December meeting. Market pricing continued to indicate the
						expectation that policy rates would peak around mid-2023 and start to decline in the second half of the
						year. This was in contrast with central bank communications, which had indicated that policy settings
						would likely remain restrictive for some time. Members observed that market expectations for policy rates
						over 2023 and 2024 were lower in Australia than in several other advanced economies, including the United
						States, Canada and New Zealand.
Consistent with market expectations for policy rates, longer term government bond yields had declined
						since the start of 2023 in most major advanced economies. This reflected the declines in both longer term
						expectations for central bank policy rates and longer term inflation expectations. Members observed that
						market-implied measures of longer term inflation expectations for Australia had been stable at around
						2½ per cent.
Private sector financing conditions had eased in most advanced economies since the previous meeting.
						Equity prices in most major markets had increased and corporate bond spreads had declined, reflecting
						revised expectations for global inflation, growth and policy interest rates. The removal of COVID-19 restrictions in China and a stronger policy focus on stimulating
						growth there had also led to a repricing of financial assets in China and globally.
The US dollar had depreciated further on a trade-weighted basis over prior months, including against
						the Australian dollar. This had occurred alongside declines in US Government bond yields relative to
						those of other major advanced economies. Further, the Australian dollar had been supported by more
						positive risk sentiment and higher prices for some key commodity exports following the reopening of the
						Chinese economy.
Members observed that the Australian dollar was around the same level as a year earlier on a
						trade-weighted basis. Members noted that, all else equal, tighter domestic monetary policy would usually
						result in an exchange rate appreciation; however, this had not occurred because other central banks had
						also been tightening monetary policy. Nonetheless, the synchronised policy tightening would result in
						lower global inflation than otherwise, which would place downward pressure on domestic inflation.
Members observed that earlier increases in the cash rate were continuing to be transmitted to broader
						financial conditions. Housing credit had continued to slow and housing prices had declined further.
						Business credit growth had also slowed more recently. New loan commitments had declined, indicating that
						a further slowing in both housing and business credit growth was likely in the months ahead.
Banks’ overall funding costs had continued to rise. The cash rate increase in December 2022 had been
						passed through in full to standard variable home loan rates, as had been the case in preceding months.
						However, the average home loan rates actually paid by borrowers had risen by less than the cash rate over
						2022, as competition had remained strong for good borrowers. Borrowers were seeking better deals on their
						home loans, for variable-rate loans as well as expiring fixed-rate loans, and a record share of mortgages
						were being refinanced with a different lender.
The full effects of the increase in interest rates were yet to be felt in mortgage payments. Members noted
						that about half of remaining fixed-rate loans, taken out during the pandemic at low interest rates, were
						due to roll off in 2023 onto higher rates. Taking account of this, and market expectations for further
						increases in the cash rate, households’ required mortgage repayments were projected to reach a
						record level as a share of household incomes.
Members observed that households had accumulated substantial additional savings over the course of the
						pandemic. This stock of savings was estimated to be larger than in most other advanced economies
						(relative to households’ disposable income). However, these additional savings might not be
						distributed evenly across households and it was unclear how and if these additional savings would be
						used.
More generally, members noted that the full effects of monetary policy tightening on activity and
						inflation occurred through a range of channels in addition to rising mortgage payments. These other
						channels include the effect of higher interest rates on asset prices, the exchange rate, the incentive
						for people to save, expectations of the future, access to finance and business investment plans.
Members noted that financial market pricing implied a further 25 basis point increase in the cash
						rate at the current meeting. The market-implied path for the cash rate had shifted slightly higher
						following the recent inflation data, and now indicated an expected peak of around 3¾ per cent
						by mid-2023. Accordingly, longer term yields on Australian Government Securities had risen a little since
						the December meeting. Market economists also expected further increases in the cash rate.
Members discussed a paper on the future of money and the Bank’s work agenda in the payments area.
						They noted the ongoing trend away from the use of banknotes towards electronic methods of payment and the
						associated growth in interest around the world in central bank digital currencies (CBDCs). Members
						discussed the implications of a retail CBDC for the structure of the financial system, the operation and
						transmission of monetary policy, and the Bank’s balance sheet. The staff’s view is that there
						is not yet a clear public policy case to issue a retail CBDC, but such a case could emerge. Australia has
						a modern and well-functioning payments system, which meets most of the needs of households and
						businesses; there is good access to banknotes for those who wish to use a publicly provided form of money
						for making payments or storing value; and there is significant innovation in the payments system at
						present, including the adoption of fast payments services.
Members supported the Bank’s ongoing research on CBDC, which is focused on understanding the
						potential use cases and economic benefits of introducing a CBDC. In 2022, the Bank commenced a
						collaborative research project with the Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre, which involves the
						issuance of a limited-scale pilot CBDC that is a real digital claim on the Bank. Industry participants in
						the pilot will be able to explore how a CBDC could be used to provide innovative payment and settlement
						services to households and businesses. The industry response to the project had been very positive, with
						a broad range of industry participants submitting use cases. A report on the findings will be published
						by the Bank around mid-year.
Members also noted the ongoing work of the Bank, under the oversight of the Payments System Board, to
						promote the efficiency, competitiveness and safety of the payments system. The Bank is focused on
						promoting competition in the card payments market, encouraging the delivery of new functionality on the
						New Payments Platform, and improving the speed and reducing the cost of cross-border payments.
Prior to considering the policy decision, members noted that inflation in Australia remained too high and
						that the incoming data on prices and labour costs had tended to exceed expectations. While a significant
						part of this was attributable to global factors, strong domestic demand relative to the ability of the
						economy to meet that demand was also an important contributing factor. Members observed that inflation
						was likely to have reached its peak in the December quarter, but this could only be confirmed in a few
						months’ time. Trends in inflation in other countries contributed to this expectation. The central
						forecast was for inflation to decline to within the target range over coming years, but the pace and
						extent of decline remained uncertain. Medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored and
						members agreed that it was important this remain the case.
The Australian economy grew at a solid pace over the second half of 2022. However, growth had slowed more
						recently and the outlook was for a further slowing. Growth in consumption, in particular, was expected to
						be subdued in 2023 as the post-pandemic recovery wanes, higher prices and household interest payments
						constrain real disposable incomes and falls in housing prices reduce net wealth. Interest rates on
						variable-rate home loans had risen substantially over preceding months and required mortgage payments
						were projected to reach their highest level on record (as a share of household disposable income).
						Nonetheless, members noted that measures indicate the extra savings accumulated in Australia over the
						preceding three years were very large. There were plausible scenarios in which consumption growth slowed
						by even more than forecast, as well as scenarios in which it was more resilient.
Members observed that unemployment was at its lowest level in nearly 50 years and that the number of
						job vacancies remained very high, even if somewhat less than in prior months. The Australian economy was
						benefiting from higher terms of trade and would benefit more than a number of other countries from
						China’s reopening.
In light of these considerations and turning to the policy decision, members agreed that a further
						increase in interest rates was warranted. The recent inflation data had suggested more breadth and
						persistence in inflation than had been expected and that strong demand was leading to price increases in
						some parts of the economy. While inflation was expected to decline, there was a risk that it could
						persist at an uncomfortably high level, which would entail longer term costs.
Members also noted that the cash rate was lower than policy rates in many other comparable economies.
						While wages growth remained lower here than elsewhere, Australia’s positive exposure to higher
						commodity prices and the extra savings buffers accumulated by households were estimated to be larger than
						in other countries. There were also notable differences in fiscal policy and population growth around the
						globe. Members observed that the cash-flow channel of monetary policy was stronger in Australia than in
						other countries, given the high level of variable-rate debt. But members also observed that, after taking
						account of all the channels for monetary policy transmission, there was little evidence to suggest that
						the overall impact of monetary policy on activity and inflation in Australia was materially different
						than elsewhere.
The Board considered two options for its policy decision: a 50 basis point increase; and a
						25 basis point increase.
The arguments for a 50 basis point increase stemmed from the concern that there had been a pattern of
						incoming prices and wages data exceeding expectations, and a risk that high inflation would be
						persistent. If it did persist, there would be significant costs, including higher interest rates and a
						larger increase in unemployment later on. Relatedly, members observed that the longer inflation stayed
						high, the greater the risk of price and wage expectations moving higher.
The arguments for a 25 basis point increase also recognised the need to bring demand and supply in
						the economy more into balance, but noted that inflation was expected to have reached its peak, that the
						outlook was for a softening in consumption growth and that there were many uncertainties around the
						outlook. Members observed that, while underlying inflation had been higher than previously forecast,
						headline inflation was below earlier expectations. The forecast was for inflation to fall within the
						target range by the end of the forecast period in mid-2025. Many households were facing tighter budgets
						and, in aggregate, real incomes were falling. There were plausible scenarios in which consumption growth
						was weaker than expected and inflation fell faster than forecast, as well as scenarios in which the
						opposite occurred.
Members acknowledged that there were arguments in favour of both options, but concluded that the case to
						increase the cash rate by 25 basis points at the present meeting was the stronger one. Members noted
						the uncertainty around the outlook and that the monthly meetings provided the Board with frequent
						opportunities to assess how these uncertainties were being resolved and to adjust policy if needed. With
						interest rates already having been adjusted substantially, there was less need to move by 50 basis
						points at this meeting.
Members noted that the forecasts for output and inflation had been prepared on the technical assumption of
						the cash rate reaching around 3¾ per cent. Consistent with this, members agreed that further
						increases in interest rates are likely to be needed over the months ahead to ensure that inflation
						returns to target and that the current period of high inflation is only temporary. In assessing how much
						further interest rates might need to increase, the Board will continue to evaluate developments in the
						global economy, trends in household spending and unemployment, the evolution of labour costs and the
						price-setting behaviour of firms.
The Board is seeking to return inflation to the 2–3 per cent
						target range while keeping the economy on an even keel. The path here is a narrow one and there are risks
						in both directions. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and
						will do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 3.35 per cent. It
						also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to
						3.25 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				