Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Videoconference – 3 November 2020


			Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
			Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
		
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets),
				Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International
				Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department)
In their discussion of international economic developments since the previous meeting, members noted
					that the global economy was in the early stages of recovery following the largest contraction in
					decades. GDP outcomes in major economies in the September quarter had generally been somewhat better
					than expected after very large declines in activity in the first half of the year. In China, where the
					recovery was most advanced, and in some other Asian economies where health outcomes had been relatively
					favourable, the contraction in GDP earlier in the year had been largely or fully reversed. However, GDP
					in the September quarter in Europe and the United States remained well below pre-pandemic levels, even
					after the rebound in the quarter, and this was expected to be the case for some time.
Members emphasised that the global outlook continued to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
					The main source of uncertainty related to the evolution of the pandemic, and the policy and behavioural
					responses to it. Indicators suggested that the pace of the global recovery had faltered and was quite
					uneven. The resurgence in new cases of the virus in recent weeks threatened the recovery in some
					economies, notably in Europe.
In their discussion of global labour markets, members noted that while recent trends in unemployment
					rates had varied across economies, significant spare capacity was evident. To date, fiscal and monetary
					policy support had been effective in limiting the rise in recorded unemployment in some countries.
					However, underemployment was still high and the recent upswing in new cases of the virus in the
					northern hemisphere could damage these economies' labour markets in the period ahead. Members
					noted that, in these circumstances, substantial ongoing policy support would be needed.
Trends in global commodity markets had been mixed and reflected a range of developments. Over the
					prior 6 months, the recovery in industrial production and fixed asset investment, particularly in
					China, had supported the prices of base metals and iron ore. Supply disruptions in Brazil had also
					supported higher iron ore prices through the year, although in recent months prices had retraced a
					little to be around 25 per cent higher since January. Liquefied natural gas (LNG) spot prices
					had fallen significantly in the first half of the year alongside a very sharp decline in oil prices,
					before rebounding strongly in recent months. A pick-up in demand, extended maintenance at some
					Australian LNG facilities and disruptions to US supply had all contributed to this rebound. Meanwhile,
					global demand for thermal and coking coal had generally been subdued and prices were still around
					20 per cent below levels at the start of the year, following large declines in April.
In reviewing the updated set of forecasts for the domestic economy, members noted that the outlook
					for GDP in the near term had been revised up a little. They noted that, since the onset of the
					pandemic, consumption, business investment and labour market outcomes had generally been better than
					initially feared, with significant policy support a key factor during and after the intensive period of
					lockdowns. However, the recovery in activity was expected to be modest in the context of the largest
					peacetime contraction in GDP since the Great Depression, and members acknowledged that GDP was not
					expected to return to its pre-pandemic level until the end of 2021.
A feature of the forecast profile was a significant further downward revision to expected population
					growth, in line with the updated projections in the Australian Government Budget, which had been
					announced in October. These projections for population growth, of around 0.2 per cent in
					2020/21 and 0.4 per cent in 2021/22, represented the lowest rates of growth since the First World War.
Members considered 3 scenarios in their discussion of the outlook. In the baseline scenario, GDP
					growth was expected to contract by around 4 per cent over 2020, before growing by
					5 per cent over 2021 and by 4 per cent over 2022. This assumed no additional
					significant COVID-19 outbreaks and that domestic activity restrictions
					would continue to be lifted, although restrictions on international travel would remain in place until
					the end of 2021.
Given the high degree of uncertainty about the outlook, 2 alternative scenarios were considered,
					based largely on different assumptions about health outcomes and restrictions on activity. A plausible
					downside scenario involved further significant outbreaks of the virus in Australia and abroad. This
					would result in renewed lockdowns, further delays in the opening of international borders and a
					material deterioration in household and business confidence. The recovery would be substantially
					delayed in this scenario, with the level of GDP still falling a little short of pre-pandemic levels by
					the end of the forecast period in 2022. A stronger economic recovery than envisaged in the baseline
					scenario was also considered, where additional progress in the control of the virus is achieved,
					leading to a more rapid easing of restrictions and a faster rebound in confidence, private demand and
					services exports. In this scenario, the level of GDP would exceed pre-pandemic levels in mid 2021
					and would be a couple of per cent higher than in the baseline scenario by the end of 2022.
The starting point for these economic projections was a little higher than expected 3 months
					earlier, despite the expected effects of the restrictions in Victoria in the September and December
					quarters. Household cash flow and the rebound in consumption were seen as driving the recovery. Reduced
					consumption possibilities as a result of restrictions on activity were important in driving the
					12 per cent decline in consumption in the June quarter. The subsequent easing in these
					restrictions was expected to underpin the recovery through to the end of the year and into 2021. Even
					so, consumption in the December quarter 2020 was expected to be around 5 per cent below the
					level of a year earlier.
Members discussed the causes and implications of the unusually high rate of household saving in the
					June quarter. The increase in savings had been due to limits on spending opportunities and strong
					growth in household disposable income, despite a sharp fall in employment and hours worked. The
					increase in social assistance payments had been particularly important in supporting the growth in
					incomes during the pandemic. Households were expected to consume a larger share of their income in the
					period ahead as more opportunities for consumption became possible, and as some households felt a
					reduced need to accumulate or maintain high levels of savings for precautionary reasons. This was
					expected to support overall economic activity through the period where household disposable income
					declined as a result of reduced social assistance payments and the expiry of other temporary support
					measures.
Members discussed the substantial support for the economy announced in the Australian Government
					Budget. The positive net fiscal impact on the economy was projected to be the largest in many decades.
					Forecasts for public consumption and investment, including infrastructure spending, had been upgraded.
					Tax incentives for firms, such as accelerated depreciation allowances, had prompted an upward revision
					to the forecasts for business investment. Even so, high uncertainty and expectations of subdued demand
					were likely to restrain business spending over the forecast period.
Turning to the housing market, members noted that prices had declined over recent months in Melbourne
					and, to a lesser extent, in Sydney. These declines had been smaller than those recorded in 2018.
					Elsewhere, housing prices had generally increased in recent months. Housing loan commitments and price
					trends across the country suggested that conditions in the detached housing market remained stronger
					than in the apartment market; growth in rents for apartments remained weak in most cities.
Members discussed recent developments in Australian trade volumes, noting that while services
					accounted for a smaller share of overall trade than goods, services trade had been particularly
					affected during the pandemic. The closure of international borders had led to sharp falls in tourism
					imports and exports, and education exports had also been much lower. In cases where foreign students
					were studying online at Australian educational institutions but not physically in the country, this
					would generate fee income. However, these students would not be consuming other goods and services in
					Australia; typically, this contributes a little more to education exports than fees.
In their discussion of the labour market, members noted that conditions in the September quarter had
					improved and outcomes had been better than expected. But labour market conditions remained soft
					overall. In the month of September, outcomes had been mixed: employment had declined, led by
					developments in Victoria, while total hours worked had recovered a little further as the increase in
					average hours worked had more than offset the decline in employment. Members observed that hours for
					part-time workers had recovered to pre-pandemic levels, while many full-time workers were still on
					reduced hours.
Under the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate was forecast to increase to a little below
					8 per cent by the end of the year. This was higher than the 6.9 per cent rate of
					unemployment in September, but below the 10 per cent peak forecast 3 months earlier.
					With employment expected to grow steadily and more people drawn back into the labour market over the
					forecast period, the unemployment rate was expected to remain above pre-pandemic levels through to the
					end of 2022. However, in the downside and upside scenarios, the unemployment rate could be
					significantly higher or lower than projected in the baseline forecast, depending largely on the
					evolution of the pandemic. Members noted a high degree of uncertainty is likely around unemployment
					rate outcomes in the coming months as restrictions are eased in Victoria and temporary support policies
					for the labour market are adjusted or expire. Members also discussed the high level of underemployment,
					which highlighted that significant spare capacity remained in the labour market and that this was
					likely to be the case for a considerable period.
Members noted that spare capacity in the labour market had been weighing on wages and underlying
					inflation, and would continue to do so for some time. Headline inflation outcomes in the June and
					September quarters had been volatile because of the introduction and subsequent removal of policy
					measures, especially the subsidy for child care and preschool, as well as large changes in fuel prices.
					The effect of temporary policy changes was expected to persist into 2021, but to a lesser extent.
					Behavioural changes during the pandemic had also had a large effect on some prices; for instance,
					prices of consumer durables had been supported by unusually strong demand. But, overall, members
					concurred that the outlook for inflation was very subdued. Both headline and trimmed mean inflation
					were forecast to bottom out below 1 per cent in 2021 before reaching
					1½ per cent by the end of 2022.
Members briefly reviewed how the domestic economy had evolved over the preceding year relative to the
					Bank's forecasts for GDP growth, unemployment and inflation, as had become the Board's
					practice in preceding years. On this occasion, members acknowledged that economic growth had been well
					below what had been expected in the November 2019 forecasts, owing to the extraordinary economic
					contraction following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. While a global
					pandemic was a known risk, its timing could not be predicted. Members noted that new data sources and
					methods, and extensive outreach with other agencies and liaison contacts, had played a valuable role in
					informing the Bank's forecasts during the period of heightened uncertainty over preceding months.
					These enhancements would assist the forecasting process in the future.
Members noted that global financial market conditions had remained very accommodative. Central banks
				were expected to maintain their highly accommodative policy settings for an extended period. Market
				pricing implied that some central banks, including the Bank of England, European Central Bank and
				Reserve Bank of New Zealand, were expected to lower policy rates further in coming months.
Central banks in most advanced economies had continued to purchase significant amounts of government
				debt in secondary markets. Government bond yields had remained very low across advanced economies partly
				as a result of these purchases and despite strong issuance by governments. This issuance had also been
				met by strong demand from private sector investors.
Corporate funding conditions had remained favourable in advanced economies, including Australia. Debt
				issuance had eased – after firms had raised large amounts of funding earlier in the year –
				and spreads on corporate debt had remained low. The number of corporate defaults had subsided over
				recent months. Equity prices had declined from recent highs, following rising COVID-19 cases in Europe and the United States. Nonetheless, the overall cost of
				equity had been low, which had supported high levels of equity issuance and corporate takeover
				activity.
In China, monetary policy had been less stimulatory than elsewhere because economic conditions had been
				more favourable and policymakers had been seeking to balance risks to the economy against risks to
				financial stability. Aided by higher interest rates and portfolio inflows, the renminbi had appreciated
				noticeably over the preceding few months.
Domestically, in preceding weeks financial market participants had more strongly anticipated that the
					Bank would announce further monetary policy measures. Specifically, the Bank was expected to: reduce
					the cash rate target, the 3-year Australian Government bond yield target and the interest rate on
					drawings under the Term Funding Facility; reduce the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances
					at the Bank; and implement a program of government bond purchases for the longer-maturity part of the
					yield curve (beyond the 3-year tenor).
Members noted that, in response, yields on Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declined across
					the curve. Yields on 10-year AGS had been high relative to the 10-year government bond yields of other
					advanced countries. They also observed that this was partly because the holdings of government debt by
					the Bank were relatively low as a share of GDP. The 10-year AGS yield had declined relative to US
					Treasury yields as market expectations for a government bond purchase program in Australia had firmed.
					The decline in Australian yields relative to those for other countries, along with lower commodity
					prices, had contributed to a depreciation of the Australian dollar of around 5 per cent since
					early September. Meanwhile, Australian equity prices had outperformed major overseas equity indices
					over the preceding month.
The Bank's policy actions to date had kept Australian banks' funding costs at historically
					low levels and had supported the availability of credit to households and businesses. Deposit rates had
					declined noticeably in March and April, and had continued to decline since then. The share of deposits
					paying interest rates close to zero had increased to be a little over one-quarter of the major
					banks' (non-equity) funding, but a sizeable share of deposits was still paying rates of
					1 per cent or higher. Lending rates for both housing and business loans had also declined
					noticeably following the Bank's package of measures in March and had gradually moved lower since
					then.
Demand for housing finance had increased a little further in September (outside Victoria) in line
					with the pick-up in some indicators of housing market activity. Growth in housing credit to
					owner-occupiers had risen a little, while credit to investors in housing had expanded only modestly
					after having declined for much of the year. Some lenders had reversed some of the tightening in the
					availability of housing finance that had occurred earlier in the pandemic, which had mostly reflected
					the application of existing credit standards in the context of weaker economic conditions. By contrast,
					demand for business credit had remained weak and credit supply had tightened since March. Lending to
					small and medium-sized businesses had been little changed, while lending to large businesses had
					retraced most of the sharp increase earlier in the year, as precautionary lines of credit had been
					repaid.
Households had continued to pay off housing loans and increase balances in offset and redraw accounts
					at a faster rate than in early 2020, at the same time as lower interest rates had reduced their
					interest payments. Personal credit had also continued to decline as households paid off their credit
					card debts. Members noted that this behaviour was consistent with weak consumption growth and was
					likely to have been facilitated by the government's income support programs as well as withdrawals
					from superannuation.
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy had been recovering from
				the initial virus outbreaks, with the recovery most advanced in China. Nevertheless, most economies were
				still well short of the output levels that prevailed prior to the pandemic and the recent virus
				outbreaks posed a downside risk to the outlook, particularly in Europe. Globally, inflation remained
				very low and below central bank targets.
In Australia, economic activity had contracted substantially in the early months of the pandemic and
				had since recovered some of that decline. With the restrictions on activity in Victoria having been
				lifted, the near-term outlook had improved a little. Fiscal and monetary policy support had been
				effective in preserving many jobs and firms through the period of restrictions and the Australian
				Government Budget had provided further stimulus. Nevertheless, the recovery was still expected to be
				protracted and the outlook remained dependent on successful containment of the virus. It would take some
				time for output to reach its pre-pandemic level, and it had become increasingly clear that an extended
				period of high unemployment was in prospect. The high unemployment rate and excess capacity across the
				economy more broadly were expected to result in subdued wages growth and inflation over coming
				years.
Members agreed that the Board's policy measures were continuing to support the Australian economy
				by underpinning very low borrowing costs and the supply of credit to households and businesses. There
				was a very high level of liquidity in the Australian financial system and the mid-March policy package
				had helped to lower funding costs. Authorised deposit-taking institutions had drawn down
				$83 billion of low-cost funding through the Term Funding Facility and had access to a further
				$104 billion under the facility. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong
				capital and liquidity buffers, had remained resilient and was helping the economy traverse the current
				difficult period.
The Board discussed the outlook for the economy and concluded that, despite somewhat better recent
				outcomes in Australia, the recovery was expected to be protracted and uneven. The outlook implied a
				large shortfall in activity and employment from levels that would be consistent with full employment. To
				provide additional support for the recovery and complement the significant support from fiscal policy,
				the Board resolved to introduce a further package of monetary measures, namely:
Under the program to purchase longer-dated bonds, members agreed the Bank would purchase nominal
					bonds issued by the Australian Government and by the states and territories, with an expected 80/20 split. These bonds would be purchased in the secondary market through
					regular auctions conducted by the Bank, with the first auction to be conducted on 5 November. The
					Bank would not purchase bonds directly from the government, and so the purchase of bonds by the Bank
					would not constitute government financing. The longstanding separation of monetary policy and fiscal
					financing in Australia would therefore remain in place. The Australian Government and the states and
					territories fund themselves in the market and their bond auctions had been heavily oversubscribed over
					recent months, notwithstanding the significant increase in the size of these auctions.
The Bank remained prepared to purchase bonds in whatever quantity is required to achieve the 3-year
					yield target. Any bonds the Bank needs to purchase to support the 3-year yield target would be in
					addition to the $100 billion program.
In considering the case for the further monetary measures, the Board recognised that the complementary
				nature of the measures meant that it would be desirable for them to be implemented as a package. In
				particular, interest rates further along the yield curve capture expectations about the path of
				short-term rates, so lowering short-term rates would also lower rates at the long end of the yield
				curve. The Board concluded that the combination of government bond purchases and lower interest rates
				across the yield curve would assist the recovery by lowering financing costs for borrowers; contributing
				to a lower exchange rate than otherwise; and supporting asset prices, which would help to strengthen
				balance sheets.
Members discussed the merits of targeting a bond yield around 5 years but decided against this and
				to continue with the 3-year yield target. Members judged that a yield target is most effective when its
				maturity is consistent with the Board's forward guidance on the cash rate. The Board expects the
				cash rate to remain at its current level for at least 3 years, but beyond that members have less
				confidence about the path of interest rates. Moreover, members acknowledged that other factors can have
				a greater influence on yields at longer horizons.
Members considered whether to implement the package at this time or to wait for further information.
				The Board concluded that it was the appropriate time to implement the package, as it had become clearer
				that unemployment would remain high and inflation subdued for an extended period, and that further
				information in coming months was unlikely to change that assessment. The Board viewed addressing the
				high rate of unemployment as an important national priority. The package would add to the substantial
				monetary stimulus already provided earlier in the year and would complement the significant steps taken
				by the Australian Government, including in the recent Budget, to support jobs and growth. It was also
				likely that having the various arms of policy all taking steps in the same direction would deliver a
				greater impact than the sum of the individual parts. This would be especially so during a period in
				which the economy is opening up and people are more willing and able to spend.
Members also discussed the effect of lower interest rates on those who rely on interest income and
				acknowledged the difficulties that low interest rates generate for these households. While the effect of
				monetary easing falls unevenly across the community, in aggregate lower interest rates boost disposable
				incomes for the household sector, which stimulates spending and supports employment. Lower interest
				rates also have broader stimulatory effects on the economy through other channels, including the
				exchange rate and asset prices. Members noted that very low interest rates were a global phenomenon,
				reflecting the high level of the supply of savings relative to the demand to use those savings to invest
				in productive capital. This had reduced returns for savers, particularly in low-risk assets.
Members discussed the effect that the further monetary measures would have on financial and
				macroeconomic stability. The further easing was expected to reduce financial stability risks by
				supporting employment, private sector balance sheets and the broader economy. The Board weighed this
				benefit against the risks inherent in investors searching for yield in a low interest rate environment,
				including risks linked to higher leverage and asset prices, particularly in the housing market. On
				balance, the Board concluded that there were greater financial stability benefits from a stronger
				economy, while acknowledging the importance of closely monitoring risks in asset markets.
Members agreed that, with the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on
				Exchange Settlement balances at zero, interest rates would have been lowered as far as it made sense to
				do so in the current environment. They considered that there was little to be gained from short-term
				interest rates moving into negative territory and continued to view a negative policy rate as
				extraordinarily unlikely.
Given the outlook for both employment and inflation, the Board considered that monetary and fiscal
				support will be required for some time. The Board remains committed to not increasing the cash rate
				until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. For this
				to occur, wages growth would have to be materially higher than recent levels. This would require
				significant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour market. Given the outlook, the Board does
				not expect to increase the cash rate for at least 3 years. The Board remains of the view that it
				would be appropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate itself were increased.
Members agreed that the focus over the period ahead will be the government bond purchase program. At
				its future meetings, the Board will closely monitor the effects of the bond purchases on the economy and
				on market functioning, as well as the evolving outlook for jobs and inflation. The Board is prepared to
				do more if necessary.
The Board agreed on the following policy settings:

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				