Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Sydney – 18 March 2020

Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM (by video),
						Wendy Craik AM (by video), Ian Harper (by video), Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO
						(by video), Catherine Tanna (by video)
					
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
						Markets)
					
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Bradley Jones (Head,
						International
						Department), David Jacobs (Deputy Head, International Markets and Relations, International
						Department)
					
In a special meeting convened to consider options for monetary policy responses to the economic
						effects
						of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), members commenced their discussion with a review of
						recent
						developments. The outbreak was noted as first and foremost a public health issue. Many countries
						were
						shutting their borders and placing restrictions on businesses and individuals to slow the spread
						of
						COVID-19. This was causing very significant disruption to economies around the world.
					
Financial markets had been very volatile and there had been sharp falls in the prices of risky
						assets
						as market participants struggled to price the risks, given their unprecedented nature. Equity
						prices in
						the advanced economies, including in Australia, had fallen by around 30 per cent. The
						falls
						had been broadly based across sectors, although equity prices in the energy and tourism sectors
						had
						fallen particularly sharply. The equity prices of banks had also fallen significantly, although
						it was
						recognised that the capital and liquidity positions of banks had been strengthened over the
						prior
						decade.
					
Liquidity in credit and money markets was very poor and the market for corporate bond issuance
						was
						essentially closed to all but the very highest quality borrowers. Credit spreads in corporate
						bond
						markets had widened substantially, particularly for high-yield bonds, increasing funding costs
						for
						corporations. Members noted that any further widening in spreads would translate directly into
						higher
						borrowing costs, since government bond yields had very little further room to fall. Yields in
						money
						markets had also risen, although banks and highly rated non-financial corporations were still
						able to
						access these markets. The Australian banks had strong funding positions and did not need to
						source
						additional funding from bond markets in the near term.
					
Government bond markets had displayed signs of dysfunction, with many participants seeking to
						liquidate
						their portfolios. This had also affected traditionally safe and liquid markets, such as the US
						Treasury
						market. The increase in yields and volatility partly reflected the unwinding of highly leveraged
						positions, and the constrained ability of dealers to absorb additional bonds after having
						reached
						leverage and capital constraints. The dysfunction in the US Treasury market had spread widely,
						given its
						important role as a pricing benchmark for the global financial system.
					
In foreign exchange markets, large repatriation flows had supported the yen, and the US dollar
						had
						appreciated against most other currencies. Members observed that the Australian dollar had
						depreciated
						against the US dollar by around 10 per cent over the preceding month, to be at
						its lowest
						level since 2002. Among other advanced economies, the exchange rates of commodity exporters such
						as
						Norway, Canada and New Zealand had also depreciated notably. Capital flight had been evident
						across
						emerging markets, with exchange rates depreciating against the US dollar and sovereign bond
						yields
						moving sharply higher.
					
In response to these developments, a number of major central banks had made sizable interest rate
						reductions at unscheduled meetings. The Federal Reserve had cut its policy rate by 100 basis
						points
						after an earlier cut of 50 basis points. The Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the
						Reserve
						Bank of New Zealand had each lowered policy rates to ¼ per cent, and interest
						rates were
						lower than this in Japan and Europe.
					
Central banks had expanded their standard open market operations to provide short-term liquidity
						to
						financial institutions, including by lengthening the terms on which liquidity is extended. To
						support
						Australian financial markets, the Bank had injected liquidity through its open market
						operations,
						increasing Exchange Settlement (ES) balances from around $2.5 billion to $14 billion.
						The Bank
						had also announced that it would be conducting daily operations at one- and three-month terms
						and
						regular repurchase operations on terms of six months or longer. In a number of jurisdictions,
						including
						in Australia, central banks had stated that they would purchase government bonds in secondary
						markets to
						support their smooth functioning.
					
Members noted that many central banks were introducing additional measures to support market
						functioning and promote the resumption of activity in corporate credit markets. The Federal
						Reserve had
						introduced a commercial paper funding facility to provide a backstop for the market. The Bank of
						England, acting as agent for the UK Treasury, had announced that it would purchase unlimited
						amounts of
						commercial paper issued by non-financial firms with an investment grade credit rating. The Bank
						of
						England and the European Central Bank had expanded funding schemes to encourage banks to lend to
						businesses. There had also been an easing of bank regulatory requirements in many countries.
					
The Federal Reserve, in conjunction with a number of other central banks, had also lowered the
						cost and
						extended the terms of foreign currency borrowing through foreign exchange swap lines. This was
						designed
						to alleviate the very high demand for US dollars from non-US entities that had issued debt
						in
						US dollars that needed to be refinanced.
					
Members discussed how these developments and the rapidly changing situation were affecting the
						outlook
						for economic activity. The immediate outlook for the Australian and global economies was highly
						uncertain, but members viewed it as very likely that most countries would experience a very
						sharp
						contraction in economic activity. Members considered the information available for the Chinese
						economy,
						which indicated that there had been a large contraction in economic activity in the March
						quarter. Some
						indicators, such as coal usage, suggested that economic activity in China was beginning to pick
						up,
						although it was too early to assess the extent to which activity would recover in the June
						quarter.
					
While it was not possible to provide an updated set of forecasts for the economy given the
						fluidity of
						the situation, it was likely that Australia would experience a very material contraction in
						economic
						activity, which would spread across the March and June quarters and potentially longer. The size
						of the
						fall in economic activity would depend on the extent of the social distancing requirements, and
						potential lockdowns, put in place to contain the virus. The composition of consumption was
						changing
						considerably, with spending at supermarkets and pharmacies increasing substantially, while
						spending on
						hospitality and other services was falling sharply. Many service industries were being severely
						disrupted, with significant spillovers across the economy. There were likely to be significant
						job
						losses over the months ahead, although the extent of this would depend on the capacity of
						businesses to
						retain employees during this period. At the same time, some industries were employing more
						workers,
						particularly those involved in the retail supply chain and delivering goods. In time, following
						containment of COVID-19, the economy is expected to recover, but the timing of this was
						uncertain.
					
Following their review of recent developments in financial markets and the implications for
						economic
						activity, members turned to how monetary policy could most effectively support the Australian
						economy
						through the challenging period that lay ahead.
					
Members acknowledged that the primary response to the COVID-19 outbreak was to manage
						people's health, but that other arms of policy, including monetary and fiscal policy, would
						play an
						important role in reducing the economic and financial disruption. Members noted the measures
						that the
						Bank had taken to support the Australian economy and operation of financial markets over the
						days
						preceding the meeting.
					
The Governor proposed a package of policy measures, which together would assist in supporting the
						Australian economy through the period ahead. The focus of the package was on ensuring that
						funding costs
						were low across the entire economy and that credit remained available to businesses and
						households. This
						would help build the necessary bridge to the economic recovery and support that recovery once
						the
						COVID-19 outbreak is contained.
					
The elements of the package were discussed in turn.
1. A further reduction in the cash rate target to 0.25 per cent.
The proposed cut in the cash rate to 0.25 per cent would bring the cumulative decline
						over
						the preceding year to 1¼ percentage points. Members noted that this would be a
						substantial
						easing of monetary policy, which, to date, had been boosting the cash flow of businesses and the
						household sector as a whole and also helping trade-exposed industries through the exchange rate
						channel.
						Members acknowledged that very low interest rates have uneven effects and negative consequences
						for some
						people – especially those relying on interest income – but the evidence was that
						lower
						interest rates were benefiting the community as a whole.
					
Members supported the proposal and agreed that the cash rate would not be increased from its
						lower
						level until progress is made towards full employment and there is confidence that inflation will
						be
						sustainably within the 2–3 per target cent range. Given this, it was considered
						likely that
						the cash rate would remain at a very low level for an extended period. Members also agreed that
						the cash
						rate was now at its effective lower bound. Members had no appetite for negative interest rates
						in
						Australia.
					
2. A target for the yield on 3-year Australian Government bonds of around 0.25 per cent.
Members considered a proposal to extend and complement the longstanding approach to target the
						cash
						rate, which forms the anchor point for the risk-free term structure, by also targeting a
						risk-free
						interest rate further out along the yield curve. The specific proposal was to target the rate at
						the
						three-year mark, given its importance as a benchmark rate in financial markets and its role in
						funding
						across much of the Australian economy. Such a target would also be consistent with the
						expectation that
						the cash rate would remain at a very low level for several years.
					
Members supported the intent of the proposal and agreed that it would make most sense, including
						from a
						communication perspective, to set the target at the same rate as the target for the cash rate,
						namely
						25 basis points. They acknowledged that the target did not need to be achieved precisely
						every day.
						Members noted that some time might be needed before yields would fall to the target from their
						level
						over the weeks preceding the meeting – of around 45 basis points. Members discussed
						the
						importance of the Bank's communication focusing on how this target would both support the
						economy
						in the immediate period and assist with a strong recovery once the COVID-19 outbreak has
						been
						contained.
					
Members noted that the yield target would be achieved by regular auctions in the secondary bond
						market,
						whereby the Bank would implement a program to purchase bonds of different maturities, given the
						high
						level of substitutability between bonds. The Bank would also be prepared to buy semi-government
						securities to achieve the target and help facilitate the smooth functioning of the bond market,
						and
						would work closely with the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) and state
						government
						borrowing authorities. Members noted that, although the program of bond purchases would entail
						an
						increase in the size of the Bank's balance sheet, the focus of the program would be on bond
						yields
						rather than the quantity and timing of bond purchases. The objective of this component of the
						proposed
						policy measures would be to add to the downward pressure on funding costs for financial
						institutions,
						households and businesses.
					
Members thought it likely that the target for three-year yields would be maintained until
						progress was
						made towards the Bank's goals of full employment and the inflation target. Furthermore,
						they
						expressed the view that it would be appropriate to remove the yield target before the cash rate
						itself
						was raised.
					
3. A term funding facility for the banking system, with particular support for credit to small
						and
						medium-sized businesses.
					
The proposed scheme had two broad objectives. The first was to lower funding costs for the entire
						banking system to ensure a low cost of credit to households and businesses. This objective would
						complement the target for the three-year bond yield. The second objective was to provide an
						incentive
						for lenders to support credit to businesses, especially small and medium-sized businesses.
						Members
						agreed that this aspect would be vital as many small businesses would be likely to find
						retaining staff
						in the period ahead extremely challenging.
					
Under the proposed facility, the Bank would provide a three-year funding facility to authorised
						deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) at a fixed rate of 0.25 per cent, which was
						substantially
						below lenders' current funding costs. ADIs would be able to obtain initial funding of up to
						3 per cent of their existing outstanding credit until the end of September 2020, and
						would
						have access to additional funding if they increased lending to businesses, especially to small
						and
						medium-sized businesses, with these funds able to be drawn upon until the end of March 2021.
						This size
						of the proposed facility was at least $90 billion. Members endorsed the proposal that no
						additional
						allowance be available to finance growth in lending for housing.
					
Members expressed support for the proposed scheme and discussed some technical aspects. They
						noted that
						institutions accessing the scheme would need to provide eligible collateral to the Bank, with
						haircuts
						applying to provide appropriate risk mitigation. The interest rate that would apply would be
						fixed for
						the term of the funding, which was consistent with the Bank's expectation that the cash
						rate was
						likely to stay at a very low level for some time. Members also agreed that including a penalty
						rate to
						counteract the risk of a reduction in lending could act as a disincentive for institutions to
						participate in the scheme. The Governor indicated that the first drawings under the facility
						would be
						possible no later than four weeks from the date of the meeting.
					
The Governor informed members that he understood that the Australian Prudential Regulation
						Authority
						(APRA) would support ADIs using the scheme. In addition, the Australian Government was in the
						process of
						developing a complementary program of support for the non-bank financial sector, small lenders
						and the
						securitisation market, which would be implemented by the AOFM. Members observed that such
						support would
						be important to assist non-bank financial institutions and small lenders to continue to provide
						credit
						to households and businesses.
					
4. Exchange settlement (ES) balances at the Reserve Bank to be remunerated at 10 basis
						points,
						rather than zero as would have been the case under the previous arrangements.
					
The Governor outlined the implications of the proposed policy measures for the cash market. The
						existing ‘corridor system’ means that the balances financial institutions hold with
						the
						Reserve Bank overnight earn an interest rate 25 basis points below the cash rate, and in
						the event
						that a financial institution needed to borrow from the Reserve Bank overnight, it would be
						charged
						25 basis points above the cash rate. Should the cash rate be reduced to 25 basis
						points, the
						interest rate on ES balances would be zero. In view of the significant increase in the balances
						held in
						ES accounts resulting from the combined effect of the Bank's enhanced liquidity operations,
						bond
						purchases and the term funding program, maintaining a zero interest rate on these balances would
						increase the costs to the banking system.
					
Members agreed that such an outcome would be undesirable in the current environment. They
						endorsed the
						proposal to alleviate this cost by increasing the rate of interest on settlement balances to
						10 basis points. No change to the arrangements for the top of the corridor were proposed.
						Members
						noted that the increase in ES balances would be likely to change the way that the cash market
						operates.
						In particular, large increases in ES balances could result in the cash rate drifting below the
						target as
						transaction volumes in the cash market decline, as had occurred in other countries in similar
						circumstances.
					
In considering the overall package of measures that had been discussed, members acknowledged that
						the
						term funding scheme and the three-year bond yield target were both significant policy
						developments that
						would not have been under consideration in normal times. Nonetheless, members strongly supported
						the
						proposed policy response as a comprehensive package to complement the fiscal response announced
						by
						governments in Australia in the preceding week or so.
					
Members endorsed the continuation of close policy coordination that had been taking place among
						the
						Bank, the federal and state governments and government agencies. They expressed the view that,
						in the
						Bank's communication, it would be important to emphasise that the Bank expected a recovery
						once the
						COVID-19 outbreak has been contained, and that the recovery would be supported by the low
						cost of
						funding across the economy.
					
The Board agreed on a package of measures, comprising four elements, namely:
The measures would be announced in a media release at 2.30 pm AEDT the following afternoon,
						19 March, following processes to ensure coordination of related policy announcements by
						APRA and
						the AOFM. The Governor would provide further elaboration and take questions at a press
						conference to be
						held at the Bank at 4.00 pm AEDT on the same day.
					

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				