The members of the Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and the international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Evidence suggests a gradual recovery of economic activity during the course of The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indices and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The global outlook remains quite uncertain.
Nevertheless, developments have so far mitigated the effects on the Brazilian economy of possible changes in economic policy in some large economies, notably in the United States.
There is uncertainty regarding the sustainability of global economic growth and the stability of current commodity price levels.
Returning to the domestic economy, inflation dynamics remain favorable.
The disinflation process has become more widespread and the disinflation of the IPCA components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy has consolidated, increasing confidence that the ongoing disinflation process will have lasting effects.
Food price disinflation constitutes a favorable supply shock.
The next steps in the process of approval of fiscal reforms involve the consideration of reforms that are fundamental to the fiscal sustainability, such as the social security reform.
This process may be lengthy and involves uncertainty.
These reforms and other necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy are important for the sustainability of disinflation and for the reduction of its structural interest rate.
Disinflation in food prices constitutes a favorable supply shock, which might produce second-round effects, and, thus, contribute to additional reductions of inflation expectations and inflation in other sectors of the economy.
They all agreed that there are signs consistent with stabilization of the economy in the short run.
However, the challenges for the resumption of economic activity remain, and the Committee expects the economic recovery during the course of 2017 to be gradual.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members pointed out the uncertainties associated with possible changes in economic policy in the United States, with the sustainability of global economic growth, with the stability of current commodity price levels and also with the outlook for Evidence suggests a gradual recovery of economic activity during the course of The highly uncertain global outlook might make disinflation more difficult.
The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in the low The next steps in the process of approval of fiscal industrial capacity utilization indices and, mainly, in reforms involve the consideration of reforms that the unemployment rate.
This process may be The global outlook remains quite uncertain.
These reforms and dynamics remain favorable.
Food price disinflation constitutes a favorable supply shock.
They analyzed the inflation trajectory during this and the following years.
This difference can be partially attributed to the primary effects of the favorable food price shock.
All members concluded that such sizable, one-off and unusual fluctuations do not have relevant implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
The Copom members assessed the extension of the monetary easing cycle, including its implications for the level of the policy rate throughout The extension will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, on the projections and expectations of IPCA inflation for 2018 and 2019, and also on the estimates for the structural interest rate of Brazilian economy.
These estimates naturally involve uncertainty and may be reassessed by the Committee over time.
The Committee members reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, with inflation forecasts at the target for 2018 and a little below target for 2017, and with the high level of economic slack, the Copom's baseline scenario prescribes frontloading the monetary easing cycle.
Everyone also agreed that this moderate intensification of the pace of monetary easing relative to the pace set in the January and February meetings is, at this time, appropriate.
Hence, the members of the Committee discussed the next steps for monetary policy.
They emphasized, at the outset, the fundamental condition that any future decision should be compatible with the maintenance of inflation projections at the target over the relevant horizon, and with anchored inflation expectations.
They also debated, on the one hand, how monetary policy could contribute to the stabilization process and subsequent resumption of economic activity and, on the other hand, the lagged effects that monetary policy could have on inflation for the coming years.
The Committee members pondered over the degree of frontloading of the desired cycle.
The Committee members once again emphasized that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would allow the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of relative price adjustments that may occur over time.
This applies to the favorable food supply shock.
The Copom understands that the primary effects of this supply shock, to which monetary policy should not react, should be estimated taking into account demand conditions in that sector.
Monetary policy should, then, focus on possible second-round effects of this shock, which might contribute to additional reductions of inflation expectations and of inflation in other sectors of the economy.
Nevertheless, they believe estimate of its extension, a possible acceleration of that the Brazilian economy nowadays shows greater the pace is equivalent to greater frontloading of the capacity to respond to occasional negative cycle.
Everyone also agreed that condition that any future decision should be a trough in the third quarter of the year and increase compatible with the maintenance of inflation in the last months of the year to values still below projections at the target over the relevant horizon, target.
This difference can be partially attributed to and with anchored inflation expectations.
They also the primary effects of the favorable food price debated, on the one hand, how monetary policy shock.
The Copom members assessed the extension of The Committee members once again the monetary easing cycle, including its implications emphasized that the environment with anchored for the level of the policy rate throughout The inflation expectations would allow the Copom to extension will depend on the evolution of economic focus on preventing second-round effects of relative activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, price adjustments that may occur over time.
This on the projections and expectations of IPCA for 2018 and a little below target for 2017, and with All members of the Committee emphasized that the high level of economic slack, the Copom's the approval and implementation of reforms, baseline scenario prescribes frontloading the notably those of a fiscal nature, and of adjustments monetary easing cycle.
These efforts are fundamental for the stabilization and resumption of the economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
This moderate intensification of the pace of monetary easing, relative to the pace set in the January and February Copom meetings, is, at this time, appropriate.
The Copom judges that the extension of the monetary easing cycle will depend not only on estimates of the structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy, which the Committee will continue to reassess over time, but also on the evolution of economic activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Copom emphasizes that the pace of monetary easing will depend on the estimated extension of the cycle and on the degree of frontloading.
In turn, the latter will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Committee considers the current pace of easing to be appropriate; however, the current economic context calls for monitoring the developments of the determinants of the degree of frontloading of the cycle.
Finally, the Committee members highlighted the importance of other reforms and investments in infrastructure aimed at increasing productivity, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvement of the business environment.
Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance of risks, and a wide array of available information, the Copom unanimously decided to reduce the Selic rate by one percentage point, to 11.25 percent per year, without bias.
This moderate intensification of the pace of monetary easing, relative to the pace set in the January and February Copom meetings, is, at this time, appropriate.
The Committee judges that convergence of inflation to Brazilian economy, which the Committee will continue to reassess over time, but also on the evolution of economic activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
