This includes the components most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Inflation expectations collected by the Focus survey retreated to around 3.1 percent for 2017 and 4.0 percent for Expectations for 2019 and 2020 are around 4.25 percent and 4.0 percent, respectively.
All members agreed that the economy should remain on a gradual recovery path, whose signs are evident, for instance, in employment gains, even at this initial phase.
As the recovery advances, consumption growth should give way to resumption in investment.
Softer economic activity data pertaining to August were discussed, as well as the prospects of a stronger recovery ahead.
The Committee emphasized the vision that, owing to the current levels of slack in the economy, marginal revisions in the intensity of recovery would not lead to material revisions in the expected path for inflation.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee confirmed the recent favorable evolution of the global economy, which shows a gradual economic recovery, without exerting excessive pressure on financial conditions in advanced economies.
The Committee acknowledged that the continuing process of normalization of monetary policy in major countries led to slightly less accommodative global financial conditions.
However, the impact on emerging economies has been limited so far.
In this context, the Copom reaffirmed that the Brazilian economy shows a greater capacity to absorb occasional setbacks in the global economy, given its robust balance of payments, low inflation environment, anchored expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
The percent for 2018, and 4.2 percent for Committee acknowledged that the continuing process of normalization of monetary policy in major countries led to slightly less accommodative global The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this and subsequent years and all members agreed that the prospects for inflation have evolved as expected.
The Committee assessed the current situation of the domestic electric energy generation sector and incorporated the recent increase in tariffs into its baseline scenario for inflation.
Regarding monetary policy, there was consensus that, as in the case of other possible relative price adjustments resulting from supply shocks, with anchored inflation expectations, monetary policy should only address the second-round effects of these shocks.
The Committee reiterates that its reaction to possible changes in relative prices, such as in food and possible adjustments of electric energy tariffs, will be symmetric, that is, monetary policy will follow the same principles in face of both inflationary and disinflationary supply shocks.
The Copom discussed the levels and path of inflation, including the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
These components show comfortable levels and a path compatible with convergence of inflation towards target.
The Committee expressed the view that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, measures of underlying inflation running at comfortable levels, inflation projections slightly below the target for 2018 and a high level of economic slack prescribe accommodative monetary policy, with interest rates below the structural level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, Committee members expressed an understanding that current _ex-ante_ real interest rates provide stimulus to the economy.
The Committee understands that, for a given estimate of the length of the monetary easing cycle, the pace of easing depends on the stage of the cycle, without necessarily reflecting changes in its baseline scenario or risk balance.
The Committee then discussed the next step in conducting monetary policy and the appropriate pace of easing for the current stage of the cycle.
There was consensus in maintaining freedom of action and to postpone any guidance on future monetary policy decisions in order to incorporate new information on the evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of risks.
The Committee reaffirmed its preference for communicating conditionalities for the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality that guides their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and improve Copom communication.
In this context, it was once again emphasized that the easing process will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle length, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of a fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are fundamental for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
The Committee understands that, for a given estimate of the length of the monetary easing cycle, The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory the pace of easing depends on the stage of the throughout this and subsequent years and all cycle, without necessarily reflecting changes in its members agreed that the prospects for inflation baseline scenario or risk balance.
This the propagation of the low current levels of contributes to increase transparency and improve inflation will lead to a lower-than-expected Copom communication.
In this context, it was once prospective inflation trajectory, as well as the risk of again emphasized that the easing process will a setback in the global outlook in a context of continue to depend on the evolution of economic frustration of expectations about the reforms and activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments necessary adjustments.
Finally, the Copom highlighted the importance The Copom understands that the process of of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy economy contributes to the reduction of its and business environment improvement.
The Committee judges that convergence of inflation to the target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2018 and 2019, is compatible with the monetary easing process.
The Committee judges that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy contributes to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Copom emphasizes that the monetary easing process will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Committee judges that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the monetary easing process will continue to depend on Srgio Neves de Souza, Reinaldo Le Grazie, Sidnei Corra Marques and Tiago Couto Berriel.
