This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
They all agreed with the diagnosis that the process of stabilization of the economy has consolidated.
They also agreed that economic activity should remain on a gradual recovery path, whose first signs are already visible.
They assessed that, as the recovery consolidates, consumption growth should give way to a resumption in investment.
They also judged that there are signs of employment recovery even in this phase of the cycle.
Regarding the global outlook, members of the Committee confirmed the recent favorable evolution of the global economy, with gradual recovery of activity, without pressures on financial conditions in developed economies.
They discussed the risks associated with the monetary policy normalization process in central economies and with the outlook for the Chinese economy, with possible impacts on risk appetite for emerging economies assets.
They discussed the risks respectively.
In this robust balance of payments, low inflation environment, anchored expectations and prospect of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom members pointed out the risk for the Brazilian economy of a reversal in this benign global outlook in a context of frustration of expectations regarding the reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
The Copom members analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this and subsequent years and agreed that the prospects for inflation continue to evolve in a favorable way.
The Committee members analyzed the prospect for the future evolution of food price inflation.
They confirmed the prescription that monetary policy should fight possible second-round effects stemming from this shock.
A slower normalization constitutes a downward risk to these projections.
The Copom members discussed the low levels of current inflation, including the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
They observed that these low levels have allowed an increase in the populations purchasing power and contributed to the economic recovery.
They also observed that the possible propagation through inertial mechanisms of the low level of current inflation may lead to a lower-than-expected prospective inflation trajectory.
Notwithstanding this risk, the Copom members considered that the The Copom assessed that monetary policy has the flexibility to react to risks on both sides.
On the one hand, to the risk that side effects of the food price shock and the propagation of the current low level of inflation may produce lower-than-expected prospective inflation.
On the other hand, to the inflationary risk stemming from a possible reversal of the global outlook, in a context of frustration of expectations regarding adjustments and reforms.
The Committee members expressed the understanding that economic conditions, with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures running at low levels, inflation forecasts slightly below target for 2018, and high level of economic slack prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed an understanding that current _ex-ante real interest_ rates already provide stimulus to the economy.
The Copom understands that the evolution of reforms, such as the recently approved credit policy measures, and of adjustments in the Brazilian economy contributes to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee understands that, for a given estimate of the length of the monetary easing cycle, the pace of easing depends on the stage of the cycle, without necessarily reflecting changes in the Committees baseline scenario or in the balance of risks.
The Committee members then discussed the next step in the conduct of monetary policy.
They argued for the need to maintain flexibility for monetary policy to properly react in case of changes to the baseline scenario and the balance of risks.
The members also discussed the appropriate pace of easing at the current stage of the cycle.
They concluded in favor of signaling, conditionally, that if the outlook evolves according to the Copoms baseline scenario, and due to the stage of the easing cycle, a moderate reduction in the robust balance of payments, low inflation recovery of the economy acts in the opposite environment, anchored expectations and prospect of direction, by gradually pushing inflation towards economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom target over members pointed out the risk for the Brazilian economy of a reversal in this benign global outlook in The Copom assessed that monetary policy has a context of frustration of expectations regarding the flexibility to react to risks on both sides.
On the the reforms and necessary adjustments in the one hand, to the risk that side effects of the food Brazilian economy.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree The Committee members discussed the of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed dynamics of food prices, whose favorable behavior an understanding that current _ex-ante real interest_ persists so far.
They analyzed that, in the twelve- rates already provide stimulus to the economy.
They confirmed the prescription that monetary policy should fight possible second-round effects stemming All Copom members agreed that the evolution of from this shock.
They observed that these low levels have case of changes to the baseline scenario and the allowed an increase in the populations purchasing balance of risks.
The members also discussed the power and contributed to the economic recovery.
They concluded in favor of signaling, through inertial mechanisms of the low level of current inflation may lead to a lower-than-expected conditionally, that if the outlook evolves according to prospective inflation trajectory.
In particular, they assessed the costs and benefits of a gradual ending to the easing cycle.
In general, the Committee members agreed that, everything else equal, there are benefits from a gradual ending of monetary cycles.
A gradual process facilitates communication and allows gathering of more evidence regarding the behavior of the economy around the end of the cycle.
But they also agreed that, in exceptional cases, the need for prompt frontloading of the cycle may bring greater benefits than those related to a gradual ending.
In the current circumstances, the Copom judged convenient to signal that, if the baseline scenario evolves as currently expected, the Committee foresees a gradual ending to the current monetary easing cycle.
The Committee members reaffirmed their preference for communicating conditionalities for the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality that guides their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and improve Copom communication.
In this context, they once again highlighted that the monetary easing process will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
All Committee members reemphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of fiscal nature and of adjustments in the Brazilian economy are fundamental to the sustainability of an environment with low and stable inflation, to the full operation of monetary policy and to the reduction of its structural interest rate, with widespread benefits for society.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development path of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms, such as the recently approved credit policy measures, and necessary adjustments to the Brazilian economy contributes to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
In addition, under those same circumstances, the Copom foresees a gradual ending to the cycle.
Notwithstanding these perspectives, the Copom emphasizes that the monetary easing process will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
In particular, they assessed the costs reduce the Selic rate by one percentage point, to and benefits of a gradual ending to the easing cycle.
The Committee judges that the current circumstances, the Copom judged The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of convenient to signal that, if the baseline scenario reforms, such as the recently approved credit policy evolves as currently expected, the Committee measures, and necessary adjustments to the Brazilian foresees a gradual ending to the current monetary economy contributes to the reduction of its easing cycle.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee members reaffirmed their preference for communicating conditionalities for The Copom emphasizes that economic and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
Notwithstanding these perspectives, the Copom emphasizes that the All Committee members reemphasized that the monetary easing process will continue to depend on approval and implementation of reforms notably the evolution of economic activity, the balance of those of fiscal nature and of adjustments in the risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the Brazilian economy are fundamental to the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
