The global outlook remains quite uncertain.
There is Food price disinflation resumed, which constitutes also uncertainty regarding the outlook for the a favorable supply shock and might produce second- Chinese economy.
The path of regulated prices, which enters the The highly uncertain global outlook might make conditional forecasts in the inflation scenarios disinflation more difficult.
Nevertheless, with the aim of maintaining a high level of transparency, the 2 The Committee understands that, in the context of the Copom will continue to report, in the Inflation Reports, ongoing monetary easing process, these projections with conditional forecasts in the four scenarios that have been constant interest rates are not very informative.
From now released since the 3Q 2016 Inflation Report.
The prospective The second dimension refers to conjunctural assessment of the Committee is that risks seem aspects.
The Committee understands that its more balanced now than in the last months of estimates of the extension of the ongoing monetary However, the challenges for the resumption of easing cycle depend not only on the structural economic activity remain, and the Committee interest rate trajectory envisaged for the economy, expects the economic recovery during the course of but also on the evolution of economic activity, on 2017 to be gradual.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members pointed out the continuation of uncertainties associated with possible changes in economic policy in the United States and also with the outlook for the Chinese economy.
Nevertheless, they believe that the Brazilian economy nowadays shows greater capacity to absorb occasional negative developments in the global economy, due to the progress in the disinflationary process and in the anchoring of expectations.
The Committee members reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, with inflation forecasts at the target for 2018 and marginally below the target for 2017, and in light of the high level of economic slack, the Copom's baseline scenario prescribes frontloading the monetary easing cycle.
Regarding the extension of the cycle, i.e., the accumulated reduction in the Selic rate at the end of the monetary easing process, the discussion focused on two different dimensions, both relevant for its determination.
The first dimension pertains to the structural interest rate of the economy.
This rate depends on factors such as the economy's productivity growth, the perspectives for fiscal policy, the quality of the business and contractual environment, the efficiency of resource allocation through the financial system, and the quality of economic policy.
Measurement of the structural interest rate involves a high level of uncertainty, and necessarily requires judgment.
The Committee judges that the change of economic policy by the government, with approval and implementation of fiscal reforms - notably the social security reform besides others reforms and necessary adjustments in economy, can reduce the structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy.
In this context, the Committee will continue to reassess its estimates of the structural interest rate of the economy over time.
This dimension generates changes for monetary policy that are less frequent and more structural.
The second dimension refers to conjunctural aspects.
The Committee understands that its estimates of the extension of the ongoing monetary easing cycle depend not only on the structural interest rate trajectory envisaged for the economy, but also on the evolution of economic activity, on the other risk factors mentioned above, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
Regarding the pace of monetary easing over the cycle, the Committee understands that, for a given estimate of its extension, a possible acceleration of the pace is equivalent to greater frontloading of the cycle.
Some members of the Committee pointed out that the estimated extension may also be itself revised, depending on the degree of frontloading of the cycle.
Hence, the members of the Committee discussed the next steps for monetary policy and expressed preference for keeping more leeway for future decisions, which will depend on the evolution of the Copom's baseline scenario and on the aforementioned risk factors.
They emphasized the fundamental condition that any future decision should be compatible with the maintenance of inflation projections at the target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, and with anchored inflation expectations.
The Committee members once again emphasized that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would allow the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of relative price adjustments that may occur over time.
This applies to the favorable food supply shock.
The Copom understands that the primary effects of this supply shock, to which monetary policy should not react, should be estimated taking into account demand conditions in that sector.
Monetary policy should, then, focus on possible second-round effects of this shock, which might contribute to additional reductions of inflation expectations and of inflation in other sectors of the economy.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members pointed out the continuation of Regarding the pace of monetary easing over the uncertainties associated with possible changes in cycle, the Committee understands that, for a given economic policy in the United States and also with estimate of its extension, a possible acceleration of the outlook for the Chinese economy.
Nevertheless, the pace is equivalent to greater frontloading of the they believe that the Brazilian economy nowadays cycle.
Some members of the Committee pointed out shows greater capacity to absorb occasional that the estimated extension may also be itself negative developments in the global economy, due revised, depending on the degree of frontloading of to the progress in the disinflationary process and in the cycle.
They emphasized the understanding that, with anchored inflation fundamental condition that any future decision expectations, with inflation forecasts at the target should be compatible with the maintenance of for 2018 and marginally below the target for 2017, inflation projections at the target over the relevant and in light of the high level of economic slack, the horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, and with Copom's baseline scenario prescribes frontloading anchored inflation expectations.
They also debated, the monetary easing cycle.
The Committee members once again policy, the quality of the business and contractual emphasized that the environment with anchored environment, the efficiency of resource allocation inflation expectations would allow the Copom to through the financial system, and the quality of focus on preventing second-round effects of relative economic policy.
Measurement of the structural price adjustments that may occur over time.
This interest rate involves a high level of uncertainty, and applies to the favorable food supply shock.
The Committee Copom understands that the primary effects of this judges that the change of economic policy by the supply shock, to which monetary policy should not government, with approval and implementation of react, should be estimated taking into account fiscal reforms - notably the social security reform - Finally, the Committee members highlighted the importance of other reforms and investments in infrastructure aimed at increasing productivity, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvement of the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the stabilization and resumption of the economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Copom emphasizes that a possible acceleration of the pace of monetary easing will depend not only on the estimated extension of the cycle, but also on the evolution of economic activity, on the other risk factors, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
