The global outlook, despite currently favorable, still carries risks associated with the monetary policy normalization process in central economies, with changes in economic policy in some central economies, and with possible impacts on risk appetite for emerging economies assets.
However, available information scenario suggests that the impact of this drop in confidence on economic activity has been The uncertainty regarding the evolution of limited so far.
In addition, changes in economic policy in some central economies have become The sharp disinflation in food and industrial less likely.
Notably, it might contribute to additional Disinflation is widespread and includes IPCA reductions of inflation expectations and components that are most sensitive to the inflation in other sectors of the economy.
The Committee members discussed the evolution of economic activity, in light of The path of administered prices underlying the available data.
They also judged that, although a gradual recovery is most likely, the pace of recovery remains uncertain.
The scenario with interest rate and exchange recovery of activity, without pressures on financial conditions in developed economies.
The Committee members also discussed the continuation of risks associated with the monetary policy normalization process in central economies and with the outlook for the Chinese economy, with possible impacts on risk appetite for emerging economies assets.
They also highlighted that the Brazilian economy nowadays shows greater capacity to respond to occasional negative developments in the global economy, due to its more robust balance of payments and to the progress in the disinflationary process and in the anchoring of expectations.
All Committee members agreed that the prospects for inflation have evolved in a favorable way.
The members of the Committee analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this and subsequent years.
The total impact on IPCA inflation is estimated at 0.45 p.p., over the months of July and August, but with higher concentration in August.
Part of this impact was already embedded in the Copoms conditional forecasts.
The members of the Committee also debated the impact on July IPCA inflation of the change in the flag on electricity tariffs from green to yellow, which is estimated at around 0.15 p.p.
All concluded that these oneoff oscillations in particular the ones related to fuel and electricity adjustments, which have been more volatile do not have relevant implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
The members of the Committee assessed the possible impacts of increased uncertainty related to the pace of reforms and adjustments in the economy on the prospective path of inflation.
They concluded that the available information suggests limited impacts so far, both through inflationary and disinflationary channels.
These estimates naturally involve uncertainty and will continue to be reassessed by the Committee over time.
The Committee members reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, with inflation forecasts a little below target for 2018 and with the high level of economic slack, the Copom's baseline scenario prescribes continuation of the monetary easing cycle.
This understanding already considers the current risks around the baseline scenario and the estimates of the extension of the cycle.
The Committee understands that, for a given estimate of its extension, the pace of monetary easing depends on the stage of the cycle, without necessarily reflecting changes in the baseline scenario or in the balance of risks.
Hence, the members of the Committee discussed the next steps for monetary policy.
The analysis regarding the convenience of signaling and the suitable magnitude of monetary easing involved considerations about the projections for inflation and economic activity, the estimates of the extension of the cycle and its current stage, and the risks surrounding the scenario and these estimates, including those associated with the prospects for reforms and adjustments in the economy.
They also expectations of IPCA inflation for 2018 and prospects for inflation have evolved in a favorable way.
The members of the Committee The Committee members reaffirmed the analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this understanding that, with anchored inflation and subsequent years.
Considering the scenario expectations, with inflation forecasts a little that conditions on paths of the interest rate and below target for 2018 and with the high level of exchange rate extracted from the Focus survey, economic slack, the Copom's baseline scenario projections for 12-month inflation reach a prescribes continuation of the monetary easing trough in the third quarter of the year and cycle.
The total implementation of reforms and adjustments in impact on IPCA inflation is estimated at 0.45 p.p., the economy, the evolution of the economy over the months of July and August, but with higher concentration in August.
The members of the to 9.25 percent p.a. Committee also debated the impact on July IPCA inflation of the change in the flag on electricity Hence, the members of the Committee the extension of the cycle and its current stage, related to the pace of reforms and adjustments in the economy on the prospective path of and the risks surrounding the scenario and these inflation.
They concluded that the available estimates, including those associated with the information suggests limited impacts so far, prospects for reforms and adjustments in the both through inflationary and disinflationary economy.
The Copom members agreed on the importance of signaling, but reaffirmed their preference for communicating conditionalities for the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality that guides their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and improve Copom communication.
In general, the magnitude of monetary easing will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Committee members once again emphasized that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would allow the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of relative price adjustments that may occur over time.
The Copom understands that it should seek to identify the primary effects of these relative price changes, to which monetary policy should not react.
Monetary policy should, then, focus on possible second-round effects of those adjustments, which might contribute to changes in inflation projections and expectations.
Also in light of the recent increase in uncertainty, all members of the Committee emphasized again that the approval and implementation of reforms, notably those of fiscal and credit nature, and of adjustments in the Brazilian economy, are fundamental to the sustainability of disinflation, to the full operation of monetary policy, and to the reduction of its structural interest rate, with widespread benefits for society.
These efforts are fundamental for The Copom members agreed on the importance the stabilization and resumption of economic of signaling, but reaffirmed their preference for activity and for the development of the communicating conditionalities for the Brazilian economy.
The Copom emphasizes that the extension of the monetary easing cycle will depend on cyclical factors and on estimates of the structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee will continue to reassess these estimates over time.
The pace of easing will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
They decided to 9.25 percent per year, without bias.
The Committee will inflation expectations would allow the Copom to continue to reassess these estimates over time.
The Copom understands that it should seek increase in uncertainty regarding the evolution emphasized again that the approval and depend on the evolution of economic activity, implementation of reforms, notably those of the balance of risks, possible reassessments of fiscal and credit nature, and of adjustments in the extension of the cycle, and on inflation the Brazilian economy, are fundamental to the forecasts and expectations.
