The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indices and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
Stronger global economic activity has so far mitigated the effects on the Brazilian economy of possible changes of economic policy in central economies.
Disinflation is widespread and includes IPCA components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
It is necessary to monitor possible impacts of higher uncertainty on the prospective path of inflation.
The Committee views the heightened uncertainty regarding the speed of the process of reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian economy as the main risk factor.
This arises from both a higher probability of scenarios that may hinder this process, and the difficulty in assessing the effects of these scenarios on the determinants of inflation.
These determinants include economic activity, inflation expectations, estimates of the structural interest rate, and prices of relevant financial assets.
Disinflation in food and industrial prices might produce second-round effects on inflation.
Notably, it might contribute to additional reductions of inflation expectations and inflation in other sectors of the economy.
They all agreed that recent data confirm the scenario of stabilization and prospects of gradual economic recovery.
However, if sustained over a long period, high levels of uncertainty regarding the evolution of reforms and adjustments in the economy can have detrimental effects on economic activity.
Update of economic outlook and conditional inflation forecasts currently involve a higher level of uncertainty.
They also highlighted that the Brazilian economy nowadays shows greater capacity to respond to occasional negative developments in the global economy, due to its more robust balance of payments and to the progress in the disinflationary process and in the anchoring of expectations.
All Committee members agreed that the prospects for inflation have evolved in a favorable way.
The members of the Committee analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this and subsequent years.
Part of this difference can be attributed to the primary effects of the favorable food price shock.
It is estimated that these adjustments should reduce June IPCA inflation by approximately 0.3 percentage point.
All members concluded that these one-off oscillations do not have relevant implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
The members of the Committee discussed possible impacts of increased uncertainty on the prospective path of inflation.
On the one hand, they consider that, if sustained over a long period, high levels of uncertainty regarding the evolution of reforms and adjustments in the economy can have detrimental effects on economic activity, and hence be disinflationary.
On the other hand, the impact of uncertainty on price setting and on estimates of the structural interest rate can have the opposite direction.
In general, the members of the Committee emphasized that, at this moment, the conditional projections of the Copom involve greater uncertainty.
They concluded that there is no direct and mechanical relationship between the increase in uncertainty and monetary policy, and that the flexibility of the inflation targeting regime allows the Committee to adjust The Copom members assessed the extension of the monetary easing cycle, including its implications for the level of interest rates throughout The extension will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the other aforementioned risk factors, on the projections and expectations of IPCA inflation for 2018 and 2019, and also on the estimates for the structural interest rate of Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that the recent increase in uncertainty regarding the evolution of reforms and adjustments in the economy hampers a more timely reduction of estimates of the structural interest rate, and makes them more uncertain.
These estimates naturally involve uncertainty and may be reassessed by the Committee over time.
The Committee members reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, with inflation forecasts at the target for 2018 and a little below target for 2017, and with the high level of economic slack, the Copom's baseline scenario prescribes continuation of the monetary easing cycle.
This understanding already considers the current risks around the baseline scenario and the estimates of the extension of the cycle.
The Committee understands that, for a given estimate of its extension, the pace of monetary easing depends on the stage of the cycle, without necessarily reflecting changes in the baseline scenario or in the balance of risks.
Hence, the members of the Committee discussed the next steps for monetary policy.
The analysis regarding the appropriate pace of easing involved considerations about inflation and activity projections, the estimates of the extension of the cycle and its current stage, and the risks surrounding the scenario and these estimates, including those associated with the prospects for reforms and adjustments in the economy.
Regarding the convenience of signaling, on the one hand, it was argued that the uncertainty evolution of the global economy, despite the monetary policy to possible prospective uncertainties associated with possible changes scenarios.
They implications for the level of interest rates also highlighted that the Brazilian economy throughout The extension will depend on nowadays shows greater capacity to respond to the evolution of economic activity, on the other analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this more uncertain.
These estimates naturally and subsequent years.
Considering the scenario involve uncertainty and may be reassessed by that conditions on paths of the interest rate and the Committee over time.
All members concluded that All members of the Copom agreed that the these one-off oscillations do not have relevant implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
They concluded that there is including those associated with the prospects no direct and mechanical relationship between for reforms and adjustments in the economy.
Nevertheless, they also emphasized that this pace will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks, on possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Committee members once again emphasized that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would allow the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of relative price adjustments that may occur over time.
This applies to the favorable food supply shock and to the positive dynamics in prices of industrial goods, but also to potential inflationary relative price adjustments.
The Copom understands that it should seek to identify the primary effects of these relative price changes, to which monetary policy should not react.
Monetary policy should, then, focus on possible second-round effects of those adjustments, which might contribute to changes in inflation projections and expectations.
All members of the Committee emphasized again that the approval and implementation of reforms, notably those of a fiscal nature, and of adjustments in the Brazilian economy, including those related to credit policy and of quasi-fiscal nature, are fundamental to the sustainability of disinflation, to the full operation of monetary policy and to the reduction of its structural interest rate, with widespread benefits for society.
Finally, the Committee members highlighted the importance of other reforms and investments in infrastructure aimed at increasing productivity, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvement of the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the stabilization and resumption of the economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance of risks, and the wide array of available information, the Copom unanimously decided to reduce the Selic rate by one percentage point, to 10.25 percent per year, without bias.
The Copom emphasizes that the extension of the monetary easing cycle will depend, among other factors, on estimates of the structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that the recent increase in the uncertainty regarding the evolution of reforms and adjustments in the economy hampers a more timely reduction of estimates of the structural interest rate, and makes them more uncertain.
The Committee will continue to reassess these estimates over time.
Naturally, the pace of monetary easing will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The other factors, on estimates of the structural cycle, and on inflation forecasts and interest rate of the Brazilian economy.
Committee judges that the recent increase in the uncertainty regarding the evolution of reforms The Committee members once again and adjustments in the economy hampers a emphasized that the environment with anchored more timely reduction of estimates of the inflation expectations would allow the Copom to structural interest rate, and makes them more focus on preventing second-round effects of uncertain.
The Committee will continue to relative price adjustments that may occur over reassess these estimates over time.
These efforts are fundamental for the stabilization and resumption of the economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
