The set of indicators released recently suggests weaker-than-expected economic activity, including in the last quarter of 2016, and that the economic recovery should be delayed even further, and be more gradual than previously anticipated.
The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indices and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The global outlook remains quite uncertain.
Nevertheless, the end of the benign environment for emerging economies has had a limited impact so far.
Returning to the domestic economy, recent inflation figures came in more favorably than expected, with signs of more widespread disinflation.
There is evidence that the more widespread disinflation process has reached IPCA components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
The market scenario considers the paths for the policy rate and the exchange rate extracted from the Focus survey.
The incorporation of the latest data on economic activity into the Copoms information set contributed significantly to the decline in conditional inflation forecasts.
However, the process of disinflation of some IPCA components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy requires continuous attention.
The continuous softening of the labor market and the significant deceleration of economic activity tend to produce disinflation that can be more intense than the one reflected in inflation expectations measured by the Focus survey and in the conditional projections produced by the Copom.
The more favorable inflation dynamics in the recent period show signs of more widespread disinflation.
Weaker-than-expected economic activity and the prospect of a further delayed and more gradual recovery tend to reinforce this process.
The steps toward approval of fiscal reforms have been positive so far, which suggests greater timeliness and higher probability of approval.
On the other hand, the process is lengthy and carries uncertainty.
Nevertheless, the end of the benign scenario environment for emerging economies has had a limited impact so far.
Short-run inflation behavior has been more favorable, which may signal lower inflation Returning to the domestic economy, recent persistence.
However, the process of disinflation of year.
Inflation expectations collected by the Focus the conditional projections produced by the Copom.
Weaker-than-expected economic activity and the prospect of a further delayed and more gradual The path of regulated prices, which enters the recovery tend to reinforce this process.
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Federal Open Market Committee.
The Committee members discussed the evolution of economic activity, in light of the most recent releases.
They all agreed that the evidence points to weaker-than-expected economic activity in the last months.
In face of challenges for the resumption of economic activity, this contributed to consolidate the assessment that the recovery of the economy may be further delayed, and be more gradual than previously anticipated.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members pointed out the uncertainties associated with possible changes in economic policy in the United States and also with the end of the benign period that prevailed during most of last year, considering that the process of normalization of monetary conditions in that country resumed.
These uncertainties have fueled an increase in long-term interest rates in major developed economies, with impact on emerging economies financing costs.
Nevertheless, the effects on asset prices of the end of the benign environment for emerging economies have been limited so far in particular for commodity-exporting countries, which have been experiencing improvements in their terms of trade.
This context reinforces the assessment of Committee members, that there is no mechanical relationship between the global outlook and monetary policy.
Inflation evolved favorably in the recent period, coming below expectations.
These factors contribute to greater confidence in the projections that the disinflation process towards the target will continue.
The economy has been operating at a weaker pace relative to what was expected a few months ago, and recent releases continued to point to weaker-than-expected economic activity at the margin, even after the latest revisions for the end of The steps in the process of consideration of additional fiscal reforms and other necessary adjustments in the economy remain positive.
In favor of this option weighted the benefit of accumulating more evidence of the consolidation of Copom's baseline scenario.
Another benefit would be a greater smoothing of the trajectory of the monetary policy instrument, which increases its predictability in the long run.
The conditional nature of Copoms communication on the conduct of monetary policy allows economic agents to update their expectations based on such evidence.
The Committee members once again emphasized that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would enable the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of relative price adjustments that may occur over time.
This strategy The Committee members discussed the contributes to the stabilization process and evolution of economic activity, in light of the most subsequent resumption of economic activity, recent releases.
Another benefit would be a period that prevailed during most of last year, greater smoothing of the trajectory of the monetary considering that the process of normalization of policy instrument, which increases its predictability monetary conditions in that country resumed.
These in the long run.
In the Committee's favorably in the recent period, coming below assessment, the evolution of the outlook for expectations.
All Committee members reiterated that the Copom members also agreed that, with approval of the constitutional amendment that anchored inflation expectations and inflation limits the real expansion of public expenses is an Finally, the Committee members highlighted the importance of other reforms and investments in infrastructure aimed at increasing productivity, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvement of the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the stabilization and resumption of the economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
They also emphasized the importance of other fiscal reforms for the continuation of the ongoing disinflationary process and for the prospects of maintaining inflation around target, with benefits for society.
The extension of the cycle and possible revisions of the pace of easing will continue to depend on inflation forecasts and expectations, and on the evolution of the aforementioned risk factors.
