This reversal reflected the supply increase due to the harvest period.
Among other pressures, electricity prices, pasteurized milk, clothes and bottled cooking gas were the main contributors for the IPCA change.
In contrast, among items with price decreases, the most important ones were meat, gasoline, fuel alcohol and rice.
Concerning regulated prices, the most significant contribution came from the rise of electricity prices in six state capitals and urban buses fares in Curitiba and Porto Alegre, besides the increase of bottled cooking gas prices.
These increases prevailed over the negative variations in the prices of fuel alcohol and gasoline, though in lower magnitude than the contribution registered in March.
Increasing commodity prices were the main cause of pressure on industrial wholesale prices.
Fuel, sugar, medicine and agricultural machinery presented the highest price changes.
All measures of IPCA core inflation declined in April.
In May, consumer inflation should still be affected by medicine, health insurance and clothes prices, as well as by the adjustment in electricity prices in various state capitals and the recovery of fuel alcohol prices.
Moreover, an unexpected turnaround in the downward trend of food prices has been noticed in the first weeks of the month, as shown in the partial IPC-S and IPC-Fipe results.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This figure is endogenously determined, taking into account seasonal components, the exchange rate, market prices inflation and the IGP-DI change; e.
However, general price indices have recorded higher rates.
Industrial wholesale inflation has continued to increase, though the pass-through to consumer inflation has remained lower than usual.
Core consumer inflation in April also declined compared to March.
Certainly, the Aprils IPCA result does not imply that inflation is accommodating at a lower level.
Still, it is an evidence of the seasonal relief that had already been incorporated to the Copoms forecasting exercises.
The IPCA behavior has been consistent with the Copoms assessment and projections, under a hypothesis of low inflation persistence in the first quarter of the year.
Economic activity has sustained the recovery trend since the second half of 2003, as confirmed by several indicators.
According to the industrial survey, all regions showed a positive performance, except Rio de Janeiro.
The improvement in activity can also be depicted from the Fecomercio-SP consumer sentiment survey.
Consumer confidence improved in May to a level similar to January and February the highest since the survey began, in March Labor market indicators, which usually react with a lag in recovery cycles, have also improved.
In the first four months of 2004, 535 thousand jobs were created, the best performance since For comparison, during last year 645 thousand jobs were created.
It is important to notice that the activity rebound continued during the first quarter of 2004, despite the widespread apprehension that the Copoms decision to keep unchanged the Over-Selic rate in January and February could have halted the process.
Such concerns were probably enhanced by the negative industrial output figures for January and February.
However, variables directly linked to demand, such as retail and industrial sales, together with industrial output for March, confirmed that the recovery process had not lost momentum.
Several indicators released since then have indicated that the expectational effects of the Copom decision in January and February, as anticipated by the Committee, were successful in influencing the inflation dynamics in the shortrun, without damaging the cyclical rebound that was already spread out.
Brazilian external accounts have continued posting expressive positive results.
First quarter data indicate that exports growth is mainly a result of higher quantities.
Although some reallocation of investment portfolios had already been anticipated, the move was more abrupt than expected.
The short-term instability impacted several currencies, as well as emerging markets risk premiums.
However, this greater instability does not characterize a crisis, due to both its temporary nature and the sound fundaments of the Brazilian economy.
Brazil is in a much better situation to react to external events than it was in the past, given the substantial fiscal and external adjustments it has achieved.
The Brazilian government has been giving solid proof of fiscal responsibility, as noted in the recent decision about the minimum wage readjustment.
Moreover, economic activity indicators, including the ones referring to the labor market, have been providing unquestionable evidence of the Brazilian sustained economic recovery, diminishing concerns that have fuelled volatility in the last weeks.
If this trend results from higher demand perspectives, and not from exogenous supply constraints, it will find natural limits in its own effects over the world economic growth.
Given the recent record levels, the most likely scenario for the next months is some accommodation in prices.
The Copom has been explicitly including in its projections an increase in domestic gasoline prices.
If oil prices remain high in the medium-term, characterizing a supply shock of a more permanent fashion, it will be necessary to revaluate this projection and its likely primary and secondary inflationary impacts.
In addition to the increase in oil prices and to the uncertainty related to the US monetary stance, there has been a certain concern regarding the possibility of a slowdown in China, a country responsible for a significant share of Brazilian exports growth.
There are also indirect effects, due to the reduction of Brazilian exports prices.
Thus, there are reasons to believe that the Brazilian exports performance wont be strongly affected by a possible reduction in the pace of the Chinese economic growth.
Market inflation expectations increased, reflecting an environment of greater uncertainty.
However, the increase was small and expectations remained properly anchored.
As in previous meetings, the Copom examined chiefly the inflation outlook under the hypothesis of a low degree of persistence of the first quarter inflation.
This hypothesis is based on a seasonal relief in market prices inflation in the second and third quarters, as observed in previous years.
For 2005, the market scenario projects higher inflation than the benchmark one, because the former supposes a declining interest rate path and a slightly depreciated exchange rate.
The significant adjustment of the current account, the reduction of the FX-linked debt, the adjustment of the consolidated public sector accounts, the combination of floating exchange rate with inflation targeting, the economic activity rebound in the last quarters and the credibility gains in macroeconomic management help to absorb the consequences of the external shock.
Even in less favorable scenarios than the most likely ones analyzed by the Copom, it is possible to be optimistic about economic growth with price stability prospects in the medium-term.
In an inflation targeting regime, the Central Bank policy-making is based on the assessment of different scenarios for the most important variables affecting inflation dynamics.
The uncertainties about the external scenario have been responsible for a short-term volatility that increased the uncertainty about future inflation behavior.
As a consequence, both the assessment of alternative scenarios by the monetary authority and the coordination of private agent's expectations become more difficult.
In this environment, the volatility triggered by risk factors that should not prevail in the medium-term, when the external scenario will be cleared, could affect inflation expectations for a longer period.
Three members of the Copom considered relatively low the risk of a contagion of inflation expectations by the short-term volatility and voted for a decrease of 25 basis points in the OverSelic rate.
However, six members considered that this risk could increase substantially if the monetary policy did not take into account the even remote possibility that some changes in the external scenario might be permanent.
Therefore, these six members understood that the most adequate decision would be to keep the Over-Selic rate unchanged.
The production and sales data for March 2004 should be carefully analyzed, as the carnival holiday in 2004 was in February.
This effect has different impacts among the sectors and can distort the monthly and annual comparisons of production and sales.
Such distortions are not completely eliminated by usual seasonally adjusted methods.
This result was better than the ones released by regional Trade Federations.
However, it is important to notice that the methodology and the geographic coverage of these surveys are rather distinct.
The Fecomercio-SP survey pointed to a recovery of consumer confidence in May, after three consecutive monthly falls.
This result reflected, mostly, the improvement in expectations of consumers with earnings up to ten minimum wages, while consumers with higher earnings were more cautious in assessing the current and future economic scenario.
This increase was widespread, encompassing eighteen out of the twentythree activities, and three out of the four use categories.
Considering the quarterly moving average, output remained unchanged from February to March, after a decline at the beginning of the year.
According to the FGV survey, business sentiment improved in regard to both demand and employment, considering a 3-month horizon.
In the first four months of the year, 535 thousand jobs were created, the highest number ever registered for this period of the year.
The result was due to declines of 0.5 p.p. and 0.7 p.p.
Non-performing credit to companies increased 0.1 p.p. in April.
In Germany, GDP growth presented the highest figure since the first quarter of 2001, boosted by exports.
In the U.S., labor market data showed new jobs creation, reduction of the unemployment rate and fall of unemployment claims.
Other economic indicators point to the sustainability of GDP growth, such as the expansion of industrial orders, industrial production, installed capacity and productivity.
In the U.S., business sentiment in the services sector improved in April, while those from the industrial sector remained stable.
In Europe, business sentiment also improved.
In Japan, the Shoko Chukin index, for small and medium corporations, remained above the optimistic level, in spite of having slowed down in April.
Consumer sentiment improved in the US and Japan, and remained stable in Europe.
The Bank of England raised the repo rate by 25 basis points on May In the US, inflationary pressures were moderate in April, in spite of the vigorous economic growth.
In China, consumer inflation rose again in April, increasing the concern of monetary authorities with respect to the inflation effects of the significant economic growth.
Global markets suffered with high volatility in the past weeks, anticipating the effects of the expected increase in the US interest rates and the measures adopted by the Chinese government to decelerate economic growth.
US Treasuries yields increased, a trend followed by the Treasuries of Japan and Europe.
Emerging markets bonds fell, with generalized increases in country risk indicators, currency depreciations against the US dollar and sharp falls in stock exchanges indices.
In the FX market, the US dollar appreciated against other hard currencies, in spite of high US fiscal and trade deficits.
Apart from oil, commodity prices fell after peaking in March, even though current levels are still well above the historical averages.
Oil prices, on the contrary, increased in the past weeks, mainly as a result of political tensions in the Middle East, of heated world demand, and of the fact that refineries are operating close to capacity in a period of high seasonal consumption of gasoline in the US.
The market perception of a tighter U.S. monetary policy triggered a movement of portfolio reallocations, affecting emerging markets' assets and, particularly, Brazils assets.
Domestic interest rates rose significantly in the period, and the futures yield curve reverted the downward slope that had been observed since April From April 14 to May 19, the 3-month, 1-year and 2-year rates increased to 0.09 p.p. from 0.46 p.p., to 2.23 p.p. from 0.68 p.p., and to 3.67 p.p. from 0.17 p.p., respectively.
The BCB did not carry out auctions to rollover securities and Fx swaps maturing in the period.
No bidding was accepted on the auction of May 4, and the auctions scheduled for the coming two weeks were canceled, given market volatility.
The BCB maintained in its open market operations the weekly post-fixed repo operations, with tenure of two weeks, the fixed operations, with tenure of three months, as well as the 2-workingday liquidity management operations.
The BCB also carried out in this period 7 fixed rate repos falling due between 1 and 2 working days.
