The more important individual contributions for the IPCA rise in December came from tobacco, clothing, rice and meat, and the readjustment of regulated prices such as urban bus tariffs, which altogether accounted for 0.23 p.p. of the total change of the index.
Conversely, price falls of chicken, milk, beans and bottled gas contributed with -0.07 p.p. for the IPCA monthly variation.
In the first group, the main pressures came from clothing, tobacco, meat and rice.
The surge in the core inflation measures reveals that the price increases in the last two months were not only due to seasonal factors, but affected most of the items included in the consumption basket.
In January, both wholesale and consumer inflation are expected to accelerate further.
At the wholesale level, more intense seasonal pressures are expected from food prices.
A recent survey unveiled that industries plan to accelerate price readjustments in the first quarter of Consumer inflation should also reflect the effects of seasonal price increases in food and the seasonal pressure in education prices.
Amongst regulated prices, the impact of the readjustment of electricity tariffs in Rio de Janeiro should stand out.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This projection assumes that the judicial decisions limiting tariffs readjustment in 2003 will not be reverted; c.
Preliminary results for January do not anticipate any change in this pattern in the very short run.
Core inflation measures also increased in December, showing that Decembers figures cannot be attributed to the behavior of specific items.
Albeit in lower intensity, core IPCA and core IPC-Br calculated under the trimmedmean method also increased in December.
It is certain that seasonal and extraordinary factors contributed to the December results.
If this hypothesis is true, inflation will return to the target path in the medium term, similar to what happened last September.
The Copom maintains the recovery scenario outlined in the last meetings.
Only the segments of semi and non-durable consumer goods have not showed significant growth rates, as they depend more strongly on real earnings.
Industrial output is likely to continue to expand as signaled by leading indicators such as electricity consumption, steel output and the flow of heavy vehicles in the highways.
This increase in investment is essential for a sustainable growth path, with no imbalances between supply and demand.
Retail sales growth in November surpassed industrial production growth for the first time since the beginning of the upturn.
If the quarterly moving average is taken, the result in November was the sixth increase in a row.
The growth was sharper in the sectors more dependent on credit, such as automobiles, furniture and appliances.
The Copom restates that a stronger contribution of monetary policy to the recovery of less credit sensitive sectors in industry and retail should stem from its indirect impact, through higher employment and real earnings, both initially concentrated in the more sensitive sectors and gradually spreading over the whole economy.
It should not be a result of additional monetary stimulus that could produce, in the short term, larger gaps between the recovery pace in the different activities and generate inflationary pressure in the leading ones.
As in previous months, the performance of the external sector has been extremely favorable.
Significant trade surpluses, an open international market for Brazilian companies and a more favorable scenario for the external accounts allowed the real to appreciate between the last Copom meetings.
Even though consistent with seasonal patterns, the recent inflation acceleration made market participants revise upwards their first quarter inflation expectations, a revision led by the most accurate market analysts in the short-term inflation forecasts.
The other Committee members decided to keep the Over-Selic rate unchanged and to continue monetary easing only when there are more consistent signals that the risk of inflation deviating from its targets is low enough.
Several considerations supported this decision.
Differently from what was seen last September, in the current inflation acceleration episode, even one-off factors may trigger inflationary pressures for a longer period, as the impacts associated to increases in fresh food prices, education prices and electricity tariffs are higher than initially expected.
If one-off inflation pressures are higher and longer than originally expected, the maneuver room for bringing inflation back to the target will be reduced in the first months of the year.
Also differently from September, despite the fact that inflation pressures in December and in the first months of 2004 are partially seasonal and non-recurrent, they will hit the economy in a period of stronger demand.
Therefore, there is more room for realignments in relative prices to develop into pressures on inflation.
Even though there is no sufficient information to a precise diagnosis about the factors that caused the surge in inflation in December and the increase in inflation expectations in the JanuaryFebruary period, some signals suggest that this trend may persist.
Firstly, as already outlined, core inflation and partial inflation figures for January do not anticipate an inflation slowdown.
The increase in wholesale prices was triggered by several factors, including increases in world commodity prices; higher demand for intermediate goods; and the change in relative prices that has benefited sectors more directly favored by the growth in demand, thus enabling increases in profit margins.
Historical data show an important statistical correlation between those intentions and industrial wholesale prices.
The recent appreciation of the real against the dollar is, undoubtedly, an important factor to be considered.
However, the Copom believes that in the current environment the effects of this exchange rate appreciation over inflation will not be so intense as it was when the exchange rate floating was the main determinant of changes in tradable goods prices in reais.
The US dollar depreciation in relation to other relevant currency, such as the euro and the Japanese yen, has to be accounted.
Also, the world economy growth and the US dollar depreciation pushed commodity prices up, which may pressure wholesale prices in Brazil, as has been occurring.
Stable inflation expectations for 2004 suggests that the market not only considers the first quarter inflation increase as temporary, but also believes that this increase will be compensated by reductions in the following quarters.
If no exogenous factors trigger those reductions, it is assumed that monetary policy will be responsible for producing the compensatory effect.
Even taking for granted that this acceleration is really temporary, the increase in inflation projections is enough to suggest caution in monetary management.
As already mentioned before, it is not possible to establish accurately the impacts of the 10 p.p. reduction of the Over-Selic rate between June and December 2003 over the output gap and inflation.
Considering that there is a strong possibility that inflation deviates from the targets, monetary policy should act preemptively.
A more prudent monetary management will not risk the upturn trend in course since the third quarter of Thus, the Copom weighted the risk of following with monetary easing and, in case inflation deviates from the targets, the need to change its policy in the medium term, with larger changes in interest rates and significant impacts over economic activity, against the risk, considered very low, of disrupting the recovery process due to the interruption of the monetary easing.
Balancing the risks, the Copom understood to be more adequate to interrupt temporarily the monetary easing.
This is the only way to retain the disinflation gains obtained during 2003, not endorsing price increases in the sectors that benefited from the rebound in demand to contaminate overall inflation.
Except for construction materials, there was generalized expansion in sales.
Eight out of the twenty sectors surveyed presented growth, led by mechanical, metallurgical, transportation, electrical and communications materials industries.
Data on manufacturing activity released by the CNI in November confirmed the cyclical recovery.
According to a FGV survey, industrial growth should strengthen in the next few months.
Business confidence remained positive, favoring the increase in output.
However, there are evidences of profit margins increases in industry, with a growing share of companies intending to increase prices in the next three months.
New loans roared in December.
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit fell 2.2 p.p.
The outlook for 2004 suggest an acceleration of the world economic growth without significant inflationary pressures, but with growing risks that the fiscal and external imbalances in the US and fiscal deficits in some European countries could lead to larger protectionist barriers and to an interruption in capital flows to emerging markets.
Business sentiment in the US, Japan and Europe continued improving, despite the possible negative effects of the Parmalats affair in Europe.
Consumer confidence remained weak because of the labor market conditions.
The fixed-income market in the US has not reacted to the upturn of the economy, in part due to the Federal Reserve signaling of a steady interest rate in the near future.
As a consequence, many sovereign issues took place in the beginning of the year.
FDI to emerging markets should also increase in 2004, unless there are changes in the Federal Reserve monetary stance or in expectations regarding advanced economies growth.
Stronger demand worldwide has benefited commodity prices, and oil prices continued to oscillate the OPEC price band.
Both the trade surplus and exports reached the highest levels ever.
This movement was caused by capital inflows and the subsequent exchange rate appreciation, and the fall of the sovereign risk.
As a result, the 3-month, 1-year and 2-year interest rates recorded in the period a decrease of 0.42 p.p., 0.74 p.p. and 1.01 p.p., respectively.
After the disclosure of the IPCA readings for December, the yield curve shifted upwards.
The BCB decided not to rollover the FX debt and swaps maturing in January and in the beginning of February.
The yield curve reduction and strong demand for fixed rate securities contributed to diminish the auction rates.
The National Treasury also carried out for the first time a public offering of NTN-F, a fixed rate 4year security with a 6-month coupon.
The BCB maintained in its open market operations the 3-month fixed and the 2-week indexed repurchase operations, as well as the daily liquidity management operations.
The BCB also carried out in this period 9 fixed rate repos falling due between 1 and 4 working days.
