This behavior resulted from the reduction of agricultural prices and from the increase of industrial prices.
For fabrics, clothing and shoes, the monthly change remained stable, albeit in a high level for the third consecutive month, still reflecting the effects of cotton price increase.
Transportation and personal expenses have contributed more intensely to this result.
The effects of the food prices recent slowdown reflecting the beginning of the harvest period and the fall of fresh food prices is likely to moderate the remaining pressures on inflation in February.
Such trend is already noticeable in the partial results already disclosed for February wholesale inflation.
As to industrial prices, it should continue to reflect the costs increases.
Regarding the IPCA, the favorable evolution of food prices should be offset by the price increases in education, health insurance plans and telephone tariffs.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This model takes into account seasonal factors, the exchange rate behavior, market prices change and the IGP inflation rate; e.
Monetary Policy Decision The inflation rate accelerated from December to January.
After a significant fall in the first half of 2003, industrial production presented strong growth in the second half of the year.
An excessive monetary easing with the objective of pushing these specific sectors forward would intensify, in the short run, the recovery gaps amongst sectors, and would allow for inflationary pressures to arise from leading sectors.
Volatility around the underlying output trend is normal in periods of economic recovery.
This volatility does not indicate that the economic rebound process is losing steam, especially because the monetary easing that took place in the second half of 2003 has not yet fully materialized.
Industrial sales growth surpassed industrial production growth for the third consecutive month.
In the second half of 2003, industrial sales increased 2.5 p.p.
This gap augmented in the fourth quarter, when industrial sales increased 4.3 p.p.
The different growth rates suggest a higher expansionary stimulus for industrial output in the shortterm, coming from the inventories build-up dynamics, as well as from improved consumer confidence, real earnings growth and credit expansion.
The most likely scenario is a continuous recovery in consumption as a consequence of improved consumer sentiment, higher real payrolls and lower consumer default rates.
As in previous months, the external sector continued to post a positive performance.
There was an increase in the sovereign risk perception due to market concern about an earlier-than-expected rise in US interest rates and its impact in emerging markets liquidity.
First quarter market inflation expectations have been increasing since December.
The inflation in January was higher than market consensus and preliminary data suggest that February inflation will also be higher than the previous forecast.
The forecast for 2005 remained unaltered.
In this exercise, the projected inflation for 2004 is slightly above the target even in the benchmark scenario, although the projection for 2005 remains below the target.
The same procedure considering the market scenario shows an increased difference between the projected inflation rate and the targets for 2004 and Considering the post-Real Plan period, the January inflation was the highest in the first quarter in 7 out of 9 years.
It is justified to expect that this seasonal behavior persists and that the February inflation shows some reversion in relation to January.
Preliminary evidence of an inflation deceleration can be found in the partial results of the IPC-Fipe and the weekly IPC-S. For the IPCS, however, inflation persists at a high level; for the IPC-Fipe, the reduction was more intense, and yet, due to the reasons described in paragraph 2 above, this pattern may not be the same for the IPCA.
Second, inflation measured by the Industrial IPA remained high and accelerated, influenced by an increase in some commodities prices, by a higher demand for inputs and by the relative price realignment, favoring the sectors that benefited from stronger demand.
Although a higher wholesale inflation will not necessarily be transmitted to consumers with the same intensity, a higher passthrough would happen as a consequence of the perception of a lenient monetary policy and of an over-optimistic scenario produced by the recovery of certain sectors.
Consequently, and considering the uncertainties about the magnitude and the lags on the output gap and on inflation of the 10 p.p. reduction in the Over-Selic rate that took place from June to December, the Copom maintains the January minutes diagnosis, that there is a real likelihood that inflation deviates from the target, requiring an extra concern in monetary policymaking.
The balance between the risks of inflation deviating from the target and the interruption in the economy recovery process has not changed significantly since January.
Resuming monetary easing prematurely can significantly increase the risk that actual inflation deviates from the target, which could force a change in monetary stance in the medium run, with strong interest rates movements and a significant effect on economic activity.
On the other hand, an unchanged OverSelic rate causes a substantial lower risk of damaging the process of economy recovery.
However, the result of 126.7, in a scale ranging from 0 to 200, reflects an overall positive sentiment, mainly regarding future consumption intentions.
Regarding investment data, for the second consecutive month, capital goods output decreased in December, compared to the previous month.
Out of the twenty surveyed segments, fifteen decreased, as well as in three out of four use categories.
The 62.4 result, in a scale ranging from 0 to 100, reflected greater optimism of businessmen in relation to both current conditions and next six months expectations.
This fall was mainly a result of a greater reduction in the number of unemployed workers relatively to the fall of economic population.
This modest increase reflected low corporate financing needs, due to seasonal factors.
Regarding credit to companies, there was a 0.1 p.p. decrease.
In the second half of 2003, private investment replaced government expenditures as the component with the highest growth.
Business sentiment in the US, Japan and Europe continued to improve.
However, in general, consumer confidence remained weak due to the labor market conditions in the respective countries.
In the absence of inflationary pressures, the basic interest rates remained steady in the central economies, except for the United Kingdom, where there was an increase of 25 b.p of the Bank of Englands repo rate.
The U.S. fixed income market has not reacted to the signs of economic recovery in the country.
However, the change in the Federal Reserves statement caused negative reactions in the sovereign bonds market, in the FX market and in the stock market.
In the FX markets, there is a near consensus about the continuity of the dollar depreciation due to the increasing U.S. current account deficit.
The dollar depreciation together with strong Chinese demand is affecting commodities prices, which reached record levels in January.
The three categories basic, semimanufactured and manufactured registered record exports.
Between January 21st and February 17th, the 3-month, 6-month and 1-year interest rates increased 0.27 p.p., 0.20 p.p. and 0.08 p.p., respectively, while the 2-year rate decreased 0.13 p.p.
As in the previous month, the BCB decided not to rollover the FX debt and swaps maturing on February 11th.
The BCB maintained in its open market operations the 3-month fixed and the 2-week indexed repurchase operations, as well as the daily liquidity management operations.
The BCB also carried out in the period 11 fixed rate repos with 1-working day tenure.
