Among market prices, food is expected to continue affecting inflation, especially meat and dairy products, still pressured by the inter-harvest period.
Moreover, due to seasonal reasons, school vacation time is expected to raise entertainment prices.
Regarding wholesale inflation, pressures over the prices of animals and by-products, fuels and fertilizers are expected to continue.
These pressures should be partially offset by the deceleration of other industrial prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This revision follows the Supreme Judicial Court decision to reinstate the IGP-DI index instead of the IPCA index for purposes of the annual adjustment in 2003, overturning a lower court ruling; c.
IPCA trimmed-mean core measures have stood relatively stable in the past few months, albeit at figures incompatible with the medium-term inflation targets.
Economic activity has continued to present a vigorous growth rate, outstripping every month the growth rate projected at the end of Several leading and coincident indicators anticipate continuous growth for the near future.
Retail sales have also kept its growth trend initiated in the second half of Similarly to the industrial output, sales have also overcome historical records.
Sales expansion comprises almost all retail sectors, not only the ones more credit-sensitive but also the ones that respond to the evolution of real earnings.
The economic activity rebound has caused an increase in the manufacturing industry level of capacity utilization, which reached record highs for the recent years.
The marginal production growth deserves special attention, considering that it has been increasing continuously for the last months, suggesting a faster occupation of the existing idle capacity.
Conversely, capital goods sector has presented the highest growth rates amongst the industrial sectors.
In such an environment, which combines fast demand growth with the recovery of fixed capital investment, the estimate of the output gap, crucial to evaluate inflationary pressures, becomes more uncertain.
As stressed in the June Inflation _Report, there is strong evidence that the_ capacity utilization is heterogeneously distributed among the different productive sectors, making it important to maintain a favorable environment for fixed capital investment, mainly on those sectors with lower idle capacity, thus enabling output to increase without causing inflationary pressures.
Although external demand has played a paramount role to the initial cyclical rebound, domestic demand has been increasingly important.
This is not unexpected, considering the relatively small share of the external sector on the Brazilian GDP.
Those reasons include the unemployment rate seasonal behavior, the labor force increase and the higher expansion of employment out of the largest urban areas.
The Brazilian external sector has continued to post sizeable results.
Both marginal exports and imports have grown significantly.
The pressures on the exchange rate and the country risk have subdued.
Even considering a more favorable outlook in the last few weeks due to a less uncertain monetary policy in the U.S., the scenario is not completely consolidated, indicating that new episodes of volatility might occur in the future.
The Committee also assessed a third hybrid scenario, considering the market exchange rate expectations and an unchanged Over-Selic rate, coming to an inflation projection that stands between the inflation outcomes estimated on the two usual scenarios.
On the one hand, this uncertainty has diminished in the last weeks.
Those factors include the increase of the private-sector inflation expectations, the upward review of fixed telephone tariffs and the acceleration of the economic activity pace.
Regarding economic activity, although fixed capital investment has been recovering, the level of capacity utilization has also increased, reaching historical highs.
The fast increase in aggregate demand and in fixed capital investment have generated higher uncertainty about the capacity to expand the supply of goods and services without triggering inflationary pressures.
Even considering that monetary policy must be oriented to accommodate the primary effects of supply shocks as those recently observed, it is important to avoid the secondary effects of inflation increases, containing the upward revision of inflation expectations.
In addition, it is also essential to carefully evaluate the current and future supply and demand conditions of the economy.
The Committees members believe that the maintenance of the current Over-Selic rate for a long period should consolidate a favorable inflation scenario, with the convergence of market inflation expectations and the actual inflation rate to the inflation targets.
However, the monetary authority restates that a more active policy stance will be adopted if the projected inflation deviates from the targets, due to an eventual deterioration of the factors that were responsible for the recent increase in inflation projections for 2004 and Even with a deteriorated inflationary environment, and the respective change in the required monetary policy stance, there are no reasons to review economic growth expectations.
Indeed, by fighting the second-order effects of the shocks recently observed, the monetary policy is aimed at preserving the medium-term sustainable growth, promoting the balance between the aggregate demand expansion and the broadening of the productive capacity of the economy.
All groups encompassing the retail sector showed year-on-year growth in May, with highlights to furniture and electrical appliances.
The Fecomercio-SP consumer sentiment survey showed that confidence improved in July, after falling in June.
Out of the 23 activities surveyed, 18 increased output, and all categories of use expanded.
The recovery of semi and non-durable goods production, albeit less intense, have increased in tandem with the gradual improvement of domestic demand.
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit decreased 0.2 p.p.
The result was due to a decline of 0.3 p.p.
External Environment World economic growth continued to gain momentum at the end of the first half of In Japan, the economy has firmly recovered, mainly boosted by the vigorous regional trade, with improvements in the corporate sector transmitted to consumers.
Economic recovery in Europe is still slow, while in the U.S. the economy has expanded at a moderate pace, reinforcing expectations of a gradual monetary policy adjustment.
Consumers and producers inflation showed declines in June in the main industrialized economies.
The manufacturing activity registered its first monthly decline in thirteen months.
Further to the U.S. economy, labor market registered an increase of 112 thousand jobs in June, against the average of 300 thousand in the previous three months.
However, the number of new unemployment claims has stood below 350 thousand since March, which is historically consistent with the creation of around 200 thousand new jobs.
Regarding business confidence, the services BAI index in the U.S. declined in June.
In Japan, the Tankan indicator increased for the fifth consecutive month, registering a record high since In Europe, business confidence remained flat, although consumer confidence increased.
The US consumer confidence increased in June to 101.9, after remaining nearly unchanged at 93.1 in the previous month.
In Japan, consumer confidence also rose significantly.
After the FOMCs decision to increase the fed funds rate in 25 b.p. at the end of June, the markets reacted positively, with some volatility in the stock market due to the release of corporate balances.
The main commodity prices registered some accommodation in the international market, but still remaining above historical averages.
Oil prices have maintained an upward trend, influenced by new attacks to Iraq oil pipelines and by the problems faced by the Russian oil company Yukos.
The monetary and credit measures adopted by the Chinese government have been limiting investment in the most dynamic sectors, aiming at controlling inflationary pressures.
From June 16 to July 21, the spread on the 6-month rate in relation to the Over-Selic rate decreased to 0.78 p.p.
In the period between the last Copom meetings, the BCB carried out an auction to rollover Fx swaps.
The BCB also carried out in this period 16 fixed rate repos falling due between 1 and 2 working days.
