Conversely, important products in the consumer basket registered new price falls in August, including rice, black beans and soy oil.
Among market prices, there were pressures coming from non-tradables, which contributed with 0.30 p.p. for the IPCA change, more noticeably from fresh food and maids and housekeeping cleaners.
Tradable prices contributed with 0.12 p.p., mainly due to increases in the prices of sugar and new and second-hand cars.
Regarding regulated prices, in addition to the price increases of gasoline and alcohol-fuel, there were residual effects of the increases in electricity, fixed telephone prices, and urban buses fares that had already pressured the IPCA in July.
The IPA-DI acceleration in August reflected the rise of both agricultural and industrial prices.
Therefore, there is a significant potential of lagged impacts on consumer prices in the next few months, due to the pass-through of the wholesale industrial inflation.
In September, consumer-prices inflation should decline, mainly due to lower pressures from regulated prices and from fresh food prices.
However, uncertainties stemming from the gap between wholesale and consumer industrial inflation persist.
Likewise, the scenario for international oil prices remains uncertain, constituting a potential risk to domestic inflation.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
Thus market prices inflation remained systematically above the levels consistent with the inflation targets set for this year and for Since May, the accumulated change in 12 months of tradable, non-tradable and regulated prices in the IPCA has been showing an upward trend.
Similarly to what happened in the past, the recent acceleration in industrial wholesale prices shall impact consumer inflation over the next few months.
The intensity of this pass-through will depend on final demand conditions.
The IPCA cores remained relatively stable, but in high levels.
This difference reflects the substantial contribution of regulated prices and food to inflation in the period.
In the year up to August, the core by exclusion is still above the headline inflation.
The industrial production seasonally adjusted series has been growing continuously since February.
Since May, the series has been above the previous record high, and, even at these high levels, presented vigorous increases in June and July.
The labor market continued to respond to the activity rebound.
According to the monthly employment survey of the IBGE, the upward trend in real payroll initiated in January accelerated in June and July.
However, average real earnings grew at a slower pace, reflecting the increase of jobs with relatively lower wages.
Negotiations for wage readjustments in the first half of the year were very favorable to the recovery of labor income.
Even with readjustments equal to past inflation, average real earnings tend to increase if future inflation declines, comparatively to past inflation.
The current perspective is that negotiations in the second half of this year will be highly favorable to the recovery in labor income.
The recovery in real earnings is an important source of sustainability to the expansion of the aggregate demand, and is paramount for the continuation of the economic rebound in a more balanced and disseminated way.
In particular, that latest result reflects a negative performance in the pharmaceutical products sector, which is not attributable to labor income dynamics, as opposed to the positive results of several economic activities strongly dependent on income.
As the industrial production surpasses historical high levels, an important concern to monetary policy is the capacity of the productive sector to accommodate the demand expansion.
According to the FGV, the industry presented relatively low levels of idle capacity in July, and in some sectors, the installed capacity utilization was close to historical peaks.
It is important to notice that, as the idle capacity is reduced, there is a gradual effect over the inflation dynamics, because even when production is beyond the existing limits, the marginal cost increases.
Emergency measures, such as multiple shifts in production, or imports that would not be competitive in normal market conditions, may be able to avoid shortages, but would not mitigate price pressures inherent to a progressively higher level of capacity utilization.
As the initial monetary impulse loses momentum, and the economic recovery process begins to be sustained on its self-propagation mechanisms, it is natural and sound that, at the margin, production and sales growth rates decelerate.
It is even more natural and sound that this deceleration takes place in a situation in which growth rates have been, on average, unusually high, even for initial stages of a cyclical recovery, and the aggregate production level has overcome previous historical highs.
Even though the industry growth rates have declined since May, the latest results still show a rather robust growth rate.
A few recent indicators have been interpreted as evidence that a more pronounced deceleration is progressing in a spontaneous fashion, despite the fact that it is difficult to identify turning points in volatile series, such as the ones regarding the level of economic activity.
The exchange rate appreciation contributed to this result, as nominal exports revenues in Brazilian _Reais decreased.
Inversely, other important coincident indicators still grew in August, as in the case of vehicles and steel production.
In spite of being plausible that some spontaneous accommodation is in fact in course or on the way, there is no data confirming beforehand an accommodation trend intense enough to rule out any concern about a potential gap between supply and demand, as well as about its effects over the inflation dynamics, given the current level of production.
Recent data suggests that fixed capital investment is recovering in an encouraging way.
The historical series of gross fixed capital formation shows, naturally, high degree of correlation with installed capacity utilization and, with some lags, with the sovereign risk.
The performance of these leading indicators confirms that there is room for expansion in fixed capital investment in the next months.
Although investment has been particularly promising since the beginning of the current growth cycle, the pace of output recovery has also been more intense than usual, which gives room to the uncertainties concerning the speed at which the output gap is closing.
Recent data indicate that the growth pace of the U.S. economy has slowed down, while inflation has remained subdued.
As a consequence, a more intense hike in U.S. interest rates has become less likely.
In contrast to the tension in the second quarter of the year, international financial markets have remained calm.
International oil prices, on the other hand, continue to be a source of concern.
Even though the prices have fallen from the historical records of August, oil prices remain high and very much sensitive to any threat to the larger exporters supply capacity.
It is important to emphasize, though, that the existing lag between domestic and international gasoline prices is being temporarily mitigated by a deviation in the international price of gasoline from that of the crude oil.
As mentioned in the August Copoms Minutes, the inflationary risk associated to oil is not only restrained to domestic gasoline prices, but also encompasses other oil intensive products.
Although the deterioration of expectations has been triggered by the exchange rate depreciation of the second quarter and reinforced by the concerns about oil prices, the reversion of this trend will depend not only on the recent exchange rate appreciation and an eventual more favorable scenario for oil prices but also on other developments, such as the domestic demand conditions and the inflation results along the incoming months.
The market scenario projects inflation rates above the ones of the benchmark scenario thus, above the inflation target because it assumes that there will be a slight reduction in the Over-Selic rate in 2005, and some exchange rate depreciation throughout the projection horizon.
Copoms estimates indicate that inflationary inertia would have an impact of 0.9 p.p.
The Copom understands that the flexibility of the inflation-targeting regime allows for the inertia not to be fully fought in a single year, as a way to promote a smoother transition to the inflation targets in the medium run.
In particular, the system of adjusted targets allowed for, besides the anticipated decision to partially accommodate the inertia inherited from the previous year, new adjustments throughout the year by the incorporation of the primary effect of certain shocks.
The increased stability of Brazil allows for the monetary conduct to be guided in 2005 by a predetermined objective for inflation, restricted to the central target set by the CMN plus the partial accommodation of the inflationary inertia.
The establishment of such an objective at this moment is due to the fact that the monetary policy has its effects over economic activity and inflation within some lags, and therefore, requires adjustment with the due anticipation to obtain the desired effects.
The fact that the monetary policy will have as an objective an inflation rate that is above the central target even before the beginning of the year suggests that the new shocks that may affect the inflation dynamics should be treated asymmetrically.
The Copom members agreed that, if the current monetary stance were maintained unchanged, the strong economic expansion would not spontaneously accommodate to a pace consistent with the convergence of inflation to its path.
The inflation projections by the Committee confirm the increasing risk that inflation could deviate from its targets.
The underlying inflation trend captured by the several core measures is relatively steady at levels that are inconsistent with the targets.
Additional risks to inflation are the deterioration of market inflation expectations, the very indefinite outlook in the global oil market, and the potential pressure of the increase in wholesale industrial inflation, in an environment that favors the re-composition of profit margins, including the ones stemming from wages readjustments that tend to increase average real earnings.
The Copom members consensually concluded that the best stance was to initiate a process of moderate adjustment in the monetary policy instrument.
Due to the existing time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects over the economy, central banks have necessarily to act in a preventive way, before contemporary data attests that inflation is out of control or that there are excessive demand pressures.
In fact, when considering the prospective scenario for the economy throughout a longer period, the monetary stance aims at avoiding that those risks do materialize.
If current data already confirmed an inflation rate out of control or excessive demand pressures, the monetary policy response would have to be different from the one now considered by the Committee.
In this sense, the monetary adjustment main and final objective is to provide conditions for the long run sustainable growth.
Another consensual agreement was the evaluation that the adjustment should come in a gradual way, differently from the shock treatment recommended to crisis episodes faced by Brazil in the past.
Five members of the Copom concluded that a 0.25 percentage point increase in the OverSelic rate would be adequate to initiate the adjustment process, making it as smooth as possible, and minimizing the initial turbulence risks.
The other three members voted for an increase of 0.5 p.p., which, according to their evaluation, would better signal the magnitude of the overall adjustment required to bring inflation back to the targets path, and would better correspond to the optimal speed of implementation of this adjustment process.
The regional distribution of growth was generalized, encompassing all States in the country, except for Roraima.
All groups encompassing the retail sector posted year-on-year growth rates in June, more noticeably in the sector of furniture and electrical appliances, which grew in a much higher pace than the aggregate retail group.
Regarding fixed capital investment, the indicators show deceleration in July, without characterizing, though, change in the expansion trend.
Out of the 23 activities surveyed, 16 registered increases in output, while out of the 4 categories, 2 expanded.
External Environment Recent indicators suggest that world economic growth is building up in the third quarter, after some deceleration in the previous quarter.
In the U.S., wholesale sales, civil construction expenditure and capacity utilization grew month-on-month in July.
In August, industrial output grew and unemployment rate declined, while retail sales fell.
In Germany, industrial output and manufacturing orders increased in July, after decreases in the previous month.
In Japan, industrial capital goods expenditure increased in the second quarter, while in China, despite the growth deceleration measures, industrial output grew again in August.
Regarding foreign trade, there are signs of significant growth.
On the other hand, in the United Kingdom, the deficit in goods and services increased in the same month.
Regarding business expectations, there was generalized slowdown in the main economies in August.
However, in the U.S., expectations are favorable, reflecting the economic momentum.
Consumer prices indicators decreased in the main economies in July, alleviating the risks of inflation acceleration.
Wholesale prices in the U.S. decreased in August, as a consequence of the slowdown in the prices of oil, food and vehicles.
On the other hand, in China, wholesale inflation increased in August.
In the international financial markets, the volatility reduced and assets appreciated.
Regarding the commodity markets, there was slight retraction in the prices of food products, and a new increase in metal prices.
Oil prices have fallen in the last weeks, but the market has remained volatile and lacking a clear trend, still representing a risk to price stability and to the global economic growth.
The determinant factor underlying the yield curve move was the markets interpretation of the August Copoms Minutes.
From August 18 to September 15, the spread on the 3-month, 6-month and 1-year rates in relation to the Over-Selic rate increased by 0.47 p.p., by 0.28 p.p. and by 0.17 p.p., respectively, while the 2-year and the 3year rates decreased by 0.01 p.p. and by 0.17 p.p.
The expectations of increases in the real interest caused the rise in the NTN-C coupons.
The BCB also carried out in this period 15 fixed rate overnight repos, fourteen of which with a one-working-day tenure and one with a three-working-day tenure.
The frequent overnight operations have enabled the reduction of the gap between the Over-Selic rate and its target, from 0.13 p.p.
