The inter-harvest period was responsible for specific pressures on the prices of milk and dairy products.
Potatoes, sugar, black beans, wheat flour and bread also suffered price increases, while soy oil, vegetables, carioca beans and rice prices fell.
The deceleration of market prices inflation was disseminated in both food and non-food prices.
Regarding regulated prices, besides gasoline, alcohol-fuel, electricity and fixed telephone prices, road tolls and urban and interstate buses fares also contributed to the rise.
The IPA-DI deceleration in July reflected lower rises in both agricultural and industrial prices.
This reduction was a consequence of the decrease in prices of cereals and export-oriented crops, as well as lower pressures from the prices of animals and by-products, vegetables, fruit and vegetal oils.
Other segments that registered lower changes in July, compared to June, include mechanical, electrical material, leather, personal care, and tobacco.
In August, consumer-prices inflation should fall, mainly due to lower regulated-prices inflation.
Regarding wholesale inflation, a deceleration is also expected as anticipated by the results of the IGP-10 and the first ten-day period of the IGP-M, notwithstanding the continuity of specific adjustments due to increases in international commodity prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
As to the wholesale inflation, there has been some deceleration since June, both in the agricultural and industrial segments, even though it has remained high.
Although this has been the lowest rate since February 2004, it is incompatible with the medium-term inflation targets.
Economic activity has continued to grow vigorously, as proved by different production, sales and employment indicators.
The CNI data have continued to point out a higher growth pace for industrial sales than for industrial production.
Data from CNI and from the Federation of Industries of So Paulo State Fiesp confirm a continuous expansion in the level of employment and in the real payroll in the manufacturing industry.
As a natural consequence of what has been occurring in the labor market, the recovery process disseminated, reaching not only the credit-sensitive and exports-oriented activities, but also activities dependent on labor market conditions.
Meanwhile, the sectors more sensitive to credit conditions, that have led the economic rebound, have not yet shown any accommodation in the growth pace.
On the other hand, capacity utilization in the intermediate goods industry remained flat in the period, in the range between the average and the historical peak, an interval much narrower than in other sectors.
The consolidation of this trend is crucial for the economy to broaden its growth potential.
At this stage, however, it is particularly difficult to project the output gap, in an environment of a sharp expansion of demand, as has been observed in the last few quarters.
Evidence that the U.S. economy may be growing below what was previously expected, with weaker inflationary pressures, lessened the risk of a faster monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve.
As a consequence, market volatility has diminished in the last few weeks, what contributed to the maintenance of the Brazilian sovereign risk below 600 basis points.
Oil prices are the main concern in the external front.
The recent trend reinforces the fears that oil prices may reach and persist for a longer period of time at higher levels than the ones recently considered as the most likely scenario, even if some reversion in relation to the recent hikes occurs.
This benign scenario has been sustained due to the diagnosis that part of the recent volatility in oil prices is due to speculative factors that may dissipate, even in the presence of some geopolitical risks.
These risks may cause a higher-than-expected increase in gasoline prices in 2004, or a greater lag between domestic and international prices to be corrected in Moreover, regardless of the evolution of domestic gasoline prices, the increase in international oil prices is transmitted to the domestic economy, partly through the intermediate productive chains, such as the petrochemical, and also through the deterioration in inflation expectations of the private sector.
The Copoms inflation projections, both in the benchmark and in the market scenarios, have slightly increased compared to last month.
The Copom also assessed a third hybrid scenario, considering an unchanged Over-Selic rate and the exchange rate path expected by the market.
Compared to the market scenario, inflation projections were identical for 2004 and slightly below for As in previous meetings, the Committee also analyzed the inflation projections for the next 12 months, corresponding to the second half of 2004 and the first half of The projected inflation for this period, both in the benchmark and market scenarios, stood above the interval between the central inflation targets for 2004 and The strong and continuous economic rebound, which already reaches historical highs, requires extra caution in the conduct of monetary policy, aimed at preserving the balance between aggregate supply and demand.
The level of capacity utilization has rapidly increased, approaching historical records in some sectors.
Recent data for capital goods domestic absorption and for civil construction activity indicate that fixed capital investment is recovering.
However, during periods of reversion in the economic activity cycle, in which fast expansion follow the slow and erratic growth pattern of the last few years, it is natural to have a high degree of uncertainty regarding the speed of growth of the productive capacity in sectors whose current levels of capacity utilization are already high, and also regarding the potential growth trend.
In this scenario, with the fast increase in aggregate demand, it is fundamental to carefully assess the risk of an eventual narrowing of the output gap.
In the previous Copoms meetings, the Committees members stressed that the maintenance of the current Over-Selic rate for a long period would consolidate a favorable inflation scenario, with the convergence of the actual inflation rate to the inflation targets.
However, the monetary authority admitted that a more active policy stance could be adopted if inflation projections deviated from the targets, due to an eventual deterioration of the underlying factors that led to the increase in inflation projections.
The first one is the increase in oil prices.
The possibility of a higher and longer rise in oil prices than previously projected, not accompanied by an adjustment of the monetary policy, could produce second-order effects incompatible with the inflation-targeting regime.
The second factor, partially a consequence of the increase in oil prices, is the deterioration of inflation expectations for 2005, which had been steady for some time.
As the scenario is not consolidated yet, the Copom will be cautious to the new developments of these factors.
Even if the inflationary scenario should require an adjustment of the Over-Selic rate in the future, it is important to reiterate that it should not impact the sustainable growth process of the Brazilian economy.
On the contrary, monetary policy contributes to growth by fighting second-order effects of the supply shocks, and by promoting the balance between the expansion of aggregate demand and the broadening of the economys productive capacity.
Moreover, sustaining inflation in a path consistent with the inflation targets is essential to preserve real earnings, fundamental for the continuous and balanced expansion of the domestic demand, and for the dissemination of the economic growth benefits to the population.
The regional distribution of growth was generalized, encompassing all States in the country, except Roraima.
This increase was due to improved future expectations by consumers.
Out of the 23 activities surveyed, 13 registered increases in output, while out of the 4 categories, 3 expanded.
Transportation material and pharmaceutical products are the only two industries that remain below the respective historical average.
The FGV survey and the CNI business sentiment survey pointed out improved confidence in July.
These surveys also perceived a better prospect in terms of domestic demand.
In July, leading indicators anticipate a continued expansion in industrial output.
The default rate measured by the ACSP fell in July to the lowest level of the year.
External Environment Recent indicators suggested some deceleration of the world economy growth, partially attributed to oil prices increases.
In the U.S., the Federal Reserve decided to raise the target for the fed funds rate by 25 b.p., considering that the weaker activity level in June and July was transitory, owing primordially to the rise in energy prices, and that the economy was prepared to resume a stronger pace of expansion in the near future.
The continuous increases in oil prices posed risks to global economic growth and price stability, as well as limited the recovery of asset prices.
The determinant factor justifying the yield curve move was the markets interpretation about the July Copoms minutes, but international markets volatility and some internal political noises also contributed for the move.
From July 21 to August 18, the spread on the 3-month and 6-month rates in relation to the Over-Selic rate increased 0.13 p.p. and 0.38 p.p., respectively, while the 1-year and the 2-year rates increased 0.56 p.p. and 0.47 p.p.
The BCB also carried out in this period 16 fixed rate overnight repos.
The higher frequency of these operations after July 28 enabled the reduction of the gap between the OverSelic rate and its target, from 0.25 p.p.
In July, the net securitized domestic public debt was stable.
