The most important individual contribution to the IPCA variation came from the readjustment of school fees, with a 0.31 p.p. contribution to the overall monthly index.
The fall in the prices of fuel-alcohol is also highlighted, as a consequence of an excessive production.
In the first group, the rise in school fees and in the prices of cars, fresh food items and beans are highlighted.
Concerning regulated prices, the rise in water and sewage tariffs as well as in the prices of bottled gas and health insurance prevailed, fact that was partially offset by the decrease in fuel prices.
Despite the continuous fall in agriculture prices, industrial prices showed sharp increase in the period.
The consumer prices deceleration is expected to continue in March, and the IPCA should show this behavior, following the food items trend and the end of educational items readjustments.
As to the wholesale prices, agriculture prices should maintain their favorable performance, reflecting the price trends of cereals and fresh food items.
Industrial prices should be pressured by inputs readjustments, albeit in a lower intensity than the one observed in February.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This figure results from a model of endogenous determination, which takes into account seasonal components, the exchange rate behavior, market prices inflation and the IGP-DI change; e.
Inflation measured by other consumer price indices, such as IPC-Fipe and IPC-Br, showed a decrease of 0.5 p.p. and 0.8 p.p., respectively, compared to January.
However, general price indices showed mixed evidences, with a decrease in the IGP-M and an increase in the IGP-DI.
The fall of consumer inflation in February can be more clearly seen in the behavior of the core inflation calculated under the trimmed-mean method.
However, as occurred in the non-tradable items group, this increase is due to the school fees behavior.
Economic indicators available so far suggest that there has been a sustained economic growth path at the beginning of the year.
Due to the significant growth in the last quarter of 2003, it is likely that the GDP data in the first quarter of 2004 indicate a cooling down on economic activity.
Semi and non-durable goods output presented growth for the first time since last September, suggesting that growth recorded in the other sectors of economy has been influencing this sector, which had not presented recovery so far, through the marginal increase in employment and real earnings.
Quarterly moving average behavior has presented a continuous industrial output growth, although in lower rates than the ones recorded in the last quarter of For February, considering previous indicators, it is not possible to discard a fall in the industrial production, which is perfectly compatible with the usual patterns of a sustained growth recovery, with short-term oscillations around the trend.
Moreover, in February there were only eighteen working days, as against twenty working days in the same month of 2003, harming the comparison against the same month in In addition, in two out of the five last years, Carnival was in March, which may affect the seasonal adjustment of the series.
Industrial production can benefit from the low inventory levels, compensating the negative short-term scenario.
This fact may give additional stimulus to production, associated to the inventories build-up dynamics.
Considering the behavior of new credit concessions, it is likely that the data on the January-February period show some decrease in the consumption of durable goods, such as automobiles, furniture and domestic appliances.
Following the growth in the real income observed in the last months of 2003, supermarket sales, which concentrate non-durable goods, have presented progressive recovery.
The consolidation of positive data in the economic activity continues to be followed by expressive indicators in the external sector, posting a favorable combination of economic policy results that had not been seen in Brazil for several years.
Regardless of the higher volatility that has been observed in the last two months, the Copom maintains the evaluation that the external scenario is very favorable, presenting perspective of world economic growth and high international liquidity.
After three consecutive months of deterioration, inflation expectations for the first quarter of 2004 dropped, according to a survey conducted by the Investor Relations Group Gerin.
As in previous meetings, the Copom also examined the projections produced according to the same methodology, and according to the same benchmark and market scenarios for the interest and exchange rates paths, taking into account the Top 5 short-term inflation expectations for March and hence, projecting inflation for the following months.
In this exercise, considering the benchmark scenario, the projected inflation for 2004 is slightly above the target, and for 2005, it is bellow the target.
However, the projected inflation for 2004 and 2005 are below the February results for the same exercise, due to the substitution of the lower figure effectively observed for the expected inflation of the Top 5 forecasters for the month of February, to the reduction of expected inflation by those institutions for March and to the reasons mentioned in the paragraph above, regarding the GDP performance in 2003, the reduction in the projection for the regulated prices for 2004 and the downwards improvement of the 12-months-ahead inflation expectations.
According to the same methodology, the projected inflation for the market scenario is above the 2004 and 2005 targets, although lower than the ones projected in February, due to the same reasons mentioned above.
The Copom also evaluated a third set of scenarios, which supposes lower inflation persistence.
These scenarios consider the hypothesis under which part of the high inflation of the first quarter of the year will not impact the following quarters and that there could even be a reversion in the inflation increases that occurred in the period due to momentary unfavorable weather conditions.
This hypothesis becomes more likely the more efficient the monetary policy is in exercising its coordinating role, preventing punctual inflation increases caused by supply shocks, by seasonal factors and by attempts to restore margins from contaminating inflation expectations.
For this hypothesis the Copom considered that part of inflation in the first quarter was due to a seasonal shock and that other shocks of the same fashion will also affect inflation in each quarter of the year and in The magnitude of each quarterly typical shock was estimated to reproduce, in the Copom projection models, the same seasonal standard observed in the recent series of free prices.
As in the exercise described in the previous paragraph, the inflation of the first quarter is the one expected by the short-term Top 5 institutions.
According to this procedure, considering the benchmark scenario exchange and interest rates trajectories, the forecast inflations for 2004 and 2005 are below the targets.
When market expected exchange and interest rates are considered, inflation remains above the target for 2004, although closer to the target value than in the exercise that only encompasses the expectations of the Top 5 institutions for the first quarter, and the inflation for 2005 remains unchanged.
Moreover, it was consensual that the evaluation of this more favorable scenario is a result of the recent monetary policy decisions, which have been mitigating the pass-through from the rises in industrial costs to retail costs and the second order effects of inflationary surprises of January and February.
The conduction of the monetary policy at the beginning of the year was decisive to revert the environment in which the leading sectors in the economic rebound could pressure prices upward, expecting that demand conditions would absorb the increases.
Therefore, the risk of higher inflation diminished while the risk of unsustained economic activity remained low.
It was also consensual the interpretation that the main risk for consumer inflation in the next months consists on the contamination of the increases of wholesale industrial prices to retail prices.
It is important to notice that this element is not incorporated into any of the projected scenarios analyzed above, except for the limited effects on the results of the IPCA for the first quarter, since there is no perceptible signal of transmission through any other channel, such as market expectations for the IPCA during the next quarters.
The experience of the last years suggests that when the industrial IPA pass-through influences the part of IPCA represented by the industrialized products, it is usually fast.
In this sense, the recent results of the deceleration of consumer prices are quite encouraging, despite the acceleration of the wholesale prices.
The usual high speed of this pass-through enables to foresee that the remaining uncertainties about the increase in consumer prices as a result of pressures caused by wholesale prices will soon be solved.
Great part of the increase in wholesale prices in the last months can be explained by supply shocks, among which the different impacts caused by the Cofins ratio and levies throughout the productive chains and the increase in the international price of some commodities and intermediate inputs.
There are still no elements allowing for a satisfactorily accurate measure of the magnitude of the potential impact of these shocks over the consumer prices, although there are preliminary indications, for example, that the effect of the Cofins may be small.
Economic theory and the best monetary policy practice recommend the partial accommodation of increases in consumer prices caused by supply shocks.
The Copom understands that the current circumstances do not recommend the adoption of procedures willing to accommodate the recent supply shocks.
These members recommended greater caution in the conduct of the monetary policy in the short term, proposing that eventual cuts in the target for the Over-Selic rate should be left for a subsequent moment, when there may be additional evidences that the higher inflation rates of January and February might not contaminate the inflation of the following months and when the impact of the recent increases in the wholesale prices over the future dynamics of the consumer prices may not be significant.
This caution would increase the probability of both a steady anchorage of the inflationary expectations and the behavior of the price-makers to consolidate a favorable level of inflation, such as the one considered by the scenarios of low inflation persistence analyzed by the Copom.
However, for most part of the members of the Copom, the immediate fall of the Over-Selic rate in 0.25 p.p can be justified by the recent behavior of the price indices, the lower inflation expectation for both the short-term and the next twelve months and the low intensity of the wholesale passthrough to the retail prices.
These considerations indicate that the maintenance of the Over-Selic rate in January and February was enough to increase the probability of materialization of low inflationary persistence scenarios considered by the Committee, moving away the danger that the inflation increase recorded from December to February could contaminate inflation expectations and provoke a change in the inflationary dynamics.
Therefore, this easing of the monetary policy reflects the necessary caution in the administration of the risks between inflation and the continuity of the restore of the economic activity.
This result reflected the decrease not only in the present but also in the future consumption intentions.
However, the result of 115.8, in a scale ranging from 0 to 200, reflects an overall positive sentiment, although weaker, mainly regarding future consumption intentions.
The increase in the capital goods production spread over all sectors, except for transport equipment.
Out of the twenty segments surveyed, seventeen presented increase, as well as in three out of four categories of use.
Regulated by the Provisional Measure 130, these modalities have been replacing other forms of credit that have higher cost, such as overdraft account and credit card, among others.
Regarding the retail sector, there was a slight seasonal worsening in the default figures in February, compared to the previous month.
The latest indicators signal to the maintenance of the global economy recovery, although in a lower pace and below market expectations.
World economy is still vulnerable to non-economic issues and the events in Madrid reinforce cautionary position when evaluating short-term trends for the economy.
In the U.S., negative indicators, as the broadening of budgetary and trade deficits, prevailed over positive figures, such as the increases in both wholesale sales and consumer credit, in January.
The recovery is still slow in Europe, while Japanese growth rate was revised downward in the last quarter of The Japanese government points the improvement in private consumption as a factor favoring economic expansion this year, together with the significant increase in exports, despite the concerns about the effects of the appreciation of yen on the trade balance.
Labor market remains recovering at a modest pace in the main economies.
Businessmen sentiment worsened in February in the U.S., and was it stable in Japan and Europe.
Consumer confidence declined in the U.S., but it increased in Japan and in the Euro Area.
In the absence of inflationary pressures, the basic interest rates remained steady in the central economies.
In the U.S., the poor performance in the labor market corroborates the evaluation that the fed fund rates should remain stable in the short-run.
In the FX markets, there is a consensus about the continuity of the dollar depreciation due to the increasing U.S. current account deficit.
The dollar depreciation together with the disequilibrium provoked by strong Chinese demand has been affecting commodity prices, which reached high levels in February.
However, other factors have been contributing to prices increase, such as the crisis in Venezuela, the low levels of U.S. stocks of gasoline, and recently, the unpredictable effects of the Madrid events.
In addition to the political scenario, other factors contributed to this movement, such as the 2003 GDP and the January industrial production results, the United States labor market data, inflation indices released showing different behavior between consumer and wholesale prices, and the lower market expectations for the next twelve months IPCA.
However, despite the volatility observed, on March 16 the yield curve had already returned to a level similar to the one observed on February Comparing both dates, the 3-month, 6-month and 1-year interest rates decreased 0.06 p.p., 0.08 p.p. and 0.13 p.p., respectively, while the 2-year interest rate remained stable.
In the two first tranches, securities maturing in January and July 2005 were placed, and in the last two tranches, securities maturing in April 2005 and January 2006 were placed.
The BCB maintained in its open market operations the 3-month fixed and the 2-week indexed repurchase operations, as well as the daily liquidity management operations, with tenor of two working days.
The BCB also carried out 6 fixed rate repos with tenure up to 3 working days.
