Climate adversities and the milk inter-harvest period explain this shift.
Energy and vehicles contributed each with 0.06 p.p., while pasteurized milk and clothes contributed with 0.05 p.p. each.
Market prices accounted for 0.41 p.p. of the monthly IPCA, while regulated prices contributed with the residual 0.10 p.p.
Core inflation measures remained relatively stable in May, compared to April.
Food prices are also expected to continue affecting inflation, especially meat and dairy products, due to the beginning of the inter-harvest period.
As to the wholesale, besides the agricultural price pressures, some deceleration in the industrial price variation is expected, apart from fuel.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
Similar to previous months, the strongest pressure stemmed from market prices.
For the second consecutive month, tradable prices presented a higher increase than non-tradable prices.
An unusual feature was the unfavorable trend in food prices.
Wholesale inflation also increased but, contrary to previous months, the main pressure stemmed from agriculture prices, while industrial prices changes decelerated.
The pass-through of wholesale prices to consumer prices remains below usual.
Wholesale-industrial prices should continue to decelerate due to the recent trend of commodity prices.
Agriculture prices, however, represent an important source of pressure over inflation in the short run, larger than the seasonal pattern at this time of the year.
In May, IPCA core measures remained relatively stable compared to April.
The industrial production levels of March were maintained in April, while growth prospects remained favorable.
Credit operations continued to expand for both individuals and companies, despite the fall of non-earmarked credit concessions in May.
This importance tends to broaden as the recovery of employment and real payroll lead to higher consumption.
In April, employment in the manufacturing sector increased, while real payroll registered a slight decrease, although it kept in an upward trend.
There are three reasons why employment growth has not yet reduced the unemployment rate.
Firstly, this period of the year is usually characterized by a seasonal increase in the unemployment rate, independently on the economic cycle.
Secondly, the recovery process has stimulated workers to search for jobs, even those who had not been searching for occupation for some time.
As a consequence, labor force increases causing the unemployment rate to rise.
Lastly, the unemployment rate is calculated in the largest urban areas, where employment growth has been not as strong as in medium and small urban areas, as well as in the rural areas.
Although tension in the oil market has lessened, there are still uncertainties regarding the expected path of the fed funds rate in the U.S.
Market inflation expectations deserved special attention by the members of the Copom.
In a scenario of temporary shocks affecting the inflation path, it would be more reasonable to observe a sharper deterioration in inflation expectations in shorter horizons, when the first order effects are concentrated and monetary policy effectiveness is limited.
The Committee members share the conviction that the magnitude of the deterioration observed for longer horizons is not compatible with the view that, in the presence of eventual supply shocks of a more permanent nature, the monetary policy will not accommodate its secondary effects.
Such deterioration is also not compatible with the inflation forecasts produced by the different models used by the Copom, even if these projections take into account particularly unfavorable scenarios to the evolution of the main determinants of the recent shocks.
Considering the inflation in April and May, and the non-usual increase of market-prices inflation in May, the Copom assessed with greater emphasis the inflation projections made without the assumption of low persistence.
The current uncertainties concerning the external scenario have been responsible for a short-term volatility that tends to increase inflation uncertainty.
As a consequence, the coordination of private agent's inflation expectations became more difficult.
The inflation rate increase in the short-term, caused by either seasonal factors or financial assets prices volatility, should not contaminate private expectations for longer periods.
In the short-term, however, inflation expectations have become a relatively more important risk factor than in the last month.
Even considering less favorable scenarios, the Copom is still optimistic about the achievement of economic growth with price stability.
Considering the hypothesis that important external variables continue under pressure for a longer period, the flexibility of the inflation-targeting regime could judiciously absorb the primary shocks associated with this pressure.
However, it would be paramount for monetary policy to fight the second order effects of these shocks.
In this case, economic activity could benefit from the progressive recovery of real earnings, which depends on a price stability environment in the medium-term.
Despite the fall, the ICC still reveals consumers optimism.
Out of the 23 sectors surveyed, 13 registered increased output.
According to CNI seasonally adjusted data, employed workers and real payroll in the industrial sector remained stable in April, compared to the previous month.
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit registered a decrease of 0.5 p.p.
The result was due to a decline of 0.9 p.p.
The decrease in the average interest rate to individuals reflected mainly an increase of credit operations with payroll-deducted repayments.
In Japan, GDP growth was revised upwards in the last two quarters.
Meanwhile, other indicators have been confirming the economic rebound, mainly boosted by the vigorous regional trade.
In the U.S., the latest economic indicators have ratified economic expansion, particularly those related to the labor market.
Recovery in Europe, however, has persisted sluggish.
In the U.S., prices have been rising under control, reflecting mainly the impacts of energy prices.
Market volatility has decreased in the latest few weeks.
However, adjustments in financial prices continue, anticipating the effects of the expected rise in the US fed funds and the measures adopted by the Chinese government to reduce the country growth pace.
Markets have stabilized in emerging economies, giving way to a slight recovery of the stock markets and an appreciation of the currencies against the U.S. dollar.
The dollar has continued to appreciate against strong currencies, in spite of the fiscal and trade deficits experienced by the U.S. economy.
Commodities prices fell in May, but the upward trend prevailing until the end of March has kept prices above their historical average.
Oil price pressures continued up to the beginning of June, mainly as a result of political tensions in the Middle East and of high global demand.
Money Market and Open Market Operations Over the past weeks, there has been high volatility in the yield curves.
On the other hand, the 1-year and 2-year rates have decreased 0.16 p.p. and 0.62 p.p. respectively.
Due to market volatility, the National Treasury did not carry out any selling auction of LTNs in the period.
However, simultaneous buying and selling auctions were carried out on May 20 and 21, aiming at giving liquidity to these securities when prices presented more volatility.
The BCB also carried out in this period 13 fixed rate repos falling due between 1 and 4 working days.
