As already stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the gap between wholesale and retail industrial inflation persists, representing a potential risk over consumer inflation, specially having in mind the seasonal demand rebound at the end of the year.
At the same time, the increase in international oil prices magnifies the inflation risks.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
Volatile prices shocks, such as those of fresh food, have an impact over the current inflation rate; however, they cause very limited effect in the future inflation trajectory.
Wholesale inflation also fell, favored by food prices.
Comparing the current dynamics of industrial prices in the wholesale and in the retail segments, a potential pass-through from the wholesale to the retail prices is noticeable, causing an important source of pressure over consumer inflation in the incoming months.
The intensity of the pass-through will depend on price-makers future inflation expectations.
The IPCA core excluding household food and regulated prices and the core under the nonsmoothed trimmed mean also decelerated in September.
It is important to note that the core measures are calculated in order to eliminate part of the volatility of the headline index, but are not completely noise-free, so that marginal variations should not be interpreted as a change in the inflation trend.
The behavior of the IPCA cores over the last few months still indicates an underlying inflation trend incompatible with the targets path.
Such an impressive figure was significantly higher than the market consensus on the eve of the publication of the data.
Market expectations were in fact negatively influenced by the fall in packaging paper shipments in August; this fall followed a sharp increase in July not fully reflected in the industrial output performance.
As mentioned in the September Copom Minutes, monthly packaging paper shipments are imprecise as a coincident indicator of the industrial activity, if analyzed apart from the historical series.
For September, the leading and coincident indicators anticipate a slight decrease in the seasonally adjusted monthly industrial performance.
The volatility of industrial output neither allows the interpretation of a surprisingly positive monthly figure as a definitive evidence of acceleration in the growth trend, nor does it mean that the marginal accommodation is a clear sign that the expansion has lost momentum.
In fact, August was the sixth consecutive month of growth in the seasonally adjusted industrial output series.
Such a long monotonic growth had not been observed since 1994, as the presence of some cyclical fluctuations around the underlying trend is the most common behavior, even during periods of strong activity expansion.
The progressive recovery of employment and labor income will perform an increasingly important role in the sustainability of the current economic recovery process, and will also contribute to a more balanced expansion among the several economic activities.
The IBGEs retail survey confirmed the expansion of personal consumption.
The concern expressed in past Copom Minutes about the pace of supply growth in order to accommodate the increasing demand without triggering inflation pressures is again emphazised.
Not only did the current prices increase, but also the perspectives that prices will remain in high levels for a longer period strengthened.
The risks are enhanced by the likelihood that, in face of a sustained increase in oil prices, there is a reduction in the current unusual lag in international gasoline prices.
As to the domestic scenario, it is still indefinite the realignment of oil by-products prices to international prices, which increases the probability that such a realignment considering that it can be postponed, but not avoided could contaminate with greater intensity the 2005 inflation rate.
Besides, a mere postponement would reduce the monetary policy effectiveness, as it expands the time horizon in which private agents expect an imminent inflationary shock, of uncertain magnitude, requiring higher nominal interest rates in order to produce the same expected real interest rate.
In the benchmark scenario, the Copom maintains unchanged its projections for 2004 domestic gasoline prices; for 2005, the Copom assumes the projections generated by the endogenous determination model for regulated prices.
The Committee has been carefully pondering that international oil prices face a more adverse environment than the current one, but still regard it as a potential risk, though increasingly higher, for the materialization of the benchmark scenario.
The Copom will soon produce disaggregate projections for gasoline prices in 2005, as well as for the other regulated prices, when it will reassess the extent to which more adverse circumstances in the oil market should be incorporated into the assumptions of the benchmark scenario.
The international capital markets started to express greater concerns about the growth dynamics in the main economies.
This uncertainty was triggered by the hike in oil prices, and resulted in greater market volatility, with immediate effects on the Brazilian foreign exchange market.
The favorable scenario that enabled the Real appreciation since last June could be harmed in the case of a larger deterioration of oil prices and its uncertain impact over the world economy growth.
This reduction is a result of the below-than-expected September inflation rate, caused by the transitory factors already discussed.
The deterioration of 2005 inflation expectations has not stopped yet, despite the current favorable trend of inflation, the exchange rate appreciation, the recent fall of important commodity prices and the signaling of a monetary tightening in the last few months.
Once more, the Copom emphasizes that the monetary policy adjustment is based on its own inflation scenarios, and are not conducted by inflation expectations of private agents.
However, private sector expectations have an important impact on monetary policy effectiveness, as they affect the expected real interest rates corresponding to a certain nominal yield curve and, given demand conditions, they significantly influence price-makers decisions.
Because of this relevance, inflation expectations are monitored by the Copom and by monetary authorities worldwide, whichever the degree of accuracy.
The Copom projections for the 2004 IPCA fell, mainly due to the favorable September result.
For 2005, the projections in both scenarios stand close to the values presented in the September issue of the Inflation Report.
The Copom reiterates that it considers natural for the economic growth pace to spontaneously slow down, as the initial monetary impulse loses momentum and the economy becomes to be sustained on auto propagation mechanisms linked to income increases.
Although some spontaneous slowdown may be in course, the available data do not suggest that it is intense enough to preserve the compatibility between the inflation targets and the productive capacity.
Despite the difficulties in measuring the installed capacity of each industry, or, in aggregate terms, the potential output, it is undeniable that the idle capacity has quickly lessened in the last few months.
Considering the production levels recently achieved, the monetary stance has to carefully accommodate the marginal expansion of demand.
Preventing the inflation increase is also essential to perverse labor income, thus maintaining a sound and balanced recovery process.
The main objective of the adjustment in monetary policy is, therefore, to ensure sustainable growth conditions.
As a consequence, the Copom understands that the current circumstances recommend the continuity of the process initiated in September, of a moderate adjustment in the Over-Selic rate.
Although an increase of 0.25 p.p. had been considered adequate to begin this adjustment, as to smooth the inflexion of the monetary stance and minimize its initial turbulence risks, the Committee evaluates that, at this moment, a 0.5 p.p. rise is more adequate with the magnitude and the speed required to promote the convergence of the inflation rate to the targets path.
Even though the Copom assumes that the monetary adjustment will be carried out in the magnitude and the pace originally set up, the current scenario holds two potential new risks.
First, the increase in oil prices, in terms of magnitude and in terms of extent.
Second, the marginal deterioration of market inflation expectations for 2005, even after the adjustment in the monetary stance, is an alert of its possible downward rigidity.
Fabric, clothing, shoes, furniture, electrical appliances, vehicles, motorcycles and parts, which had been showing expressive growth rates in the year, presented a decrease in the month, while super and hypermarkets sales remained high, considering the seasonally adjusted series.
The yearon-year growth in retail sales encompassed 26 out of 27 states of the country.
The growth resulted in the highest consumer confidence since the beginning of the survey, in Regarding fixed capital investment, indicators showed the continuity of the recovery in August.
Civil construction indicators ratify the investment expansion trend.
A sequence of six consecutive positive monthly results had not been seen since 1994, after the Real Plan.
The data have also indicated that employment has increased at a higher pace outside large metropolitan areas.
It is important to stress that the economic expansion has its effects over the labor market by both increasing total employed workers and the working force, as people start searching for jobs as a result of the better economic outlook.
This increase was a result of the 1.6 p.p. rise in the average corporate rate, while the average rate for individuals remained almost stable.
The continuous rises in oil prices have brought uncertainties about the sustainability of the world economic growth.
In the bonds markets, securities prices have been adjusting to the gradual rise in the US interest rates, benefiting emerging markets bonds.
Despite the continuous rises in the prices of oil and some commodities, consumer and producer price indices have remained stable in the main economies.
Considering a scenario of controlled inflation, the Bank of England and the European Central Bank decided to keep interest rates unchanged in October.
In the U.S., the last indicators have reinforced the perception of a moderate economic growth.
The labor market has reacted slowly.
Business and consumer expectations decreased in September.
The last indicators have shown deceleration in industrial growth in France and Germany.
Low consumer confidence, a weak recovery of employment and the oil price rises have impacted the recovery of domestic demand.
External demand also begins to shrink, after leading the economic recovery in the area.
In Japan, the economy has been growing consistently, lead by exports expansion.
However, in the last two months, industrial output and exports have decelerated.
Domestic consumption has been moderate, following the gradual improvement in the labor market, but consumer confidence has recently deteriorated.
In China, despite the restrictive economic measures, the outlook remains rather positive.
The trade balance registered the fifth consecutive surplus in September, due to increasing exports.
The determinant factors underlying the downward move of the long-term yield curve were the reduction of the sovereign risk, the _Real_ appreciation, the increase of the public sector primary surplus target and the sound external accounts.
From September 15 to October 20, the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month interest rates increased by 0.35 p.p., 0.25 p.p. and 0.06 p.p., respectively, while the 1-year, 2-year and the 3year rates decreased by 0.23 p.p., 0.39 p.p. and 0.41 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also carried out in the period 21 fixed rate overnight repos, nineteen of which with a one-day tenure.
