Inflation should accelerate further in November, as a consequence of, among other factors, the second installment of the readjustment in fixed-line telephone services determined by the Supreme Judicial Court and the increases in fuel-alcohol prices and urban bus tariffs in Belo Horizonte.
The favorable contribution of fresh food prices to inflation may be smaller in November than in October.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This acceleration occurred despite the fall in food prices for the second consecutive month.
Regulated prices were pressured by fuel prices, especially fuel-alcohol.
The acceleration of the industrial-IPA practically offset the fall of the agriculture-IPA.
The Copom will continue to monitor the potential transmission of wholesale inflation to consumer inflation in the coming months.
The intensity of the pass-through will basically depend on future demand conditions and on the market inflation expectations.
According to the three methodologies used by the Copom, IPCA core inflation increased in October.
The upsurge was more significant for the core excluding food and regulated prices and for the core under the non-smoothed trimmed mean, which had decelerated in September.
As stressed in the October Copom minutes, the September core results did not reflect the reversion in the underlying inflation trend but the persisting volatility in these measures.
Therefore, the cores have persisted in levels incompatible with the inflation targets.
However, this specific outcome does not indicate that industrial output is reverting the growth trend, as isolated positive performances do not indisputably indicate acceleration in the growth rhythm.
After the uninterrupted growth from March to August, some accommodation is expected because industrial activity is volatile, with short-term oscillations around the growth trend.
Methods aimed at diminishing this volatility, such as the three-month moving average of the seasonally adjusted series, show a continuous output expansion since February, although at lower positive rates in recent months.
In addition to converging to a more moderate growth pace, growth dynamics have continued to disseminate.
In the recent past, the relative importance of the industries more sensitive to income has increased, disregard of the activities more sensitive to credit, which leaded the initial stages of the recovery process.
The activity rebound in the last five quarters has continued to positively affect the labor market.
Furniture and electrical appliances, and vehicles and motorcycles continued to lead the retail expansion, supported by credit conditions.
However, similarly to what has happened to industry, less credit-sensitive segments, such as clothing, and super and hypermarkets, have gained momentum.
Considering the activity expansion since the second half of 2003, a critical concern of the Copom is the performance of aggregate supply.
Final consumer goods and intermediate goods, which had already been at high capacity levels, experienced additional increases, while capital goods slightly decreased.
Among industrial sectors, mechanics, electrical and communications materials and food products not only increased capacity utilization levels throughout the year, but also reached historical highs.
In contrast, CNI monthly data indicated a slight decrease in capacity utilization in September, in seasonally adjusted terms, after having peaked in August.
As stressed in past Copom minutes, fixed capital investment is highly correlated with capacity utilization and, notwithstanding the longer lag, with the sovereign risk.
However, the sustainability of this benign scenario will depend on new data regarding the performance of the OECD economies, especially the US, and the evolution of international crude oil prices.
International capital markets expect the Federal Reserve to continue the gradual tightening, although recent activity and inflation data are inconclusive about the current economic trend and, as a consequence, the future monetary stance.
After historical records in October, crude oil prices have fallen.
Expectations about oil prices, currently centered on the magnitude and continuity of the recent decrease in prices, remain uncertain.
Nevertheless, this trend validates the Copom forecasting scenario, where high oil prices were treated more as a latent risk and not as a baseline hypothesis.
For 2005, the Committee has continued to work with aggregate projections for regulated prices, generated by an endogenous determination model.
A preliminary disaggregate analysis confirms, in general terms, the models aggregate projection, assuming domestic gasoline prices maintain their historical correlation with international oil prices.
For 2005, the inflation projections in both the benchmark and the market scenarios have decreased, compared to the Octobers estimates.
These factors have not yet been able to substantially alter the future inflation prospects, despite the recent change in the monetary stance.
For this reason, the Copom decided to maintain the rise of the Over-Selic rate, as to ensure the convergence of the inflation rate to the targets path.
This adjustment in the Over-Selic rate will prevent more drastic adjustments in the future, in order to disinflate the economy, which could seriously damage the growth cycle.
Furthermore, the sustainability of the economic rebound initiated in 2003 depends on the convergence of inflation to the target path, supporting the components of domestic demand more dependent on labor income.
In other words, the monetary policy adjustment process aims at reducing output volatility and at providing long-term sustainability to economic growth.
As mentioned in the October Copom Minutes, the Committee emphasizes that the maintenance of the monetary adjustment in the magnitude and in the pace initially designed, requires that the risk factors do not exacerbate.
Among other aspects, it is important for the recent scenario of international oil prices not to deteriorate and for the rigidity of inflation expectations to reverse.
If the Copom assesses an enhanced risk of inflation deviating from the target path, it will be prepared to alter the pace and the magnitude of the monetary adjustment process initiated in September.
Construction indicators were stable in September, after six consecutive months of expansion.
Industrial output, measured by the IBGE, remained stable in September, in seasonally adjusted terms, after growing from March to August.
Among the use categories, semi and nondurable goods led the performance of industry.
Despite the October negative performance, those leading indicators have grown notably in the year, reaching record highs.
Job creation was led by manufacturing, followed by construction and services.
Data have also continued to indicate that employment has increased at a higher pace outside large metropolitan areas.
The fall in the unemployment rate reflected the effects of the activity rebound on the labor market.
Since then, oil prices have declined, posing less risks to global economic growth.
The stock exchanges reacted favorably to the fall in oil prices.
In mid-June, the volatility of the 2- and 10-year treasuries diminished, as it became more clear the Federal Reserve strategy of gradual tightening.
Since then, Treasury yields have been driven by new economic indicators and geopolitical developments in Iraq.
The purchase of U.S. securities by Asian central banks has helped to smooth the movements in the yield curve.
The third quarter GDP data confirmed the U.S. economic expansion.
Besides the increase in volumes, important export products, such as steel products, oil, gasoline, pork, coffee, sugar, cotton and tobacco have registered price increases.
The longer end of the yield curve was influenced by the fall of oil prices, the decline in country risk, the BRL appreciation, operations in the derivatives market and expectations that monetary policy will enable a quicker convergence of the inflation rate to the target path.
Between October 20 and November 17, the 1-month, 6-month and 1-year interest rates increased by 0.71 p.p., 0.49 p.p. and 0.20 p.p., respectively, while the 2-year and the 3-year rates decreased by 0.12 p.p. and 0.26 p.p.
The BCB also carried out 17 repos in the period, fifteen of which were overnight borrowings, one with a two-working-day tenure and another with an overnight lending.
