Regarding the IPCA, the reduction of the monthly change was mainly due to the smaller impact of the school fees readjustment in the month.
This readjustment was the main factor of pressure in February.
Regarding regulated prices, there has recently been above-than-expected price increases in certain items.
In addition to this item, recent announcements of price readjustments of electricity in Minas Gerais and Pernambuco are also above previously expected.
These increases consider inflation-indexed costs, price increases due to investments in the distribution and a part of the 2003 readjustment that is being applied this year.
In the first group, the rise of tradable goods prices contributed 0.27 p.p. for the IPCA monthly change, while non-tradable goods contributed with 0.22 p.p.
Regarding regulated prices, the negative change was due to the reduction of fuel prices, which prevailed over the increases of water and sewage tariffs and bottled gas prices.
However, the prices of rice, cattle and sugar cane remained in a downward trend.
As occurred with the full IPCA, the 12-month accumulated core indices registered in March the lowest changes since the end of 2002, despite being above the full IPCA change.
In April, consumer price indices should be influenced by price rises of medicine and clothing, and, among regulated items, of water and sewage and household electricity.
The magnitude and the pace of the pass-through of wholesale industrial price increases to consumer prices have been unsurprised.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This figure results from a model of endogenous determination, which takes into account seasonal components, the exchange rate behavior, market prices inflation and the IGP change; e.
However, general price indices have shown relatively higher rates.
In contrast with the deceleration of the headline index, the various core IPCA measures calculated under the trimmed-mean method increased in March, reversing the February fall.
It should be noted that increases in the measures of core inflation and inflation dispersion could be justified as a consequence of recent increases in wholesale prices, even if the pass-through remains moderate, as expected, and compatible with a favorable inflation scenario.
This fall, anticipated in the March minutes, is fully consistent with usual economic recovery cycles and is related to the sharp rebound of the second half of The recovery was fast and intense, which became clear in the new industrial output series released in April by the IBGE.
However, according to the new series, industrial production has been declining since November, in spite of signals showing a continuous economic recovery.
The new series also shows a higher growth in the semi and non-durable goods sectors.
Several leading and coincident indicators confirm the Copoms evaluation regarding the positive activity trend.
Packaging paper production sustained the upward trend initiated in September.
Automobile production increased again in March.
Average real earnings in the six metropolitan areas in the IBGEs monthly employment survey increased in February for the second consecutive month.
According to data from the CNI to Brasil and Fiesp to So Paulo, real earnings in the industry are currently in higher levels than the ones observed in Regarding Fiesp data, employment growth in the first quarter of 2004 was the highest since 1999, indicating that industrial production growth is already affecting job creation.
Credit operations also sustained an upward trend.
Despite the fall in consumer sentiment in March and April, retail sales have apparently not been affected.
Brazilian external accounts continue to show very impressive positive results.
World growth perspectives help the Brazilian trade balance.
Furthermore, the anticipation of an interest rate hike in the U.S. after the disclosure of sales and consumer inflation data in March, should not change significantly costs and availability of external funding to Brazil in 2004, despite eventual turbulence in the short run.
The scenario of a rise in the fed funds is already incorporated in asset prices.
In addition, the remarkable adjustment in the Brazilian current account and the reduction of the FX-linked public debt contribute significantly to mitigate not only the effects of a deterioration in international liquidity to the financing of the Balance of Payments, but also its effects on the foreign exchange market.
Although inflation in the first quarter was higher than expected, market expectations remained relatively stable.
The small increase in expected inflation is mainly due to the incorporation of the January-March actual rates.
The effect on expectations to 2004 was marginal, as expectations remained satisfactorily anchored.
Copom considered BCBs inflation projections under the hypothesis of a low degree of persistence of the first quarter inflation, following the seasonal inflation pattern observed in the last years.
The market scenario projects higher inflation rates than the benchmarked scenario because it assumes a declining trend for the interest rate, as well as a small increase of the exchange rate.
The Copom evaluated that the cautious monetary stance has been essential to increase the likelihood of inflation converging to the target.
Accordingly, inflation indicators must continue consistent with the low inflation-persistence hypothesis that has been considered.
The monetary stance is different during crises periods, such as the one observed at the end of 2002 and the beginning of 2003, or during times of greater macroeconomic stability, as the one recently established.
Therefore, when the crisis is reverted, as the interest rate is still considerably high, interest rate cuts are larger.
However, a different interest rate dynamics should take place during times of greater macroeconomic stability, when inflation convergence to the targeted path, along with sustained economic recovery, should be monitored more carefully.
The Committee stresses that it is pointless to infer that the more moderate cut of interest rate corresponds to a negative evaluation about the future behavior of inflation, or that it should cause pessimism about the future path of economic activity.
On the contrary, a natural result of the progressive normalization of the economic environment is precisely the fall in the average interest rate cuts.
In addition to allowing further monetary easing, this procedure enables a smooth transition to a scenario of price stability with economic growth, with smaller market interest rates volatility in the medium run.
The statistics concerning the output and sales in February 2004 should be analyzed with caution, once that in this year, differently from the previous year, Carnival holidays happened in February.
These distortions may not be completely eliminated with the application of usual seasoning adjustment procedures and tend to diminish February 2004 results and increase those of March.
The result reflects the decrease of both present and future consumption intentions.
Considering categories of use, this movement was generalized, with higher intensity in the productions of durable consumption goods and capital goods, which had been increasing in the last six months.
Therefore, the negative results in February reflect mostly the last months production high level.
The result was due to an increase of the economic population while the number of employed workers remained practically stable from January to February.
External Environment World economic indicators signal to the maintenance of the global economy growth, mainly in the U.S. and Asia.
More recent estimates point to more vigorous economic growth in 2004, despite the low reaction of the European economy.
However, economic optimism can be harmed by an eventual worsening of the politic environment.
In the U.S., employment data signal to the recovery of labor market, with the creation of 308 thousand new job positions therefore, above the expectations.
The initial requests of job claims have also been presenting weekly decreases.
The recovery remains low in Europe, due to the lack of reaction of the domestic demand components in the region, especially in Germany.
The impossibility to broaden the fiscal and monetary stimulus adds more skepticism to the recovery in the Euro Area.
Business confidence improved in the U.S. and in Japan in March, but remained stable in Europe.
Consumer expectations remained stable in the U.S. and Europe and presented slight improvement in Japan.
In the absence of inflationary pressures, the basic interest rates remain steady in the central economies.
However, the most prominent indicators of labor market in the U.S. anticipated the market expectations that the Federal Reserve would initiate the process of increasing the interest rates this year.
There was positive reaction among the rates of the US government securities and the treasuries of the European economies.
The futures markets have showed high volatility.
In the FX markets, there is a consensus about the continuity of the dollar depreciation due to the increasing U.S. current account deficits.
Prices of commodities reached the highest levels in March.
Grain inventories have been maintained in historically low levels due to the atmospheric conditions of the last years and to the recent harvest shock in the South hemisphere.
Along with the strong world demand, this fact has pressured the prices.
Metal prices have also been kept above the historical averages, reflecting the demand pressures and low inventories.
Regarding oil, pressure over prices is also a result of the increase in the tensions in Iraq.
The main factors that contributed to the slowdown movement of the short part of the curve were the reduction of the Over-Selic Target and the favorable expectations of the inflation trajectory.
This movement was partially reverted by the fact that the IPCA and its cores were above market expectations.
Between March 17 and April 13, the 1-month and 6-month interest rates decreased 0.23 p.p. and 0.16 p.p., respectively, while the 1-year, 2-year and 3-year rates increased 0.11 p.p., 0.33 p.p. and 0.48 p.p., respectively.
Similarly to what has been occurring since the middle of December of last year, the BCB did not carry out auctions to rollover securities and Fx swaps maturing in the period.
The BCB maintained in its open market operations the weekly post-fixed repo operations, with tenure of two weeks, and the fixed operations, with tenure of three months, as well as the 2working-day daily liquidity management operations.
The BCB also carried out in this period 11 fixed rate repos falling due between 1 and 3 working days.
