The IPCA diffusion index has shown an increase in the number of items with positive price rises.
The persistence of high core inflation and the recent behavior of the diffusion index indicate the dissemination of price increases across several sectors of the economy.
In December, the IPCA should persist at a relatively high level.
Further increases of fuel-alcohol prices, the readjustment of gasoline prices announced on November 26, and the urban bus fare increases in Recife and Belo Horizonte should be emphasized.
Among market prices, the favorable contribution of food might be lower, mainly due to fresh products prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new available information.
This acceleration was mainly due to regulated price increases, especially fuel prices.
This acceleration happened despite the decline in household food prices for the third consecutive month.
This wholesale price inflation continues to represent a potential pressure on consumer prices in the coming months.
The intensity of the pass-through will depend on prospective demand conditions and market inflation expectations; the evidence that this transmission has not happened yet with the intensity and velocity observed in the past does not mean that the pressure has definitely vanished.
IPCA core inflation continued to accelerate in November, according to the three criteria by excluding regulated prices and household food, by smoothed and by non-smoothed trimmed-means.
The cores remain at levels incompatible with the medium-run inflation targets.
The significant activity rebound mentioned in the Copom Minutes during the year, based on monthly indicators of industrial output, sales, and employment, was ratified by the third quarter GDP result.
Industry was the sector that increased most according to both criteria.
The GDP data also confirmed that growth is being supported by domestic demand.
This decline, however, was lower than suggested by the behavior of leading and coincident industrial indicators.
Industry has shown an already anticipated qualitative change, being stimulated progressively by the sectors that are more income sensitive.
Leading and coincident indicators for November anticipate a new decline in the industrial output seasonally adjusted series.
However, as discussed in previous Copom Minutes, this specific performance does not signal a reversion in the industrial output growth trend, as a strong isolated increase cannot be considered as an indicator of acceleration in production.
After a sequence of growth rates as witnessed in the recent past, it is reasonable to observe some temporary accommodation, since industrial activity rates are volatile, with short-run variations around the growth trend.
The variation of the number of working days makes the analysis of the monthly economic activity data even more difficult, particularly regarding industrial output.
In October 2004 there were only 20 working days, compared to 23 working days in the same month of 2003 and an average of 21.5 in the last eleven years, distorting both the comparison between years and the seasonally adjusted data series.
The correction of this distortion is not trivial, because the number of working days obviously affects industries that produce only on these days, though there is no direct impact for the industries with continuous production cycles.
The same problem will happen in December, but inversely, because the month will have 23 working days compared to only 21 in Thus, recent monthly activity indicators will be clearer just after the release of new data in the coming months.
The labor market has continued to improve significantly.
According to quarterly moving averages, the sales of automobiles and motorcycles, along with supermarket sales, continued to grow, while the sales of appliances and furniture, and fabric, clothes and shoes decreased.
However, appliances and furniture, and vehicles and motorcycles continue to present the highest growth rates over twelve months.
Due to the significant activity expansion in recent quarters, the performance of aggregate supply in the coming quarters continues to be an important concern for the Copom.
Investment performance has been promising, though the level of capacity utilization remains high.
The CNI installed capacity index declined in October for the second consecutive month in seasonally adjusted terms, after reaching an historical high in August.
The different output gap measures continued to narrow, even after the inclusion of the third quarter GDP data.
Thus, monetary policy has to continue monitoring the additional expansion of demand.
The external trade surplus has remained robust despite the increase in domestic activity.
In a more favorable global environment, the Brazilian country risk premium continued to decline and the BRL appreciated against the dollar.
Actually, in 2004, liquidity remained favorable, except for a short period in the second quarter, when the markets expected a change in the Feds stance.
Since the end of 2003, the Copom has been working with a scenario of a low probability of abrupt movements in the U.S. fed funds rate, which actually happened.
The continuity of this favorable environment will depend on new economic data for industrialized economies, especially the United States, and on international oil prices.
The recent exchange rate moves represent an additional concern, since a process of disorderly adjustment, which is not likely to happen, would cause significant instability in the international financial markets.
In the beginning of December, the Central Bank resumed the purchase of foreign currency.
As emphasized in a Communiqu released last January, the BCB aims at increasing the countrys international reserves in the medium-run and not at attaining any quantitative target.
This policy will continue to be based on liquidity conditions, and will objective not to add volatility to the exchange rate market and not to interfere in the floating exchange rate trend.
This process should be understood, therefore, as an effort to rebuild international reserves in an inflationtargeting regime with a floating exchange rate.
It should not be understood as the establishment of other targets, such as a ceiling or a floor to the foreign exchange rate.
The BCB has also achieved, since May 2003, extremely positive results regarding the decrease of the share of the public debt linked to the exchange rate.
After reaching record levels in October, international oil prices have fallen; nevertheless, they still remain at high levels.
Oil price prospects remain highly uncertain, primarily due to uncertainties regarding the continuity and the magnitude of the recent price correction.
In any case, the reduction in oil prices since October supports the Copom forecasting scenario, which treats the sharp oil price deterioration as a latent risk and not as a baseline scenario hypothesis.
On the domestic front, the Copom projects that there will be no fuel price adjustments in If a more favorable international oil price scenario materializes, it is possible that there may actually be downward adjustments to domestic oil product prices next year.
Nevertheless, this improvement could be considered relatively modest in light of the recent developments that reduced inflationary pressures for the next year, such as signs of moderation in the pace of economic growth, the exchange rate appreciation, the reduction of important international commodity prices, and unequivocal signs of a more restrictive monetary policy stance.
The Copom inflation projections for 2004 increased mainly due to the end-of-November adjustment in gasoline prices.
Since September, the deviation between the Copom inflation projections and the inflation target has narrowed.
In order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the targeted path, the Copom members determined that the gradual interest rate adjustment process should continue at the originally foreseen pace.
The Committee assumes that the combination of the ongoing adjustment process followed by a sufficiently long period of unchanged interest rates should significantly reduce the likelihood that the future inflation path diverges from the targets.
As stressed in the November Minutes, the Committee emphasizes that the persistence of the monetary adjustment process in the originally foreseen pace and magnitude requires that there is not an exacerbation of the risk factors that the Committee has closely monitored in the recent months, and that there is not an interruption in the process of convergence of the private sector inflation expectations to the inflation targets.
The Copom will be prepared to change the pace and magnitude of the monetary adjustment process if it assesses that there are risks for the inflation to deviate from the target path.
Hyper and supermarket sales maintained their growth trend, while the sales of fuel and of fabric, clothing and shoes fell in the month in seasonally adjusted terms.
Furniture and electrical appliances, which had been showing notable growth rates in the year, expanded again in October after falling in September.
The year-on-year growth in retail sales occurred in 25 out of the 27 states in the country.
The sharp jump in exports was driven by the sale of a domestically-produced oil exploration platform-ship, which remained leased in the country.
Considering the quarterly moving average, industrial output recorded an historic high in October, slightly above the level recorded in September The breakdown of industrial output data showed the October decline was a result of the performance of 14 out of the 23 activities, seasonally adjusted.
The most notable declines were in the sectors of food, rubber and plastic, vehicles, and perfumes.
The sectors that demonstrated notable growth were oil refining and alcohol production, chemical products, machines and electrical materials and metallurgy.
Regarding the use categories, capital and durable goods production recorded the most important declines, although these categories have recorded the greatest expansion along the year.
Job creation was led by manufacturing.
Data have also continued to indicate that employment has increased at a higher pace outside large metropolitan areas.
The U.S. and China have continued to lead global growth.
In Europe, the recovery remains slow.
The recovery is jeopardized by high energy prices and the Euro appreciation, which affects exports.
Inflation has remained under control in the main economies, although price indices rose in October, as a result of the ongoing increases in oil prices.
Regarding Japan, the price indices signaled the end of a long deflation trend.
It is expected that the Federal Reserve will continue its policy of gradual tightening in Oil prices have fallen since the second week of October, though they still represent a risk of volatility to the markets, particularly the stock market.
The dollar has continued to depreciate against other currencies, mainly against the euro and the yen.
The issuance of emerging market sovereign and corporate bonds has continued to benefit from favorable global liquidity conditions and by the reduction in spreads over U.S. Treasuries.
Besides the increase in volumes, important export products have registered price increases.
On December 15, the yield curve showed a negative slope from the 6-month vertices.
The perception of market participants that the monetary tightening cycle would persist influenced the short end of the yield curve.
The long end of the yield curve was influenced by falling oil prices, the reduction in the sovereign risk, evidence of decelerating economic activity, and operations in the derivatives market.
Between November 17 and December 15, the 1-month and 6-month interest rates increased by 0.35 p.p. and by 0.04 p.p., respectively, while the 1-year, 2-year and the 3-year rates decreased by 0.22 p.p., 0.49 p.p. and 0.60 p.p., respectively.
The BCB did not carry out auctions to roll over FX securities and swaps maturing in December.
The BCB also carried out in the period 10 repos, five of which were overnight borrowings, four were borrowings with a two-working-day tenure and one was an overnight lending.
