The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: for food, fuel, and transport and communication. In line with BSP projections, January 2005 inflation eased to 8.4 percent (2000=100) from food and energy products) increased to 7.9 percent (2000=100) in January 2005 from 7.8 percent in the previous month. - The highlights of the discussions of the 10 February 2005 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 10 March 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. National Statistics Office’s (NSO) shift to the new 2000-based CPI series. The revision was also intended to account for the additional inflation risks that have emerged since the target was set in 2004. factors such as the increases in food and oil prices. However, forecasts generated by the BSP’s inflation forecasting models indicated that inflation will decelerate in the first quarter of 2005 and will settle below 5.0 percent by the last quarter of the year. Average inflation was expected to fall within the 4-5 percent range in 2006. some evidence of resource slack remained. respectively. Growth was boosted by the continued growth in personal consumption, exports and construction spending. percent in November 2004 from 80.1 percent in October. This was, however, higher than the 78.4 percent posted a year ago. growth in the previous month. Likewise, the growth in volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing rose by 8.7 percent increase in October. growth in the first nine months of 2004. However, some firms registered a marked slowdown in third quarter income growth from the previous two quarters’ outturn. fastest since July 2002. This brought the January-November 2004 annual exports growth to 9.9 percent. a significant slowdown from the previous month’s 16.3 growth. For the January to November 2004 period, the cumulative annual growth of imports stood at 8.2 percent. previous year’s growth of 11.9 percent. Meanwhile, combined truck and bus sales fell by 12 percent during the year. This was also lower than the 3.9 percent expansion in December October 2004 compared to the 10.2 percent registered for the same period in 2003. The October unemployment rate, however, was lower than the 11.7 percent posted in the preceding quarter. rates eased during the 31 January 2005 auction of the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr), leading to narrower spreads over foreign interest rates. December 2004 from the 6.9 percent (revised) increase in the previous month. year-on-year as of end-November 2004, following a similar increase in the previous month. auction. The decline was attributed to market optimism sparked by a string of positive news on economic growth, corporate performance, strengthening of the peso against the US dollar and indications of sufficient liquidity in the system. were expected to continue to exert a central influence on the inflation outlook. In addition, the forecasted reduction in agricultural production in the first quarter of 2005—due to the negative impact of the El Niño— poses an upside risk to food prices. the 3.7 percent growth posted in 2003—despite the damages caused by typhoons in November and December. However, the negative effects of the ongoing El Niño episode pose upside risks to food prices, and highlight the need for government measures to prevent supply shortages. seasonally high winter demand for heating fuel in the Northern Hemisphere and concerns that OPEC would prevent oil prices from falling towards the end of the winter season. Meanwhile, pump prices of petroleum products in the domestic market eased in January, following the decline in world oil prices in the previous month. of remittances from overseas Filipino workers (OFW) and foreign investments, strong regional currencies, and weak corporate demand for US dollar. settled at P186.1 billion (3.8 percent of GDP), lower than both the programmed level of P197.8 billion (4.2 percent) and the P199.9 billion deficit in 2003. This was the second consecutive year that the NG outperformed its fiscal deficit goal. but at a moderating pace. Recent indicators pointed to sustained improvements in investment spending although industrial production and private consumption appeared to have slowed down in most economies. On the price front, short-term inflationary pressures have diminished somewhat, on account of the recent declines in world oil prices. altogether risk-free given the uncertainty in the direction of world oil prices, mounting budget and current account deficits, and uneven gains in employment and earnings. mainly to weaker export gains and subdued private consumption. Continued volatility in world oil prices and the further strengthening of the euro also present risks to the recovery. economy gained some momentum towards the end of 2004, boosted by growth in the services sector. remained on the recovery track as shown by the uptrend in business investment and steady improvements in corporate profitability. policy settings unchanged during their latest respective monetary policy meetings. However, the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to raise its policy rates by 25 basis points during its 1-2 February 2005 meeting, citing strong output expansion in the economy. policy in the face of an oil price shock poses a special challenge for monetary policy, because it raises the prices of goods and services while also reducing the level of aggregate output. The members of the Board, therefore, underscored the need to be careful not to worsen the output effects of an oil shock while also guarding against any second-round demand-side effects. inflation towards the target in 2006 constitutes a straightforward argument for keeping policy rates steady. This affirms the BSP's assessment that inflation uptrend is largely transitory, attributed primarily to supply-side factors. Asian economies, there is no evidence of a positive output gap in the Philippines given that (1) the prevailing levels of capacity utilization and employment growth remain moderate and (2) the expansion in aggregate demand does not appear to be broad-based as yet. Moreover, the members of the Monetary Board were of the view that indications of a possible cyclical downturn in the Philippine economy strengthen the need to enhance policy intervention in order to extend expansion phase of the business cycle. potential impact of new tax measures, such as the increase in the VAT. The risk of demand-side effects from these factors could very well increase in the near term and spill over into wage- and price-setting behavior. factors to expected supply-side pressures. These include: (1) the prospect of a weak US dollar, which should provide a stabilizing influence on import prices and consequently, on overall inflation; and (2) the predicted El Niño dry spell, which is widely expected to be brief and mild, and thus should not unduly disrupt agricultural output. outlook for prices and output continues to suggest keeping monetary policy settings unchanged. However, should calls for wage adjustment persist, a stronger risk of second-round effects from supply-side factors on domestic wage- and price-setting could ensue. This, in turn, would require a timely monetary response. no monetary action at present can be a beneficial tactic, since keeping policy interest rates at prevailing levels provides implicit support to credit activity by preventing large upticks in market interest rates. In any case, direct non-monetary action against supply-side risks remains a sensible tool against the likely pressures on prices over the near term, and should be encouraged accordingly. has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; SDAs; and to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 10 March 2005.