The Advisory Committee1 submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: a) Increase the BSP’s policy interest rates by 25 basis points to 7.0 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and b) Adjust the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs. to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. A measured increase in policy rates would provide a signal to the public of the BSP’s commitment to fighting inflation by preventing inflation expectations from spiraling away from the inflation target. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: same rate as in the previous month. Clothing, housing and repairs, and services posted higher year-on-year inflation in March. Services inflation rose, owing mainly to the increase in inflation for transportation and communication due to higher prices of gasoline and oil products. - The highlights of the discussions of the 7 April 2005 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, Monetary Policy Sub-Sector and the Acting Managing Director of the Treasury Department. However, inflation for food, beverage and tobacco as well as fuel, light and water was slower in March compared to the previous month. and energy items such as rice, corn, fruits and vegetables, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), kerosene and gasoline—slowed down to 8.0 percent year-on-year in March 2005 from 8.1 percent a month ago. inflation would likely exceed the target of 5.0-6.0 percent as the full impact of supply-side pressures sets in. In the absence of further adverse shocks, the average inflation for 2006 could fall to the target range of 4.05.0 percent. on the future path of inflation. The continuing presence of slack in the economy—evidenced by less than maximum capacity utilization, relatively high unemployment, and modest credit demand—is not likely to cause an upsurge of demand-related pressures in the near term. volatility in world oil prices are related to concerns over the ability of oil producers to widen output capacity. by the US, China, and India, has fueled the rise in oil consumption and in part, reduced the margin of excess production capacities of oil exporters. countries continued to pose risks to supply in the world market. market contributed in part to the pressures on oil prices. local oil companies thrice in March, reflecting the rise in world crude prices. allowance or an increase in the minimum daily wage were issued in all 17 regions over the past year, with the latest increase granted on 29 March year due to the uptrend in inflation. adjustments before the Land Transportation Fare Regulatory Board feeding into the public’s inflation expectations, such as those shown by private sector’s inflation forecasts, consumer and business expectations surveys, and term spread movements. In turn, these developments could increase the risk that expectations may become disanchored. polled by the staff have been rising. inflation in the second quarter for selected group of commodities relative to the previous quarter. The highest price increases were expected to come from electric bills, transportation, water bills, fish and seafood, fruits and vegetables, meat, and rice. Weather Station (SWS) and the Pulse Asia in March 2005 showed growing concerns among Filipinos over the urgent need to control the rising prices of basic goods. and short-term interest rates in the secondary market have widened, suggesting higher inflation expectations. appreciation against the US dollar due mainly to the sustained inflows of remittances from overseas Filipino workers, participation of foreign investors in the initial public offerings of two companies, stronger regional currencies, exporter dollar sales and the favorable reaction to the passage of modifications to the value added tax. revenue growth of the country’s major co rporations, recovery in export growth, and improving business optimism. reach US$3.28 billion in January 2005. This was an acceleration from growth of 2.9 percent in the previous month and 4.1 percent in January 2004. lower than the 17.9 percent growth posted in December 2004. On a month-on-month basis, VAPI declined for the third straight month (2.9 percent in January). Year-on-year growth in the volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing was slightly lower at 5.5 percent in January compared to 5.9 percent in the previous month. Meanwhile, the month-on-month decline in VOPI was higher at 3.1 percent in January from the 0.9 percent drop a month ago. boosted San Miguel Corporation’s revenues, while heightened expansion drove sales of fastfood leader Jollibee Foods Corporation. Ayala Corporation also reported strong revenue growth, owing to the solid performance of its key operating subsidiaries and affiliates including Globe Telecom. Globe and its competitor, PLDT, posted revenue growth of over ten percent as the subscriber base for their wireless business continued to expand. business optimism maintaining a relatively steady and positive outlook in the current quarter and improving significantly in the second quarter of the year. manufacturing continued to show some slack in resource use. Moreover, merchandise imports, car sales and energy sales declined. percent in January 2005 from 80.0 percent in the previous month. Compared to the utilization rate in January 2004, this was higher by reach US$3.11 billion in January 2005. This was a further downturn from the 8.9 percent expansion in the same month last year. in the previous month. Similarly, sales of trucks and buses fell further by 42.4 percent year-on-year in February from 31.1 percent in January. year-on-year in February 2005 as against the 7.2 percent increase in the previous month. Office (NSO) showed that unemployment rate rose to 11.3 percent in January 2005 from 11.0 percent a year ago. This was also higher than the 10.9 percent unemployment rate in October 2004. typhoons in the last quarter of the year. The outlook for agricultural production in 2005 could improve given indications of exit of the El Nino phenomenon as well as the expected favorable impact of government programs to enhance the productivity of the sector and mitigate the impact of the dry spell. This highlighted the importance of sustained implementation of government intervention measures to ensure adequate food supply. due to ample liquidity in the system. The increase in liquidity arising from external inflows remained below levels warranted by the economy’s growth and inflation path. to 11.0 percent year-on-year in January 2005, based on Depository Corporation Survey (DCS) from the 9.1 percent increase in the previous month.2 year-on-year to P1.512 trillion as of end-January 2005. This was higher than the 2.6 year-on-year growth recorded in December 2004 but remained modest. tenors during the 14 March 2005 auction. This could be traced to the presence of ample liquidity in the system. due to the likelihood of further declines in interest rate differentials and the potential adverse market sentiment shifts due to delays in needed tax measures. that the government is clearly on track to meet the first quarter target. The NG budget deficit in February 2005 reached P23.5 billion, bringing The DCS, which replaces the Monetary Survey (MS) as the basis for measuring domestic liquidity, features an expanded list of surveyed institutions that includes the BSP, commercial banks, thrift banks, rural banks, non -stock savings and loan associations and non-banks with quasi -banking functions. the actual deficit for the first two months to P40.1 billion, and about 51.5 percent of the P77.8 billion first quarter fiscal program. investment, steady improvements in labor market conditions, and recovery of business and consumer confidence in the major economies. Industrial production and export gains, however, appeared to have slowed down in most economies, reflecting both a return to more sustainable pace of expansion and the adverse impact of higher oil prices. continued solid growth performance in 2005. Meanwhile, inflation expectations appeared to be well anchored. However, the widening global imbalances alongside continued volatility in world oil prices and weakening of the US dollar continued to pose risks to the outlook. domestic investment boosted the overall performance in 2004. Recent indicators suggested that the US economy has started the year 2005 strongly at a moderating pace. Labor market conditions continued to improve while business and consumer confidence remain robust. The mounting budget and current account deficits could also dampen prospects for sustained economic growth. second half of 2004 as domestic demand remained subdued while export growth weakened further due to the strengthening of the euro and the modest slowdown in global growth. Investments, however, remained strong. The moderate economic growth and weak labor markets contained the rise in wages. quarter of 2004, propelled by the robust output performance of the services sector, the modest recovery of manufacturing, and accompanied by solid growth in investment and public consumption. Household spending, grew weaker during the quarter, alongside the observed slowdown in retail sales and housing market activity. ongoing adjustments stemming from the slowdown in the global IT market. Industrial production and export growth could improve gradually as the impact of adjustments in IT-related sectors wanes. The uptrend in business investment could be maintained as corporate profits continue to improve steadily. decided to raise its policy rates by 25 basis points during its most recent policy meeting. By contrast, monetary authorities in Japan, in Euro area, and in UK kept their monetary policy settings unchanged. and outlook indicated that price pressures continued to be dominated by supply side risks and that demand side impulses remained generally moderate and limited despite some improvements. expected price pressures over the two-year policy horizon continued to be linked to supply side factors, notably price fluctuations in the world oil market and weather-induced pressures on agricultural food prices. the inflation outlook increased given recent movements in international oil prices. This implied renewed cost-push pressures on energy and transport prices over the policy horizon. continued pressures from oil and transport prices could also raise the likelihood of second-round effects in the form of nominal wage increases. These risks may lead to an upward shift in the forecast inflation path. of future inflation may be disanchored as cost-side influences may already be feeding into it. Inflation expectations appeared to be on the rise, based on survey of the inflation forecasts of the private analysts; anticipation of higher inflation for selected commodities over the next 12 months in the Consumer Expectations Survey by the BSP; and growing public concerns over rising inflation as shown in the survey results of the Social Weather Station and Pulse Asia in March 2005. Moreover, an increase in the differentials between long-term and short-term interest rates in the secondary market was observed. agreed that a marginal increase in policy interest rates would be appropriate in providing a signal to the public of the BSP’s commitment to fighting inflation and preventing inflation expectations from spiraling away further from the inflation target. Upon assessment of the balance of risks to inflation and the evidence that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: a) Increase the BSP’s policy interest rates by 25 basis points to 7.0 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and b) Adjust the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs. address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary m:\_aamb policy and minutes\highlights\2005 mb minutes\mb minutes 07-04-2005 meeting.doc