The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: previous month. Clothing, housing and repairs, and services posted higher year-on-year inflation in March. Services inflation rose, owing mainly to the increase in inflation for transportation and communication due to higher prices of gasoline and oil products. However, inflation for food, beverage and tobacco as well as fuel, light and water was lower in March compared to the previous month. Monetary Board during its meeting held on 2 June 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, Monetary Policy Sub-Sector and the Managing Director of the Treasury Department. and energy items such as rice, corn, fruits and vegetables, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), kerosene and gasoline—slowed down to 8.0 percent year-on-year in March 2005 from 8.1 percent a month ago. percent headline inflation for March, 3.6 percentage points were attributed to food, beverage and tobacco, 1.7 percentage points to transportation and communication services and 1.3 percentage points to fuel, light and water inflation would likely exceed the target of 5.0-6.0 percent as the full impact of supply-side pressures sets in. In the absence of further adverse shocks, average inflation for 2006 could fall to the target range of 4.0 -5.0 percent. influence of supply-side factors particularly, the movement in international oil prices. factors behind the inflation process. This could intensify pending demands for adjustments in transport fares and further increase in utility charges, which may eventually feed into the prices of other goods and services. likely compel authorities to grant petitions for adjustments in minimum nominal wage rates. adversely the agriculture sector, particularly rice production. such as the expanded VAT reform, could exert upward pressures on prices in the short run. Nevertheless, the impact of said revenue measures on inflation could be classified as part of the BSP’s exemption clauses. Also, the passage of the VAT reform bill is expected to improve the government’s fiscal position, shore up investor confidence, and thereby, improve the economy’s growth prospects over time. evidence of resource slack remains. percent in February 2005. January growth rate of 13.6 percent. Year-on-year growth in volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing was slightly lower at 2.4 percent in February compared to the revised figure of 2.7 percent for January. February 2005. This was a downturn from growth rates of 15.4 percent in the previous month and 7.6 percent in February 2004. February 2005 from a 2.1 percent drop in the previous month. This was a downturn from the 6.3 percent expansion in the same month last year. Meanwhile, sales of trucks and buses continued to fall by 23.3 percent year-on-year in March from 42.4 percent in February. year-on-year in February 2005 as against the 7.2 percent increase in the previous month. Office (NSO) showed that unemployment rate rose to 11.3 percent in January 2005 from 11.0 percent a year ago. This was also higher than the 10.9 percent unemployment rate in October 2004. lending likewise showed an improvement but remained modest. Meanwhile, Treasury bill rates rose during the 25 April 2005 auction relative to the 14 March 2005 auction[2] but declined relative to the previous week’s auction on 18 April 2005. bids for the 364-day tenor. Corporations Survey (DCS) from the 11.0 percent rise in the previous month.[3] year-on-year to P1.525 trillion as of end-February 2005. This was higher than the 4.0 percent year-on-year growth recorded in January tenors during the 25 April 2005 auction. The increase in yields was influenced partly by the upward adjustment in the BSP’s policy rates by 25 basis points on 7 April 2005. Relative to the 18 Ap ril 2005 auction, T-bill yields for the 91-day, 182-day and 364-day T-bills eased by 10.6 basis points, 12.3 basis points and 11.4 basis points, respectively. This could be traced to the presence of ample liquidity in the system. compared to March, the peso weakened slightly in April due mainly to high corporate dollar demand for month-end import obligations, market concerns over the possible delay in the passage of the expanded VAT reform measure and the recovery of the US dollar. Exchange market pressure remained a risk to the inflation environment due to the possibility of further narrowing of interest rate differentials. reached P23.4 billion in March, bringing the first quarter 2005 NG budget deficit to P63.5 billion. This was P14.3 billion lower than the programmed level for the period as growth in revenue collections continued to outpace that of expenditures. quarter of 2005. Improving labor market conditions and generally positive consumer confidence in most markets continued to underpin the strength of consumer spending and the observed pick-up in manufacturing. Overall, the outlook for 2005 suggested a sustained pace of economic recovery, although at a modest pace. The widening global imbalances alongside continued volatility in world oil prices continued to exert downside risks to the outlook. characterized by improvement in labor market conditions and robust The DCS, which replaces the Monetary Survey (MS) as the basis for measuring domestic liquidity, features an expanded list of surveyed institutions that includes the BSP, commercial banks, thrift banks, rural banks, non -stock savings and loan associations and non-banks with quasi -banking functions. consumer spending despite rising energy prices and rising interest rates. Manufacturing activity also continued at solid levels. activity in the euro area in the first quarter of 2005. Industrial production and retail sales regained some momentum. However, subdued consumer confidence continued to weigh down on consumption growth. Meanwhile, moderate economic growth and weak labor markets contained the rise in wages. spending. Improvements in housing market activity, modest growth in retail sales, and resilient real income and wealth, indicated a potential pick up in consumption spending. started to pick-up while employment conditions continued to improve. Meanwhile, weak consumer spending and cautious business sentiment alongside continued volatility in world oil prices weighed down on the prospects for sustained economic recovery. economies, the US Federal Open Market Committee raised its policy rate by 25 basis points to 3.0 percent during its last meeting held on 3 May 2005. By contrast, monetary authorities in Japan, in Euro area, and in UK kept their monetary policy settings unchanged during their last meetings in April. that inflation may have levelled off, leading to the targeted 4-5 percent range in 2006, in the absence of further adverse shocks. This was supported by the slowdown in year-on-year core inflation. Taken together, the expectations of a decelerating path for inflation alongside the presence of slack in the economy supported the maintenance of current policy settings. inflation over the policy horizon given the prospects for sustained costside pressures via high oil prices, impending second-round effects in the form of nominal wage increases and ancillary adjustments in other key prices such as transport fares and power costs. circumstances, monetary authorities may opt to respond in order to guide inflation expectations down. Such a move would help contain prevailing inflation risks and underline the BSP’s strong commitment to fighting inflation. was also enough flexibility to keep monetary policy settings unchanged for the time being. way into the economy and exert its impact on inflation expectations. present conditions, given that demand pressures continued to be softened by sluggish employment conditions, moderate capacity utilization, and generally modest credit demand. between long-term and short-term interest rates narrowed in recent months, indicating that long-term inflation expectations remained anchored. agreed that present monetary policy settings should be kept unchanged for the time being. support Government’s efforts in intensifying supply intervention measures such as timely and increased importation of rice and other measures that will facilitate distribution of agricultural commodities to the final consumers. has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 2 June 2005.