The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: uptrend in December 2004. In line with expectations, the full-year 2004 average inflation reached 5.5 percent (1994=100), exceeding the 4–5 percent target for 2004, and 6.0 percent (2000=100). energy products) also edged higher in December 2004. Full-year core - The highlights of the discussions of the 13 January 2005 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 10 February 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. inflation was registered at 5.5 percent (1994=based) and 5.7 percent inflation above the 4-5 percent target in 2004 may be characterized as a predominantly supply-side phenomenon. inflation will likely begin to decelerate in the first quarter of 2005 and fall further to the 4-5 percent range in 2006. show positive trends, other indicators pointed to soft spots in the economy. percent in October 2004 from 79.9 percent (revised) in September and 78.7 percent a year ago. growth in the previous month. Meanwhile, the growth in volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing decelerated to 4.9 percent increase in September. growth in the first nine months of 2004. However, some firms registered marked slowdown in their third quarter income growth from the previous two quarters’ outturn. fastest since July 2002 when it registered 24.2 percent. This brought the January-November 2004 annual exports growth to 9.9 percent. from 14.8 percent in September. For the January to October 2004 period, the cumulative annual growth of imports stood at 8.8 percent. November, from zero growth in October as reported by the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. (CAMPI). This also represented a significant downturn compared to the 53.2 percent annual growth in November 2003. Meanwhile, the combined truck and bus sales posted an 8.7 percent year-on-year growth in October, a reversal from the 7.8 percent dip in September. percent increase in the previous month and 3.6 percent expansion in November 2003. October 2004 from the 10.2 percent registered for the comparable period in the previous year. The October unemployment rate, however, was lower than the 11.7 percent posted in July 2004. This is still considerably higher than 7.4 percent, the lowest unemployment rate recorded during the peak growth years 1993-1996. nominal RP interest rates increased during the 3 January 2005 auction of the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) relative to the previous auction, leading to narrower spreads over foreign interest rates. November from the 6.2 percent (revised) rise recorded in the previous month. year-on-year as of end-October 2004. This was a slight improvement over the 1.9 percent increase in the previous month. across all tenors during the 3 January 2005 auction. The increase in yields reflected expectations of higher inflation as well as banks’ weak appetite for government securities as they remained cautious over the increase in the BTr’s offering from P11.0 billion to P15.0 billion and the possibility that the BSP might raise its policy rates. the inflation outlook, particularly the volatility in global oil prices. In addition, the forecasted reduction in agricultural production in the first quarter of 2005—with the onset of a weak El Niño—poses an upside risk to food prices. comparable period a year ago and the highest since 2000. However, the onset of a weak El Niño episode poses upside risks to food prices, and highlights the importance of timely intervention measures to limit adverse impact of the said weather disturbance. build-up in world crude oil stocks and mild weather conditions in the Northern Hemisphere. Consequently, pump prices of petroleum products in the domestic market eased in December 2004, reflecting the decline in world oil prices. However, in early January 2005, some increases in both the spot price of Dubai crude oil and the futures price of Brent crude oil were observed. from OFW remittances during the holiday season and the relative weakness of the dollar in regional currency markets. November 2004 widened to P12.5 billion, higher than the deficit level registered in the comparable month last year of P8.3 billion. However, the January-November 2004 NG budget deficit of P160.2 billion, was 7 percent lower than the figure recorded in the same period a year ago, providing indication that the full-year fiscal deficit would be within the NG’s program. industrial production and private consumption appeared to have slowed down in most economies. Stronger inflationary pressures are expected to persist over the short term owing to the volatility in world oil prices, but the medium-term outlook remains in line with price stability. resilient consumer spending and robust expansion of business investment. However, the mounting budget and current account deficit could dampen prospects for sustained economic growth. quarter on weaker export gains and subdued private consumption alongside the observed slowdown in production growth in the industries and services sector. account of a decline in investment alongside flat consumption growth and cooling property market. movements in industrial production and exports. This was supported by the growth in business investment and improvement in private consumption. their latest respective monetary policy meetings. However, some, like the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and the Bank of Thailand and tight labor market conditions. the monetary assessment process focuses primarily on forecasted inflation rather than contemporaneous inflation in order to ensure that the monetary policy stance has a forward-looking orientation at all times. full effect (currently estimated at 15–21 months), the Monetary Board noted that monetary actions undertaken at this point will primarily affect inflation in 2006 and may only have a minimal impact in 2005 inflation. The members of the Monetary Board, therefore, agreed that prospective decisions should be oriented toward safeguarding the 2006 inflation target. showing a declining trend for inflation over the next few quarters. With some easing of international oil prices from peak levels in 2004, latest forecasts indicate that inflation would settle below 5.0 percent in the last quarter of 2005. The 2006 average inflation is expected to be within the proposed adjustment in the 2005 target is intended mainly to reflect the dynamics of the new inflation data series. In particular, the Monetary Board noted that the 2000 CPI inflation series are higher than the1994 series. In addition, a revision of the 2005 inflation target takes into account the additional risks on prices that have emerged since the target was originally set in 2004. action may be undertaken when the available evidence begins to point more strongly to the following conditions: (1) emergence of demand-side pressures on consumer prices; (2) emergence of inflationary pressures that are over and above those generated by ongoing supply shocks; and from narrowing interest rate differentials which could feed into inflation and inflation expectations. inflation and other economic evidence support keeping present policy settings unchanged, accompanied by a continued readiness to undertake any necessary policy action ahead of time against inflation pressures. continue supporting measures being undertaken by the Department of Agriculture (DA) to mitigate the negative impact on agricultural production as well as the steps to rehabilitate the typhoon-damaged areas. These intervention measures would help ensure adequate food supply and temper the potential inflationary impact of the El Niño weather disturbance. that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; SDAs; and to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 10 February 2005.