The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies; and dynamics and sources of price pressures in order to help guide inflationary expectations. The Advisory Committee’s recommendations were based on the following considerations: food inflation offset the uptick in non-food inflation. This brought the yearto-date average inflation rate to 8.5 percent. On a month-to-month basis, inflation rose in April 2005 from the March 2005 rate. - The highlights of the discussions of the 2 June 2005 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 7 July 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, Monetary Policy Sub-Sector and the Managing Director of the Treasury Department. oil prices. Of the 8.5 percent inflation for April 2005, 3.3 percentage points were attributed to food, beverage and tobacco, 1.7 percentage points to transportation and communication services and 1.4 percentage points to fuel, light and water. from 8.0 percent a month earlier. emergence of new risks such as the implementation of the reforms in VAT, adjustments in transport fares and possible increase in wages over and above the equivalent of loss of purchasing power and ancillary adjustments. The ongoing impact of dry weather and the continued rise in world oil prices may also contribute to pressures on domestic prices. activity, although at a slower pace. a year ago and the previous quarter. This was due largely to the slowdown in consumption and external trade and the decline in mining and agricultural production. percent in March 2005 from 79.8 percent in the previous month. percent year-on-year in March 2005, higher than the revised February growth rate of 10.0 percent. Year-on-year growth in volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing was 2.8 percent in March from 1.6 percent in February. corporations showed mixed trends. This was a faster decline compared to the previous month’s 0.6 percent and a reversal from year-ago growth of 7.1 percent. from the 4.4 percent expansion in the same month last year. the 119.2 percent expansion a year ago. percent year-on-year in March 2005 from the 2.5 percent drop in the previous month. unemployment rate in October 2004. that business outlook was less optimistic than in the previous quarter but remained positive. The overall business outlook diffusion index for the second quarter of 2005 was recorded at 12.9 percent. The latest Consumer Expectations Survey likewise showed weaker consumer outlook for the second and third quarters of 2005. Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB) continued to rise in the second quarter of 2005 to 0.272 from 0.245 in the first quarter. influence on the inflation outlook. first quarter of 2005, as the gains from poultry and fishery production offset the decline in crop production caused by the El Niño-induced drought. inventory and a seasonal decline in energy consumption. However, prices rose again in the fourth week of May due to renewed supply concerns. In the domestic market, oil companies reduced retail pump prices of petroleum products to reflect the drop in world oil prices. investments in government securities. Bank lending generally remained modest despite continued improvement. Corporations Survey (DCS) from the 11.0 percent rise in the previous month.2 The DCS, which replaces the Monetary Survey (MS) as the basis for measuring domestic liquidity, features an expanded list of surveyed institutions that includes the BSP, commercial banks, thrift banks, rural banks, non -stock savings and loan associations and non-banks with quasi -banking functions. year-on-year in February 2005. This was higher than the 4.0 percent year-on-year growth recorded in the previous month. continued to decline on more positive fiscal picture following the passage of the expanded VAT reform bill, reports that the National Government (NG) posted a budget surplus for the first time in four years in April, and the sale of US$750 million worth of global bonds by the NG. sustained inflows from OFW remittances, balance of payment surplus for the first four months of the year, improvements in tax collection, the passage of the VAT reform bill, and strong regional currencies. Exchange market pressure remained a risk to the inflation environment due to the possibility of further narrowing of interest rate differentials. the last four years. This brought the NG’s budget deficit for the first four months to P60.1 billion, 7.0 percent lower than the deficit level posted a year ago and equivalent to 61.0 percent of the P98.5 billion program deficit for the first semester. first quarter of 2005. Consumption spending and export growth moderated in most economies while labor market conditions remained generally favorable. On the whole, forward -looking global economic indicators appeared consistent with a moderate, yet continued solid growth performance in the year ahead. emerging risks to inflation were associated mainly with supply-side or cost push factors such as the VAT reform, oil prices and imminent adjustments in transport fares. These factors were expected to push the future inflation path upward in the short-term but are not likely to have a lasting impact on prices in the absence of further shocks. pressures on prices continued to be muted due to cyclical and structural conditions, particularly high unemployment and modest credit demand. There was thus a need to preserve the conditions for continued expansion in aggregate demand, given emerging indications of the contractionary impact of the oil shock and the expected impact of fiscal adjustment via VAT reform on growth in the short run. continued price pressures might influence inflation expectations. Monetary authorities should try to mitigate cost-push inflation from feeding into higher wages and prices of other goods and services. The BSP, therefore, should stand ready to take action in order to guide inflation expectations and signal the BSP’s commitment to fight inflation. increase should also be given time to fully work its way into the economy and exert its impact on inflation expectations. The current level of policy rates, while divergent from market interest rates, remained appropriate to promote levels of liquidity consistent with the output path and the inflation outlook. The BSP was able to contain the expansion of liquidity stemming mainly from inflows of OFW remittances and portfolio investments. There was also no significant evidence of a shift in preference away from peso assets. strengthen representation with other government agencies in support of non-monetary supply-side intervention measures to mitigate the impact of higher prices on consumers, such as measures to facilitate distribution of basic goods and services to final consumers. transparency and communication of policies and prospects of inflation in order to manage inflation expectations. has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies; and the dynamics and sources of price pressures in order to help guide inflationary expectations. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 30 June 2005.