On 31 July 2003, the Monetary Board held its ninth meeting for the year on monetary policy issues. At the meeting, the Advisory Committee[1] presented its recommendations to the Monetary Board on the stance of monetary policy of the BSP, based on the Committee’s assessment of the outlook for inflation, the economy’s growth prospects, and the emerging trends in key macroeconomic and financial indicators. The recommendations served as basis for the Monetary Board’s discussion on the appropriate course of action for monetary policy. The Advisory Committee recommended the following measures to the Monetary Board: (1) maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent as the borrowing rate under the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) facility and 9.0 percent as the lending rate under the overnight repurchase (RP) facility; (2) maintain the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and Special Deposit Account (SDA) windows; (3) maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs; and (4) maintain the reserve requirements at their current levels given the adequate level of liquidity in the system. These recommendations were based on the following considerations: June 2003 from 2.7 percent in the previous month and 2.9 percent a year earlier. This was due mainly to the temporary increase in food prices in Metro Manila brought about by the series of typhoons that caused heavy Monetary Board during its meeting held on 4 September 2003. namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of Research and the Director for the Treasury Department. rains and flooding. Moreover, increased charges for electricity consumption in Metro Manila in June as well as higher tuition fees and prices of school supplies and other commodities coinciding with the opening of the school year also exerted upside pressures on prices. Core inflation also picked up during the month to 3.0 percent from 2.4 percent in May. continued to be relatively low. This mainly reflected the continued absence of significant demand-pull pressures on consumer prices as well as the positive impact of supply-side factors. The outlook for inflation for the remainder of the year thus continued to be benign. of the pace and strength of a pick-up in domestic demand reinforced expectations of limited demand-side influences on prices. manufacturing accelerated to 2.6 percent year-on-year in May from the value of production index (VAPI) for manufacturing improved to percent in May from 77.5 percent in the previous month. commercial banks rising by 3.4 percent year-on-year in May 2003. This rate of increase was an improvement from the 3.0 percent growth recorded in the previous month. National Statistics Office (NSO) showed a 12.2 percent year-on-year rise in May 2003, following a 7.6 percent decline in April and an 11.4 percent increase in March. Merchandise exports fell by 4.0 percent year-on-year in May following a 1.8 percent decline in April. This reflected the downside impact of the continued softness in global market conditions. number of car sold registered a 4 percent year-on-year decline in June 2003 following a steep 40 percent decrease in the previous month. Meanwhile, growth in sales of electricity by Manila Electric Company (Meralco) slowed down to 2.7 percent in May from 5.4 percent in the previous month. inflation setting, going forward. end of the El Niño weather disturbance and normal rainfall conditions are expected to temper food prices. production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries international oil prices in July. In spite of this, domestic oil prices were stable during the month due to large inventory levels of local oil companies. lower than those applied for by the NPC. This helped support expectations of a benign impact of power rates on future inflation. Meanwhile, the continued implementation of Meralco’s refund scheme could support a favorable outlook on consumer sentiment. average yield falling by about 16 basis points to 5.17 percent at the BTr auction on 21 July 2003. The BSP’s monetary easing stance, improved fiscal performance and continued presence of ample liquidity in the system have contributed to the easing of interest rates. Meanwhile, interest rate differentials were narrower for the early part of July following the BSP’s policy rate cut by 25 basis points. month’s level. Domestic liquidity grew by 4.0 percent year-on-year in May oversubscriptions of offerings of T-bills and T-bonds and sizable placements in government securities by banks also indicated the presence of ample liquidity in the system. exhibited some volatility in the fourth week as domestic peace and order concerns were reignited following the escape from prison of a suspected international terrorist and 27 July 2003 failed mutiny. Meanwhile, on a real and trade-weighted basis, the peso weakened against the basket of currencies of the country’s major trading partners and competitor countries. This suggested an improvement in the country’s external price competitiveness. billion relative to its year-ago level and by about 22 percent relative to the January-June 2003 target. The narrowing gap reflected the gains from stronger revenue collection performance and the strict enforcement of tax laws and measures to increase collection efficiency along with tight spending policy. uneven and tentative improvements in macroeconomic conditions in the major economies. spending continued to hold up and financial conditions showed marked improvement following a rebound in the stock market. However, there were still elements of fragility owing to continued weakness in labor market conditions, relatively high spare capacity and the external downside risks posed by the softness in major trading partners’ economies. economic activity and lack of confidence. Recent economic indicators suggested broadly that conditions have stabilized but there were no clear signs yet of the underlying strength in production and market confidence.[2] slower consumer demand and subdued private investment along with the decline in exports which have offset the impact of higher public spending.[3] to weak consumer spending and housing investment combined with Duisenberg,” 10 July 2003; available online at http://www.ecb.int/index.html the decline in public investments. Meanwhile, the recovery in Japanese exports has also stalled.[4] maintain a supportive monetary policy stance by reducing policy rates to help sustain economic recovery. In the case of the US, the easing was also aimed at guarding against the possibility—although remote—of a substantial further disinflation.[5] Following the 25-basis point reduction in the federal funds target rate by the US Fed on 25 June 2003, the Bank of England, the Swedish central bank—Riksbank, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of Thailand and the Bank of Korea reduced their key policy rates. members of the Monetary Board agreed that the outlook for inflation has not significantly changed since the previous review of the monetary policy stance on 2 July 2003. In particular, they expressed the view that the assessment of various indicators of demand and supply conditions suggested that price dynamics will continue to be benign going forward. subdued inflation combined with moderate growth in domestic demand and downside risks to external demand pointed to the need for the monetary policy stance to continue to help establish a firmer footing for economic activity. to provide monetary impetus to growth should be balanced with the need to guard against excessive easing as well as the need to maintain operational latitude in preserving the inflation target from potential pressures. current monetary stance would help check any possible build-up of vulnerabilities in the economy that could arise from renewed volatility in the foreign exchange market, excessive debt accumulation by both the View), 16 July 2003; available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/seisaku/03/seisak_f.htm Services, US House of Representatives, 16 July 2003 private and public sectors and the possibility of incipient rise in asset price inflation. considered the following monetary policy options: The members of the Monetary Board noted that a further easing of the monetary policy settings would infuse more liquidity into the financial system, which already has ample liquidity.[6] The majority of the members of the Monetary Board shared the view that given that monetary policy affects inflation with a lag, the recent 25-basis point cut in the policy rates should be given sufficient time to work its way through the system. as follows: The Monetary Board’s assessment was that the current monetary policy stance remained supportive of the economy’s growth path given subdued inflationary expectations. They emphasized that while there is room for more easing, this should be weighed against the need to remain cautious and vigilant against any possible resurgence of inflationary threats. A member of the Monetary Board also noted that there may not be a need to ease the monetary settings at the moment since there is already ample liquidity in the system as evidenced by the downtrend in the benchmark Monetary Board concluded, therefore, that maintaining the current monetary settings would help preserve the BSP’s operational latitude in maintaining price stability. the 27 July 2003 coup attempt on the domestic economy. The members of the Monetary Board reviewed the economic impact of past coup attempts, particularly the 1989 coup attempt, on key demand indicators. They noted that the 1989 coup attempt did not have an independent impact on inflation and that, based on simulations, the main channel of additional liquidity of about P14.4 billion.This was estimated as one percent of the sum of deposits and deposit substitute liabilities of commercial banks amounting to P1.435 trillion as of end-May 2003. impact of the 1989 coup on the economy appeared to come in the form of higher risk premium. The resulting higher interest rates along with coup’s impact on market sentiment and expectations led to a reduction in private investment. However, the Monetary Board stressed that the economic impact of the 27 July 2003 mutiny is likely to be considerably less, since the mutiny was confined to a particular area, did not result in bloodshed and was resolved quickly. inflationary expectations and the evolving domestic demand conditions, the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, decided to: a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight Reverse Repurchase (RRP) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight Repurchase (RP) rate; b. Maintain the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and SDA windows; For banks’ placements with the BSP under the overnight RRP window, the interest rates shall be maintained at the following rates: c. Maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs; and d. Maintain the reserve requirements at their current levels given the adequate level of liquidity in the system. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 28 August 2003.