The Monetary Board held its seventh meeting for the year on monetary policy issues on 5 June 2003. This was preceded by the Advisory Committee[1] meeting on 3 June 2003. During the Monetary Board’s meeting, the discussions by the Monetary Board members revolved around the presentation of the Advisory Committee focusing on a comprehensive assessment of key economic and financial indicators relevant for the Monetary Board’s deliberation. The results of the discussions of the Advisory Committee as well as their recommendations on the appropriate stance of monetary policy were also presented to the Monetary Board. These served as inputs for the Monetary Board’s review of the BSP’s monetary policy stance. measure of core inflation decelerated to 2.4 percent in May from 2.5 percent in April 2003. below the Government’s target of 4.5-5.5 percent. This was based on the Monetary Board’s assessment which showed that: support a benign inflation environment going forward; and Monetary Board during its meeting held on 10 July 2003. namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. off, particularly with the abatement of the El Niño phenomenon and the downtrend in international oil prices with the conclusion of the US-Iraq war. Government’s target range of 4-5 percent. This outlook stemmed from the following factors: consumption and improved agricultural output; demand for credit based on expectations of a continued supportive monetary policy stance; utility charges; and of living. terms of stronger consumption spending and manufacturing activities. However, the pace of credit demand remained modest with a mild slowdown observed in March. The overall strength of aggregate demand thus remained generally moderate. GDP rose by 4.5 percent, which is the upper end of the Government’s forecast of 4.0-4.5 percent. Similarly, real GNP increased significantly in the first quarter by 5.6 percent, exceeding the Government’s forecast of 4.3-4.8 percent. spending grew by 4.9 percent in real terms during the first quarter of phone services, and utilities. This growth was stronger than the 3.5 percent increase reported a year earlier and was the highest growth rate recorded since the fourth quarter of 1998. grew by 6.4 percent (revised) in March 2003, a marked turnaround from the 1.1 percent (revised) decline in the previous month. Meanwhile, the growth in value of production index (VAPI) strengthened to 17.4 percent (revised) during the month from 10.0 percent (revised) in February. rising to 80.0 percent (revised) in March from 76.7 percent (revised) in the previous month. consecutive month, rising by 3.2 percent year-on-year in March registered in the previous month. preceding month. have shown some signs of weakening. Weather conditions are expected to normalize indicating continued favorable food production in the near term. Meanwhile, prices of fuel products softened in May. quarter from the 5.2 percent gain posted for the same period last year due mainly to the El Niño weather disturbance. However, food production for the remainder of 2003 should be normal with dissipating dry weather conditions, the onset of the rainy season, and continuing government measures to support farmers. These factors should help tame food inflation for the rest of the year. downward as world oil prices softened and domestic supply remained relatively high. Compared with the end-April 2003 levels, prices per liter of gasoline products, diesel oil, kerosene and cumulatively by P1.20, P0.90, P0.60 and P0.56 respectively. estimated at 72 days of supply, well above the required minimum inventory level of 7-15 days. already approved Phase 1 of Meralco’s refund scheme. On a on Meralco’s motion for reconsideration of the ERC’s decision on the utility’s rate unbundling case. The Order authorized Meralco to implement a P0.17 per kwh average increase over Meralco’s average May selling rate. softening of the yields was due mainly to the improved fiscal performance in April 2003 as well as the presence of ample liquidity in Treasury, the average yield on the benchmark 91-day T-bill fell to 6.302 percent, 54 basis points lower than the 6.842 percent yield recorded in the previous auction. This was the lowest level registered since the 17 March 2003 auction. The steady downtrend in the benchmark RP rates was accompanied by relatively steady foreign interest rates, which in turn translated into narrower interest rate differentials in May. Meanwhile, the growth in domestic liquidity slowed down further in April commercial and universal banks as well as the removal of the tiering scheme on RRP placements. average P52.54/US$1 in May 2003 compared to the P52.76/US$1 average in April 2003 due to the sustained inflow of remittances from overseas Filipino workers (OFWs), the strengthening of regional currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar and receipts from export dollar sales. Meanwhile, on a real, trade-weighted basis, the peso depreciated relative to the currencies of the major trading partners. The peso also tracked a similar depreciating trend vis-à-vis the broad and narrow baskets of competitor currencies. These developments indicated some improvement in the country’s external price competitiveness.[2] deficit stood at P65.5 billion, lower by 21.1 percent compared to the level registered in the same period a year ago. The favorable fiscal performance was influenced largely by the strong growth in revenue collections, reflecting partly the seasonal impact of quarterly/annual tax payments, reform measures instituted by the primary collecting agencies as well as the tight rein in public spending. The improvement in the NG fiscal performance in April buoyed up expectations that the fiscal sector could achieve its target budget deficit for the whole year. area and the United Kingdom. The broad basket of competitor countries is composed of the currencies of Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Hong Kong while the narrow basket is composed of the currencies of Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand only. This should provide a positive influence on expectations on future inflation and output growth. the timing and extent of global recovery remain uncertain as significant geopolitical, economic and policy risks remained in the major economies. The risks over the pace of global economic recovery remained predominantly on the downside. improvement but the overall picture indicated softness in domestic demand over the near term.[3] US real GDP growth in the first quarter of 2003 grew steadily by 1.4 percent (revised) as in the previous quarter. Consumer sentiment continued to rise in May as the University of Michigan's consumer sentiment index increased further to 92.1 (revised) from April’s reading of 86.0.[4] Similarly, the Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Index—another closely watched gauge of consumer confidence—rose to 83.8 in May, the highest in six months since November 2002.[5] However, the US unemployment rate remained high at 6.0 percent in April while the manufacturing sector remained weak as reflected in the decline of the Institute for Supply Management’s (ISM) manufacturing index to posted a nil quarter-on-quarter GDP growth in the first quarter.[6] While the appreciation in the euro would help ease further inflationary pressures in the short term, it could also dampen exports, which have been relied upon as the driver of economic growth in the Euro area. showed that the first quarter real GDP grew by only 0.2 percent, quarter-on-quarter or by 2.2 percent from the level a year ago. The key uncertainty in the UK economy was the overall pressure on the Remarks by Governor Mark W. Olson before the Chambers of Commerce of Bloomington, Eden Prairie story.news.yahoo.com/news quick read on where sentiment stands. The Conference Board's consumer confidence index is based on a mail-in survey of 5,000 households, and is more focused on labor-market conditions. http://www.fxstreet.com/nou/content demand side, reflecting the balance between the pick-up in government spending and the prospective improvement in net trade and ultimately investment on one hand and the slowdown in consumption, on the other.[7] there is greater uncertainty about the economic outlook, stoking fears that the economy would slip back into a shallow recession. risks on the global economic recovery have been predominantly on the downside. The US Fed, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England maintained their policy rates during their last meetings on monetary policy in May. Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) continued to ease liquidity conditions as it raised further the target for the current account balance of banks held at the BOJ to 27-30 trillion yen from 2227 trillion yen during their monetary policy meeting held on 19-20 May irrespective of the target should there be a risk to the stability of the financial markets in case of a surge in liquidity demand.[8] and supply conditions continued to point to a subdued inflation environment going forward. For 2003, the Monetary Board expects the average annual inflation to fall significantly below the Government’s target of 4.5-5.5 percent. For 2004, the Monetary Board expressed confidence that the average annual inflation would remain broadly in line with the 4.0-5.0 percent target. Based on its assessment, the Monetary Board believed that the near-term risks to inflation have diminished. In particular, deliberations by the Monetary Board showed that: demand—such as the robust growth in consumption spending and improvements in manufacturing—there is still lack of clear-cut evidence of a sustained pick-up in domestic economic activity. www.bankofengland.co.uk Bank’s View), available at www.boj.or.jp/en The lack of momentum for a pick-up in credit demand as well as continued restraint in bank lending stance—in part motivated by banks’ need to preserve asset quality—have contributed to the lack of price pressures. of tapering off, particularly with the abatement of the El Niño phenomenon and the downtrend in international oil prices with the conclusion of the US-Iraq war. has remained relatively stable indicating that the risk to the inflation outlook coming from a possible sustained depreciation of the currency—which coincided with the war uncertainties—has dissipated. demand for money remained moderate despite ample liquidity in the system. that the balance of risks on the global economic outlook remained on the downside even as the uncertainty surrounding the war has been removed. A slowdown in the pace of global recovery could impact adversely on the demand for Philippine exports. The members of the Monetary Board noted that this could weigh down on the growth prospects of the Philippine economy. alternative policy moves. In particular, the members of the Monetary Board deliberated on the merits of maintaining the current monetary policy settings and the possibility of further easing the current monetary policy stance. Against a backdrop of favorable inflation environment and relatively subdued demand conditions, the members of the Monetary Board noted that current monetary policy stance could be maintained to provide sufficient liquidity to fuel the economy’s growth requirements while guarding against the resurgence of price pressures that could dampen the growth momentum. sustained build-up in aggregate domestic demand and the downside risks in the external environment along with the quiescent inflation path highlighted the need for a supportive monetary policy setting, going forward. They expressed the view that recent monetary conditions and other economic developments provided added flexibility for the BSP to ease the stance while remaining cautious against potential inflationary threats given that the main risks to the inflation outlook have largely dissipated. scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP. They noted that based on the staff’s estimates, the possible impact on inflation of the restoration of the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and SDA facilities would only be minimal and would not lead to a breach of the Government’s inflation targets over the BSP’s policy horizon. They also stressed that easing the monetary policy setting—through the restoration of the tiering scheme—could help build up momentum for economic activity and consumer confidence without endangering the inflation goals. They also noted that the restoration of the tiering scheme would help compel banks to increase their lending activities for productive purposes instead of parking their excess funds with the BSP. would remain watchful of the evolving economic and financial developments, including the policy moves by other central banks such as the US Fed. inflationary expectations on one hand and the evolving domestic demand conditions, on the other hand, the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, approved to restore the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and SDA windows. In particular, banks’ placements with the BSP under the overnight RRP window would be subject to the following interest rates: The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 2 July 2003.