The Monetary Board held its sixth meeting for the year on meeting of the Advisory Committee.[1] The Advisory Committee submitted, for the Monetary Board’s consideration, a policy paper containing the committee’s assessment of the economic conditions and their implications on the inflation outlook as well as the committee’s recommendations for the appropriate stance of monetary policy. During around the factors that could influence inflation and inflation expectations, in particular, the forecasts of agricultural production, movements of the exchange rate, direction of international and domestic oil prices, possible adjustments in utility rates, liquidity and credit conditions, trends in demand and output indicators, fiscal developments, world economic conditions and outlook, and the implications of these factors on the BSP’s monetary policy stance. in the previous month as the lower food inflation cushioned the impact of higher fuel prices. The BSP’s measure of core inflation also eased to 2.5 percent in April from 2.6 percent in March. percent in 2003 but broadly in line with the 4-5 percent target for domestic demand continued to support a benign inflation setting and Monetary Board during its meeting held on 12 June 2003. namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. shown evident signs of tapering off. receded from the present environment. production is expected to weaken as weather conditions improve. Meanwhile, improved planting conditions and government support measures to avert possible supply problems of basic commodities are expected to keep food prices low or stable. corresponding cutbacks in the prices of local petroleum products. Compared with end-March 2003 levels, the prices of premium gasoline, kerosene, diesel oil, and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) centavos, 40 centavos, and P1.10, respectively. Domestic oil prices could go down further after local oil companies run down their current inventory of crude and finished products, which were imported at a time of rising world market prices. overcharging case on 30 April 2003.[2] While this implies a favorable influence on inflation expectations, the ultimate impact on future inflation would depend also on the final decision of the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) on Meralco’s pending petition for rate unbundling.[3] but do not, as yet, provide conclusive evidence of a strong and sustained pickup in demand. slowed to 1.8 percent in February 2003 from 3.7 percent in the previous month. The value of production index (VAPI) likewise slowed to 11.4 percent In February from 12.8 percent in January. compared to the average selling rate in May 2003 (ERC Case No. 2001-646). consecutive month with an increase of 4.4 percent year-on-year in February 2003. strengthen as credit card receivables of both commercial and thrift banks (including their credit card subsidiaries) grew by 5.1 percent compared to the third quarter of 2002 and by 13.8 percent from a year earlier. Credit card receivables comprise about 3 percent of banks’ total loan portfolio. Company (Meralco)—a leading indicator of overall power consumption—slowed down to 5.6 percent to 1,847 million kwh in February after an 11.6 percent annual rise in the previous month. unemployment rate remaining at 10.6 percent compared to 10.2 percent in the previous quarter and 10.3 percent in the first quarter of 2002. in the yields reflected the market’s demand for higher premium on Tbills owing to the implementation, beginning 1 April 2003, of the securities, which effectively replaced the 5 percent gross receipts tax country’s credit standing by Standard and Poor’s. During the 28 April reached an 11-month high of 7.34 percent—although this was 12 basis points lower compared to the rate in the previous auction on 14 April 2003. Meanwhile, domestic liquidity (M3) remained adequate automatically withheld by the BTr as replacement for the old gross receipts tax (GRT), while the remaining 4 percent is remitted by the banks themselves to the government. On 24 April 2003, however, the NG decided to temporarily suspend the withholding of the 6 percent GRT-equivalent portion of the VAT pending clarifications by the BIR on the application of the VAT. This resulted in the slight decline in 91-day T-bill yields on 28 April 2003 compared to the 91-day T-bill yield on 14 April 2003. despite the slowdown in M3 growth to 4.3 percent year-on-year in March 2003 from the previous month’s 6.3 percent growth. dollar. The peso’s recovery, which started around mid-March, could be attributed partly to the reduced uncertainty in the Iraq situation as the market priced in a quick resolution of the conflict in the Middle East. The implementation by the BSP of a number of measures to curb speculative demand for dollars also contributed to the moderation of market volatility. The peso settled at an average of P52.76/US$1 during the month, a 3.4 percent nominal appreciation from its average level in March. P58.9 billion was slightly above the target of P55.2 billion, but lower than the P61.2 billion deficit posted a year ago. remained cautious, weighed down by weak labor market conditions, sharp falls in equity markets, and lingering geopolitical uncertainties. quarter of 2003, up slightly from the 1.4 percent growth in the fourth quarter of 2002. Consumer spending continued to be resilient as advance estimates of retail and food services sales increased by 2.1 percent in March from a decline of 1.3 percent in the previous month. Likewise, the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index gained, rising to 86.0 in April from 77.6 in March. Meanwhile, other indicators continued to point to weakness in the economy as the US unemployment rate rose to Institute for Supply Management (ISM) manufacturing index has remained below 50 percentage points in April, falling to 45.4 percentage points from 46.2 percentage points in March. likely to remain weak in early 2003. Manufacturing activity for the euro area contracted in March as the purchasing managers index http://www.reuters.com. recovery as both public investment and private consumption showed a declining trend. Meanwhile, deflationary pressures have somewhat eased due to the recent uptick in crude oil prices and other international commodity prices.[6] most of the major central banks. The US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England all voted to keep policy interest rates unchanged during their latest monetary policy meetings. However, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) continued to ease liquidity conditions as it decided to raise further its main operating target for money market operations—the target outstanding balance of current accounts held at the BOJ–from “around Y17-22 trillion” to more liquidity irrespective of the above target when necessary to secure financial market stability.”[7] environment showed that the greater balance of available economic data pointed to demand conditions that continue to support a subdued inflation setting going forward. The members of the Monetary Board noted that BSP’s estimates of core inflation continued to track a benign trend, suggesting the relative absence of broad-based price pressures across consumer commodity groups. They argued that this is consistent with the mixed trends in various indicators of aggregate demand, the modest pace of credit creation, sluggish employment and wage conditions, and partial capacity utilization in key sectors such as manufacturing. view that some of the main risks to future inflation associated with cost-push influences, notably the impact on farm prices of the El Niño phenomenon and adverse movements in world oil prices, have to some extent receded from the present environment. expectations that headline inflation would remain broadly in line with the government’s target over the policy horizon. Moreover, the Monetary Board’s macroeconomic assessment also highlighted the greater risk of economic weakness faced by monetary authorities here as in other parts of the world. inflation have not all dissipated. The problem of a possible prolonged exchange rate volatility and its implications for inflation expectations has subsided without recourse to sharp policy rate responses. Hence, the possibility of renewed exchange market pressure should not be entirely discounted, particularly given that market sentiment is also vulnerable to changes in the NG’s fiscal performance. current monetary policy settings are consistent with the preservation of price stability and are appropriately calibrated to support the economy’s growth objectives. inflationary expectations given the various macroeconomic and financial sector indicators which have become available since its 10 April 2003 monetary policy meeting, the Monetary Board concluded that the current monetary policy stance continued to ensure price stability while remaining supportive of the economy’s growth objective. Thus, the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, approved the following measures: a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 7.0 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate—without the tiering scheme—and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and b. Maintain the reserve requirement ratios for banks at their current levels of 9 percent for regular reserves and 8 percent for liquidity reserves. the option of reassessing present monetary settings, particularly the level of liquidity reserve requirements given that the risks to the inflation outlook have abated. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 5 June 2003.