The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current level of 1.75 percent for the intermeeting period.
The member, meanwhile, presented the opinion that there had been ongoing concerns about a possible domestic economic downturn, as a global economic slowdown had been underway, led by industries upon which Korean exports heavily rely on.
Meanwhile, some members emphasized that, although prices were relatively stable, the real estate market was in a recession and the uncertainties surrounding domestic and overseas financial markets were increasing.
Based on all of this, the member argued that the growth and price paths did not have solid footing and their uncertainties were extremely high, but considering that this had already been expected during the last month’s rate cut, it would be advisable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
In addition, the member pointed out that there had been a slight slowing of price inflation with respect to items sensitive to economic conditions and of core inflation with items whose prices are administered excluded, and this implied a slight weakening of demand-side inflationary pressures and was also consistent with the recent real economic path.
Many members mentioned that, in the international financial markets, with global interest rates showing stable trends due to the easing of concerns about early QE tapering by the US Federal Reserve, stock prices had risen sharply.
However, members expressed conflicting opinions on the background to this growth.
On the employment front, as the number of persons employed has increased, the employment-to-population ratio rose and the unemployment rate fell in July compared to those in July of last year.
The member went on to argue that the policy authorities should work hard to improve economic sentiment by conveying their policy intentions more clearly and by ensuring that they are equipped with various policy instruments and are prepared to implement them.
Mortgage lending has continued to increase on a relatively large scale, even though house transactions have been inactive.
The amount of increase in household loans has lessened, and the increase in housing prices has moderated in all parts of the country.
The member noted that uncertainties surrounding the future growth path had heightened further, as there were factors making for political and economic instability at home and abroad, and as the economy was expected to slow down in the fourth quarter, influenced for instance by discontinued production of some items, corporate restructuring and the anti-graft law.
In addition, the member assessed that we can’t afford to be complacent, as developments in global energy prices related to China’s reopening and the rise in public utility bills could work as restraints on the downward stabilization of consumer price inflation.
The member’s assessment of the domestic economy since the end of last year was that demand in the private sector had stagnated and weak growth dependent on expansion in public sector expenditure was continuing.
The member also stated that financial stability risks related to real estate PF loans still existed.
He then presented the view that the normalization of interest rates should be considered at an appropriate time, when the economic recovery had become evident.
Meanwhile, one member took the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, in overall consideration of factors such as household debt that cause financial instability and the heightened uncertainties concerning domestic and overseas conditions, despite a slight increase in downside risks to the recent real economy and next year’s inflation.
The member also noted that there was a growing possibility that with the prolongation of the pandemic the temporary liquidity shortage stemming from the loss of sales could gradually transform into a solvency issue.
The member assessed that the domestic economy had maintained growth consistent with the potential growth rate in the first half of this year, but the gap between exports and domestic demand had been widening and uncertainty surrounding the future growth path had increased somewhat.
The member pointed out that, first, lending to households by non-bank financial institutions had been rising sharply, led by mutual credit firms, and second, optimism that the housing market would stabilize could be premature, since slower construction investment had not materialized, contrary to expectations.
In this process it will judge carefully whether it is necessary to adjust its accommodative monetary policy stance further, while closely checking future economic growth and inflation trends.
Members also noted that, while the international financial markets had generally shown stable movements, global interest rates had declined, stock prices had risen, and global capital had shown inflows to emerging market countries.
He added that, as the Base Rate was being cut in parallel with the easing of the LTV and DTI regulations to normalize the housing market, it would be advisable to closely monitor the real estate market in the future, and to make the required preparations for implementing macroprudential measures if needed.
The member stated that after the SVB incident, risk aversion sentiment had been strengthened globally and that there were also expectations of an easing of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy tightening stance.
As the inflationary pressures on the demand side are forecast to not be high for the time being, while the domestic economy is expected to continue its solid growth, the Board will maintain its accommodative policy stance while closely checking future economic growth and inflation trends.
Looking ahead the Board forecasts that consumer price inflation will remain at a low level for the time being, and then gradually rise due to the disappearance of the effect of the temporary electricity fee reduction and the weakening influence of the low oil prices.
The member argued, however, that uncertainties surrounding the future growth path remained high, owing to geopolitical risks as well as the lack of agreements in trade talks between major countries.
The member noted that financial stability indicators were positive, with government bond yields and lending rates falling and with money markets generally being assessed as stable.
The member emphasized that particular attention should be paid to the sudden concentration in the asset markets of liquidity that had increased as a result of the aggressive monetary policy in response to the COVID-19 shock.
The member’s assessment was that, although the accommodative fiscal policy had been acting as a buffer against the real neutral interest rate decline, this would have only a limited effect, considering the sluggish income and inflation indicators.
The member mentioned that economic shocks from COVID-19 had lasted for the third consecutive year, due to the spread of the Omicron variant.
The member also noted that the Board should decide when to make an additional adjustment to monetary accommodation, while reviewing the transmission effects of the Base Rate hikes, the developments and impacts of the pandemic, and growth and inflation conditions, while carefully monitoring improvements in financial imbalances at the same time.
Members expected CPI to fall somewhat going forward, given recent underlying inflation and the decline in oil prices, and fluctuate in the mid- to upper-1 percent range, not deviating greatly from its target.
Looking at the recent changes in domestic and external conditions, the member assessed downside risks to the growth and price paths as having increased somewhat from the April forecast.
The member added that households’ mortgage interest rates were already running above the pre-pandemic level in reflection of the government’s lending regulation measures, and policy measures to offset the negative side effects of low interest rates, such as debt service ratio (DSR) rules differentiated by borrower, had also taken effect.
Another member opined that there was a need to even out the maturity distribution of household debt, since there was a possibility of a vicious circle being set in motion between souring household loans, particularly those extended to older age groups, and real estate market instability.
Finally, the member pointed out that financial imbalances were continuing to accumulate amid the accommodative financial conditions.
More specifically, there is a higher likelihood of housing sale prices becoming more sensitive to lending rates, as household liquidity holdings have increased and recent housing transactions have been mostly driven by non-speculative demand.
The member added that, since the Base Rate had been raised on two occasions in August and November last year, it would be necessary to examine the effects of these rate hikes.
The member noted that employment conditions had improved somewhat with the number of persons employed increasing slightly in October.
despite a narrowing of the extent of decline in agricultural product prices as the decline in petroleum product prices accelerated.
In addition, the member commented that the restructuring of troubled companies, which had become an issue of late, and difficulties in monetary policy in the course of such restructuring exemplified the importance of curbing moral hazard by taking preemptive policy measures to strengthen financial soundness.
Long-term market interest rates have fallen back after having previously risen, in reflection mainly of interest rate movements in major countries.
The member thus saw the need to take active policy measures to deal with this issue.
However, one member pointed out the possibility that the degree of contribution of fiscal stimulus to growth might fall greatly from the second half of the year, since it would be difficult for the government to expand its spending significantly this year due to concerns about fiscal soundness.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Most members took the view that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to raise the Base Rate to 1.25% from its current level of 1.00%, while one member argued that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at the current level of 1.00%.
the moderate economic recovery in the US to have been sustained but economic activities in the euro area to have been unable to shake off their sluggishness, while emerging market countries have shown continuing economic growth.
The member stressed that it would be necessary to address the uncertainties felt by economic agents and stop self-reinforcing dynamic adaptation, while sharing the view that it was difficult to expect the domestic economy to grow at more than a modest pace in a situation where exports were unlikely to recover easily.
Taking these points into overall consideration, the member saw it desirable to maintain the Base Rate at the current level of 3.5% at this meeting.
The member forecast that the global economy would maintain strong growth exceeding its potential this year and global trade would sustain strong growth for the time being, and assessed the weakening of real economic indicators in some advanced countries during the first quarter as having been attributable to one-off factors.
The member noted that the world economy was sustaining its moderate recovery, and there had recently been signs of reflation.
The member also expressed the opinion that, in discussions about ending or changing the various financial support measures which had been adopted so far, consideration should be given to the differences in recovery trends by industry, sector, and income class.
The member particularly noted that typical domestic demand areas, such as the wholesale & retail trade and food & accommodation industries, were continuing to show sluggishness since the second half of last year.
The member thus saw that the short-term shock to the domestic economy could be much greater than past incidents of infectious diseases.
The member added that now is the time for us to keep the Base Rate unchanged at the current 3.50% and to monitor the effects of the high interest rate policy that we have kept so far.
With respect to employment, many members evaluated the employment situation as continuing to improve, with the gradual increase in number of persons employed, particularly in the private sector.
Members expressed concerns that, on top of the slowdown of domestic demand, the sluggishness of exports that had become apparent since the second quarter might limit domestic economic growth.
The member commented that, although exports had been continuing to show a solid recovery, factors such as the deterioration in trade conditions with China had been working to increase the negative impacts on both goods and services exports, thus requiring ongoing monitoring of trade with China on an item-by-item basis.
The member thus added that there would be a need to support the real economy and stabilize inflation expectations by implementing an accommodative monetary policy for some time.
The member also expressed the view that the government and the supervisory authorities should also carry out macroeconomic and housing policies for stabilization of household debt and the housing market in a consistent manner.
The member also expected construction investment to show improvement in the second half of this year.
The member added that we had gained clear insight into how substantial fiscal expenditures, which had inevitably heightened during COVID, had impacted inflation.
The member forecast that, however, a somewhat different picture could be in sight from the previous quarter in that exports would decline at a much faster pace, particularly to the US and the euro area where preventive measures had been strengthened, while the decline in private consumption would ease gradually, boosted by various policy support measures.
As to the domestic economy, many members noted that growth in the fourth quarter of 2014 had not been strong, due mainly to contractions in consumption and construction investment.
Concerning the domestic financial markets members noted that, with the inflows of securities investment funds of foreigners continuing, interest rates had fallen, stock prices had risen, and the Korean won had appreciated.
The member added that the slowdown of the consumption recovery was not expected to continue past the middle of the fourth quarter, since vaccines had been proven to be effective in preventing severe cases, and the domestic vaccination rollout had gathered pace of late.
Concerning inflation, the member noted that the growth in service charges had been accelerating, coupled with upward pressures on the supply side.
The member forecast that core goods inflation would slow, as a decline in import prices would be reflected after a time gap, and upward pressure on core service inflation would weaken further, influenced by a sluggish housing market and households’ increased debt servicing burdens in line with rate hikes.
The member added that there were high uncertainties as to how the COVID-19 situation would develop and how severe its impacts would be.
The member also expressed the view that, since the COVID-19 shock had been asymmetric, fiscal support and bank intermediated lending support, which allow selective support for vulnerable groups, should be continued.
However, due to high interest rates and inflation, consumer and investment capacity has weakened, exacerbating the imbalance between domestic demand and exports, and sectoral differentiation in the labor market is also happening.
A different member suggested the view that uncertainties associated with loan-to-deposit regulations might increase, as substantial changes were expected to take place in banks' fund-raising and fund operation.
The member added that concerns about the spread of the Irael-Hamas conflict had been somewhat mitigated, leading to falls in global oil prices.
Looking at the changes in domestic and external conditions since the previous MPB meeting, the member assessed the recovery of the global economy as strengthening gradually, boosted by expansion of vaccine distribution and reopening the economy as well as the economic stimulus in major countries.
The member then stressed the necessity of looking into the third option, which is to boost the housing rental market.
Going forward as well, many members expected the domestic economy to remain on an upward track, led by exports.
The member, however, emphasized that housing supply policies, tax policies and macroprudential policies should be carried out as planned in order to stabilize the housing market.
The member, however, pointed out that the price path had not been showing a commensurate change.
Thus, the Board will maintain its accommodative monetary policy stance.
some economic indicators in the US such as employment to have shown improvements, but economic activities in the euro area to have remained sluggish.
The member went on to forecast that although the Korean economy was expected to continue to show a trend of low growth, the 2% inflation target was likely to be achieved in the medium term according to the current economic outlook.
Stock prices have risen, with the large scale inflow of foreign portfolio investment funds.
Meanwhile, the member commented that China was at a stage of possible deflation, as inflation fell amid the slowing economy.
Regarding the housing market, sales prices in Seoul and its surrounding areas maintained their level of the previous month while the uptrend of those in the rest of the country slowed.
Improvement in the growth rate, in particular, is a factor adding to demand side inflation pressures, and, in this regard, its impact on disinflation needs to be closely monitored.
Meanwhile, the member mentioned that the spread of global risk-off sentiment had increased financial market volatility significantly, and the policy implications of the rising won-dollar exchange rate could be examined from various perspectives.
In summary, the member saw that, while the growth trend has improved, risks from external conditions, such as the exchange rate, remain, and upside risks to inflation have increased.
The member added that this was attributable to the softened expectations of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s further rate hikes and adjustments in the pace of long-term bond issuance by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and thanks to a weakened U.S. dollar.
The member commented that, for the moment, no major central banks were attempting to change the monetary policy stance to reflect the overconcentration of funds into asset markets.
The member presented the view that, therefore, it was appropriate to respond first by adopting microprudential policy.
Another member meanwhile expressed concerns about the continued, albeit slight, rise in mortgage loans under the influence of low lending rates.
The member’s assessment was that the recent decline in Korea’s potential growth was attributable to sluggish global manufacturing production and the decline in global trade volume.
Looking at the financial markets, the member took the view that, as the US was expected to continue its rate hikes, and trade conflicts among major countries and financial conditions in EMEs had been working to destabilize the financial markets, it would be necessary to continuously monitor the possibility of a spread of related risks.
One member emphasized that exit strategies including raising of policy rates were already being implemented in some emerging market countries, prompted by concerns about inflation and rising asset prices.
However, there is a heightened need for caution regarding the potential increase in volatility in foreign exchange markets, and the accumulation of financial imbalances, including rising housing prices and household debt.
Reflecting the outcome of these discussions, the following Monetary Policy Decision statement was prepared and then unanimously approved by the members.
Looking at price conditions, the member mentioned that, since the flattening of the Phillips curve, which implied a weaker linkage between growth and prices, had been witnessed across the world of late, Korea also was unlikely to see a large increase in underlying demand-side inflationary pressures.
Considering the inflation outlook, the member expected that the real Base Rate would exceed the neutral rate of interest after the second quarter, constraining private consumption even further.
The member saw that the global economy was maintaining growth above its potential and continuing to show a modest expansionary phase.
The member assessed that, since the record high interest rate differential between Korea and the U.S. could destabilize exchange rates and expand volatility in the foreign exchange market, it would be important to keep a close eye on foreign exchange movements and prevent any rise in foreign exchange volatility.
The main details of the MPC members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Although the sluggishness in domestic demand and exports were expected to last while inflation continued to run at a low level, members decided unanimously to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, sharing the view that there was a need to keep an eye on changes in financial and economic conditions at home and abroad for a while longer, since domestic and overseas financial market instability had eased somewhat of late and major countries were taking policy measures to boost their economies.
Meanwhile, the member presented the view that consumer price inflation remained at a low level of around 1 percent year-on-year and, although economic participation and employment rates were recently rising, this was attributable to the gradual expansion in labor market capacity in line with the rising rate of employment of the over-50s offsetting the declining rate of youth employment, and this was unlikely to lead to upward pressures on inflation over a medium-term horizon.
The trend of economic growth was generally not expected to deviate far from the path forecast last July.
The Committee forecasts that, due largely to the stability of international agricultural prices, inflation will remain low for the time being, but that it will be higher than its current level.
One member argued that, while maintaining the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, it would be necessary to more closely analyze the trends of global risks and uncertainties that had recently grown more pronounced, while priority should at the same time be placed on examining the effects on the Korean economy of the Base Rate cuts in August and October.
One member presented the view that it would be appropriate to raise the Base Rate to 2.50% from the current 2.25% at this meeting.
One member presented the view that it would be appropriate to raise the Base Rate to 0.75% from the current 0.50%.
Concerning future price conditions, he indicated that it was too soon to relax due to the numerous uncertainties, such as international oil prices and unstable agricultural product prices.
The member assessed that the gap between financial and real economic conditions was not narrowing, since the real economy was showing a very modest recovery while asset prices and credit to the private sector maintained strong growth.
The Committee forecasts that the global economy will sustain its modest recovery going forward, but judges that the possibility exists of its being affected by the changes in global financial market conditions stemming from the US Federal Reserve’s QE tapering.
One member presented the view in addition that attention should be paid to the facts that the share in overall bank lending of loans to SMEs had been decreasing since the financial crisis and, furthermore, that the share of credit-based loans in total bank lending to SMEs had also continued to decline.
The member expressed the view that this had also been witnessed during the period of economic downturn around 2012 and seemed to be related with population aging, a structural factor of the Korean economy.
increase in the prices of petroleum products and the base effect from the decline in the prices of public services last year.
With regard to inflation, the member’s assessment was, although that the Research Department had raised its inflation forecast for this year significantly to 3.1% and also adjusted its core inflation forecast upward to 2.6%, upside risks were even greater considering the recent global oil price trend and inflation pressures.
After briefings by staff on ‘Current Economic Developments in Korea’, the Monetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered the following areas: With regard to the global economy, members’ assessment was that Chinese economic growth was continuing to slow down, with the nation’s exports declining, while the US economy was maintaining its recovery, with consumption, facilities investment and the housing market continuing to improve and employment growth accelerating, and the euro area was showing a modest recovery.
The member saw these changes as positive, but pointed out that, since the US-China trade negotiations had not yet been finalized and global manufacturing and investment still remained sluggish, it was necessary to constantly keep an eye on the relevant developments.
- Looking ahead, while paying close attention to developments in and the influences of external risk factors such as shifts in major countries’ monetary policies and geopolitical risk in Eastern Europe, the Committee will conduct monetary policy so as to keep consumer price inflation within the inflation target range over a medium-term horizon while supporting the continued recovery of economic growth.
The member commented that the global economy has been growing moderately overall due to monetary policy tightening, with the U.S. sustaining growth far exceeding initial expectations.
As for the global financial markets, members judged that volatility of price variables, such as interest rates in major countries, had increased temporarily but then stabilized with risk-off sentiment easing in accordance chiefly with a reduction in major country policy uncertainties.
However, the member evaluated that, given that there were concerns about downside risks to growth and private debt repayment burdens of the vulnerable groups in particular had increased, it would be desirable to reduce the degree of Base Rate increase to 25 basis points this time.
Looking at an adjusted projection by the Research Department, the member expected that the growth gap would turn negative, while the inflation gap would remain in positive territory.
In other words, the member was of the view that low demand-side inflationary pressures stemming from the continuation of the negative output gap had been leading to the widening of the negative inflation gap.
The member mentioned that it would be necessary to clearly communicate whether the focus of diagnosis of, and prescription for, economic conditions would be placed upon a return to the potential growth rate, upon adaptation to the new normal, or upon responding to a new crisis.
Regarding the domestic economy, the member noted that growth was exhibiting a gradual recovery trend, boosted by favorable semiconductor and automobile exports, while domestic demand, such as private consumption and investment, had continued to show a weak recovery.
Going forward, domestic economic growth is expected to remain weak, affected by the global economic slowdown and the increase in interest rates.
The member expected consumer price inflation to far exceed the path projected in February, as impacts of rises in commodity prices and global supply disruptions, the two factors working to increase prices since the second half of last year, had grown since the outbreak of the Ukraine crisis.
In line with this, he argued that the possibility of a hard landing of the Chinese economy should be closely monitored.
The main details of the MPC Members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: The majority of members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international economic environment and the future outlooks for both, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period.
The won-dollar exchange rate decreased due to the weakening of the dollar.
The member thus noted that, at this juncture, it was necessary to reduce the degree of monetary policy accommodation, while giving more attention to financial stability in monetary policy operations.
The member presented the view that, fortunately, the labor market maintained a strong recovery trend despite these conditions.
Meanwhile, the member assessed that the accumulation of financial imbalances had been easing, as the government’s various regulatory policy measures had led to slower growth in real estate-related lending and a trend of decline in housing prices.
Government bond yields and stock prices in major countries have fallen while the currencies of emerging economies have depreciated, in line mainly with the escalation of the US-China trade dispute and the sluggishness of economic indicators in major countries.
The member argued that production growth led by exports and the manufacturing sector had started to lead to a recovery in domestic demand and that there were significant changes in indicators which called for consideration of whether the future path of monetary policy should be adjusted.
The member noted that, since the middle of last year, rising import prices including commodity prices had been gradually leading to rising prices of final consumer goods through producer prices, and the number of items showing price increases in the Consumer Price Index had also been growing.
The member, however, stressed that the financial markets could be destabilized greatly in line with the developments in the spread of COVID-19, and therefore external soundness conditions and potential risk factors at home and abroad should be closely examined and prepared against.
Members also mentioned that there had been growing concerns in the global financial markets, as Asian emerging market countries had seen declining stock prices and depreciating currencies and had experienced foreign capital outflows in consequence of the US-China trade dispute.
Meanwhile, members pointed out that, although international financial markets remained stable overall despite external potential risks, attention should be paid to the possibility of greater volatility.
The member thus emphasized the need to pay attention to this issue.
The member also added that, on the fiscal side, the Bank should actively set forth its views to ensure that the expansion of the fiscal burden would dynamically lead to a virtuous cycle of growth and distribution, while creating a favorable environment for fiscal expansion through low interest rates and purchases of Treasury bonds.
Core inflation excluding the prices of agricultural and petroleum products also rose from 2.1% to 2.3%.
Another member commented that, while lowering the Base Rate by weakening consumer and investor sentiments, it was necessary to pay attention to ensure that factors threatening financial stability, such as an increase in household debt and a delay in corporate restructuring, did not materialize, and to closely examine the effects of changes in global financial market conditions resulting from any shift in the US monetary policy stance.
The member also raised concerns about a growing possibility that spillover effects from negative shocks, such as an economic recession or housing price declines, could expand due to heightened vulnerabilities to household income and housing price risks.
One member opined that attention should be paid to the fact that adverse effects from the persistence of low interest rates for an extended period were already appearing, in the form of a deepening of economic imbalances—with real interest rates currently remaining negative and household and corporate lending growth accelerating—and that the Base Rate hikes should consequently be resumed, once the global financial market unrest had eased to some extent and positive signs of changes in economic activity had reemerged.
As for the world economy, with concerns persisting about its slowdown, uncertainties lingered due largely to the delays in recovery of consumer and investor sentiment.
The member expressed the opinion that, overall, monetary policy should maintain its current accommodative stance, prioritizing improvements in macro indicators such as growth, inflation and employment, in response to the wider-than-expected spread of COVID-19 and domestic and international economic sluggishness.
The member also noted that some non-bank financial institutions that had significantly increased their exposure to real estate financing were experiencing a rapid increase in delinquency rates, suggesting that there were potential risks related to the real estate market.
The members projected the growth rate for this year and next year at 3.0% and 2.9%, respectively, as forecast in January this year.
The member went on to state that the overall slack in the labor market had improved slightly in July, but such slack was concentrated among vulnerable groups, such as manufacturing workers and the younger generation, and attention should be paid to the possibility that factors such as corporate restructuring could undermine future improvements in the labor market.
The member thus called for closer attention on this matter.
The member presented the view that, since GDP for this year would be only 3% higher than its pre-COVID-19 level recorded in 2019 and private consumption was likely to return to its pre-COVID-19 level in the second half of next year at the earliest, it would be necessary to wait a little longer to see whether GDP growth led primarily by exports and the manufacturing sector would lead to expansions in household income, wages, employment and consumption.
Moving forward, the domestic economy is expected to show a moderate growth trend as robust export momentum continues and as sluggishness in domestic demand gradually eases due to slowing inflation and improving household real income conditions.
The member stated that lending growth associated with sales of new apartments and housing sales was stabilizing.
The member stated that the GDP growth forecast for this year had been adjusted downward to 2.7% from 3.0% and consumer price inflation was expected to remain at around 5% for the next several months to run at approximately 4.5% for the year overall, well above the previous forecast of 3.1%.
Members also judged that risk aversion in the international financial markets had heightened, and that the U.S. dollar had continued to strengthen.
The member went on to express the opinion that, given these factors, while the Base Rate should be maintained at the current level, it was necessary to closely monitor downside risks to the macroeconomy going forward.
economy has weakened due to the resurgence of COVID-19.
The member mentioned that inflation expectations of the general public had been growing recently along with the continued uptrend in prices, and went on to state that in order to prevent this from imposing an additional burden on the future path of the domestic economy and also on monetary policy options, preemptive measures needed to be taken for stable management of inflation expectations.
The member noted that, amid sluggish demand from major trading partners for goods imports, exports had remained sluggish affected by a slowdown in the global semiconductor industry.
First, looking at the global economy, the member assessed that, while the growth trend had differentiated across major economies and as inflation had continued to moderate in its underlying trend, uncertainty had increased overall due to a prolongation of tightening monetary policy stances in advanced countries and heightened geopolitical risks.
The member expected the GDP growth rate for this year to be generally consistent with the August projection since negative external risks, such as global supply disruptions, global inflation, and a slowdown in Chinese economic growth, were predicted to be offset by the possibility of an expansion in domestic demand following a transition in the disease control system in the fourth quarter.
On the other hand, the member assessed that core inflation in the U.S. had not declined greatly from the level seen in the second half of last year, and that it was rising in the euro area.
Meanwhile, the member stated that, in the FX market, the Korean won to US dollar exchange rate, which had risen significantly, fell sharply, in line with improvement in investor sentiment, driven by expectations of an adjustment to the pace of rate hikes by the US Federal Reserve.
In terms of inflation, members noted that consumer price inflation had risen to the lower-5% level during January, driven by an increase in processed food prices and hikes in public utility fees.
On the global economic front, the member noted that global trade was showing a solid recovery despite existing risks such as uncertainties originating in China, slow recoveries in other emerging market economies, rising energy prices, and supply and demand imbalances.
Meanwhile, the member presented the opinion that, as loan delinquency rates for real estate project financing and at non-bank financial institutions continued to rise, it would be necessary to examine risks more closely, keeping in mind the possibilities of deterioration in asset quality of related financial institutions, as well as of the weakening of their financial intermediary functions.
As inflation slows in accordance with the forecast path, there are growing expectations that inflation will converge on its target level in the second half of next year.
In global financial markets, the rise in stock prices in major countries has moderated as risk-taking tendencies were offset by factors such as inflation concerns.
Another member voiced the opinion that efforts to normalize Base Rate must be driven forward persistently, since the opportunity to curb price rises with monetary policy was receding and the negative effects including household debt expansion and delays in corporate restructuring were gradually increasing with the pause in rate normalization.
The member expressed concerns that financial imbalances had been worsening, as the continued risk-taking tendencies and yield-seeking behavior of economic agents had caused household debt to build up and asset prices to rise significantly.
The member projected that the domestic economic growth would remain at a lower level than initially expected, affected mainly by the global economic slowdown and the worsening of financial conditions at home and abroad.
Looking at the overseas economic environments since the previous MPB meeting, the member judged that global inflation had been strengthened, and recovery in major economies had weakened, due to the war in Ukraine and prolonged lockdowns in China.
Long-term market interest rates have declined, and the Korean won-US dollar exchange rate has fallen slightly.
Therefore, the member argued that the Bank should actively consult with the government to ensure that fiscal policy could be operated in a more expansionary manner.
Looking at employment, which had been recently recovering somewhat, the member noted that employment in the services sector was anticipated to improve, while that in the manufacturing sector was forecast to remain lackluster for the time being, and careful monitoring was required in this regard.
As for Korea, however, the member’s evaluation was that there were only slight inflationary pressures at the moment.
In this regard, the member expressed concerns that the fall in service charges, which was closely related with the livelihood of economic agents, could act as a larger shock causing inflation expectations to decline.
economic risk factors both at home and abroad and endeavoring to lower inflation expectations, will conduct monetary policy so as to stabilize consumer price inflation at the midpoint of the inflation target over a medium-term horizon amid continuing sound growth of the economy.
rates fell and the Korean won depreciated against the US dollar, as price variables fluctuated in line largely with international financial market conditions and economic indicators in major countries.
Looking at the FX and financial sectors, the member took the view that, despite a rise in interest rates due to expectations of monetary policy normalization at home and abroad, the situations in the FX and financial markets were not cause for major concern in terms of conditions for external borrowing, foreign currency liquidity management, and corporate funding.
Household loans have decreased slightly and housing prices have further decreased.
Members also noted that, although the household lending growth was slowing somewhat, it was still high compared to past years, and thus a close watch should be kept on the accumulation of financial imbalances.
The member assessed that the decline in core inflation had been slower than expected due to the continued pass-through of accumulated cost pressures into prices and the sustained upward momentum of service prices.
The member then expressed the view that, although an overall consideration of these points could lead to the conclusion that there is a need for further Base Rate adjustments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, while checking to see if the growth and inflation paths for the second quarter were consistent with the initial projections, and to strengthen the examination of changes in credit, exchange rate and other policy transmission channels and factors causing financial instability at home and abroad, thus maintaining a flexible policy stance.
The main details of the MPC Members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Members shared the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period as, with inflation remaining at a low level, the domestic economy was maintaining its steady trend of recovery.
The member also pointed out that leaseholders of commercial real estate had been increasing, particularly among small business owners, and in light of this, if business conditions slowed in the future, it might cause related loans to turn sour.
The member also expressed the view that, despite heightened international financial market volatility, financial instability seemed unlikely to spread to Korea, thanks largely to Korea’s sustained current account surplus and to sound financial conditions at Korean financial institutions.
In other words, the real GDP growth rate was holding steady as net export growth stemming from lower import volume had offset a decline in the contribution of domestic demand to growth, resulting in the slowdown of GNI and nominal income growth.
The member stated that it would be desirable to adjust the pace of tightening, while looking at the future domestic price and growth paths, capital flow trends, global financial market conditions, and changes in monetary policy in major countries.
One member took the view that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current level at this meeting, as the downside risks to the real economic growth path had expanded somewhat of late, acceleration in price inflation was still modest, and the downside risks to the growth path for next year had increased slightly.
- Based on currently available information the Board considers that the US economy has emerged from its temporary slowdown and shown a trend of moderate growth.
The member took the view that most economic indicators had been shifting to a downward trend and China’s economic slowdown could worsen in the course of trade conflicts and debt restructuring, which made it difficult to take an optimistic view of future economic conditions.
The member commented that there were heavier depreciation pressures on the won and greater incentives for an increase in external debt, as residents’ direct and indirect overseas investment had been expanding and foreigners’ domestic portfolio investment was continuing to show a net outflow with the current account surplus narrowing sharply entering this year.
Another member pointed out that with the delayed recoveries of the U.S. and other advanced economies, a hike in global oil prices and household loan defaults might have a negative effect on the domestic economic recovery.
The member saw that, with respect to global trade, goods trade was sustaining high growth, while recovery in service trade had been delayed.
The member also projected that consumption would sustain its underlying trend of improvement, since the effects of the spread of the virus variants were unlikely to last long considering the full-scale vaccinations of young and senior age groups and previous measures to combat COVID-19, and the government was implementing policy measures to support income and boost consumption.
The member judged that, although there had been ups and downs in the monthly data, from a broader perspective exports had remained favorable and consumption had maintained steady growth, despite significant corrections in investment, and the growth rate had generally remained close to its potential level.
The member stated that numerous emergency measures had expired so far, but supporting the credit market through an SPV that purchases corporate bonds and commercial paper, and the expansion of the Bank Intermediated Lending Support Facility, were still ongoing.
The member noted that, at this time, the Research Department’s April forecast looked to have significant downside risks, and even if the forecast materialized, it was still difficult to see the Base Rate of 1.50% as low relative to economic fundamentals.
The member, meanwhile, forecast that as global financial market conditions were expected to remain accommodative with a diminishing likelihood of the U.S. Federal Reserve further tightening, countries would likely show increasingly diverging policy stances from now on depending on their own economic conditions.
However, the member stressed the need to operate monetary policy cautiously, while examining the effects of the rate hikes so far, major economic indicators and future developments in terms of financial unrest, as financial stability risks also appeared to have increased both domestically and internationally.
In this process it will judge whether to adjust the degree of monetary policy accommodation, while carefully monitoring developments in the US-China trade negotiations, the economies and monetary policies of major countries, the trend of increase in household debt, and geopolitical risks and examining their effects on domestic macroeconomic and financial stability conditions.
Looking ahead, it is forecast that consumer price inflation will continue to run in the 3% range for a considerable time, exceeding the path projected in November, and above the mid-2% level for the year overall.
The member stated that spillover effects of changes in non-core inflation on core inflation could persist for some time due to remaining pressure of increasing costs so far, regardless of demand-side pressure.
One member presented the view that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at the current The member evaluated that, looking at global economic conditions, trends of economic growth in major countries excluding the US had slowed, and world trade had also remained sluggish.
Specifically, the U.S. economy is showing a growth trajectory surpassing expectations, as consumption remains strong and as the labor market demonstrates robust performance, potentially resulting in a slower-than-expected inflation deceleration due to demand-side pressures.
Concerning the price outlook as well, members anticipated that, although the CPI growth rate might slow somewhat on the back of government's micro-level efforts, upward pressures would remain high due mainly to increased inflation expectations.
The member added that facilities investment was showing faster-than-expected growth, while the correction in construction investment was proceeding at a modest pace and therefore was unlikely to constrain macroeconomic recovery.
One member expressed the opinion that it would be desirable to closely monitor changes in upside and downside macroeconomic risks, housing market conditions, the trend of household debt growth, the future directions of major countries’ monetary policies, and international oil price movements, while maintaining the Base Rate at the current 1.25 percent level for the intermeeting period.
All members shared the view that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to leave the Base Rate unchanged at the current 3.50% level for the intermeeting period.
The member expected that, despite a slight increase in the Base Rate in the current environment, growth and prices would remain on their forecast paths, and the Base Rate adjustment would help achieve financial stability by easing risk appetites and thereby curbing leveraged investment, mitigating the inefficient distribution of resources and curbing capital outflows.
However, some members expressed concerns about the additional increase in banks' household lending, while another mentioned the possibility of growing default risks, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with poor credit ratings, influenced by the worsening of fund-raising conditions for construction companies, due to the delayed real estate market recovery and tighter attitudes toward SME lending following the supervisory authorities' strengthening of soundness supervision.
Second, the member’s assessment was that, while the growth gap was narrowing, macroeconomic policy would expand further overall this year given the government’s fiscal policy stance, even if the Base Rate remained at the current level.
The member, however, commented that the causes of low inflation had not yet been resolved.
With this view in mind, most members agreed that the current economic recovery was not yet solid enough to allow an immediate shift in the policy stance.
As a result, the output gap was estimated to have become less negative.
has continued but domestic demand activities such as consumption, and the sentiments of economic agents appear to be improving somewhat.
The member went on to note that the decision in November 2015 to include the yuan in the SDR currency basket was a consequence of the Chinese government’s phase-in implementation of its medium-to-long-term plan to make the yuan an international currency.
August, owing mainly to slowdowns in the rates of agricultural product price increase and to declines in petroleum product prices.
However, the member expected the Board to reduce the size and pace of further increases of the Base Rate, while monitoring domestic and overseas economic developments and financial stability conditions, if the current forecast continued to hold that there would be a pattern of high price growth in the first half and low growth in the latter half and core inflation excluding electricity and gas fees would decline to the 2% range after the second half.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, members evaluated that the volatility of major price variables, including interest rates, stock prices and exchange rates, had increased, as also seen in the international financial markets, and that long-term market interest rates had risen substantially, affected chiefly by expectations of a US policy rate hike and rises in major country Treasury bond yields, while stock prices had fallen due to the increased uncertainties at home and abroad.
The member saw that inflation would remain very low this year, due to low demand-side inflationary pressures amid the combined interactions of structural and cyclical factors.
- The Monetary Policy Board of the Bank of Korea decided today to leave the Base Rate unchanged at 1.50% for the intermeeting period.
The member saw that, while global trade had begun to recover modestly from its slowdown, many countries were still exhibiting weak growth.
The member meanwhile stated that international financial market volatility had partially expanded in line with rate hikes in the US and the escalating trade dispute between the US and China.
After briefings by staff on _Recent Economic Developments,[2)]_ _FX and International_ Board (MPB) members covered the following areas: Members’ evaluation was that the domestic economy would show growth generally consistent with the previous forecast.
Nonetheless, the member noted that upward pressure on wages was declining and labor productivity, which had rebounded temporarily during the COVID-19 pandemic, was slowing again as employment grew, especially in the low-wage sectors, following recoveries in the hotel & restaurant and health & welfare sectors, as well as growth in the elderly and female participation rates in economic activity.
As for housing prices, the upward movements in Seoul and its surrounding areas have come to a halt, while the steep upward trend in the rest of the country has continued.
Members, however, added that there was a need to pay attention to changes in export and employment conditions in line for instance with stronger protectionism by the US and a foreign automaker’s decision to shut down a factory in Korea, while bearing in mind that employment was growing, led by export manufacturing industries, and employment growth was slowing in the service industries closely associated with domestic demand.
Looking at sectors, the member saw that, concerning private consumption, consumption of face-to-face services had been sluggish due mainly to containment measures, and overseas spending was unlikely to reverse course for a considerable time.
Even though construction investment has continued to be subdued and facilities investment has decreased, exports have sustained their buoyancy and consumption has steadily increased.
The member noted, however, that entering this year, the expectations for policy rate cuts had somewhat weakened in major countries, partially reversing developments in those indicators.
The member also forecast the output gap to remain positive, even if slightly, with exports continuing to grow, consumption maintaining the trend of improvement, facilities investment undergoing a modest adjustment from its high level, and construction investment continuing to go through a correction as expected.
The member added that, more fundamentally, there had been a continued underlying trend of changes to global value chains.
The member expected the domestic economy to sustain growth consistent with the path forecast in August, led by continued strong exports and solid growth in investment as well as a gradual recovery in consumption.
The member commented that the reduced uncertainty about major country policies had been easing global financial conditions via the retreat of risk aversion, which in turn could work in favor of policy flexibility of the countries where external conditions were not considered sound.
In terms of inflation, the member noted that, with the consumer price uptrend slowing in the first quarter, the future trajectory of annual inflation had been adjusted slightly downward.
On the other hand, one other member put forward his view that it would be advisable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.75% for the intermeeting period.
The member’s assessment was that monetary policy still remained accommodative, in view of abundant market liquidity conditions.
One member commented that the possibility of a double-dip recession in the US economy, the sovereign debt problems in certain European countries and geopolitical risks on the Korean peninsula had served as factors limiting normalization of the Base Rate, but that uncertainties with regard to these factors seemed to have eased significantly of late.
The member’s assessment was that, in the financial markets at home and abroad, volatility in price variables had heightened due to concerns about the spread of global trade disputes.
The member commented that household lending was showing stability this year, acting a backdrop to seamless corporate funding despite worsened corporate bond issuance conditions following the recent rises in bond yields.
The member, however, stated the need for paying further attention to downside risks to the macroeconomy overall.
The member noted that, with respect to private consumption growth, it had shifted to a trend of recovery from a prolonged downturn in the second half of last year and had exceeded GDP growth year-on-year until the first half of this year, but the savings ratio in the household sector still remained high, and thus it was uncertain whether the growth could be maintained.
However, the member presented the opinion that, since the domestic and overseas policy environments remained fluid and macro indicators had become more volatile, it was necessary to take a little more time to monitor the relevant indicators to see if the recent developments would lead to meaningful recovery or would be mere one-off events.
Prior to the members’ discussion regarding the Base Rate, the Chairman gave the floor to the 1st Vice Minister of Strategy and Finance, the government representative.
The member added that growing uncertainties over the outcome of the U.S. presidential election in the second half of this year would likely increase volatility in financial and foreign exchange markets.
In the housing market the uptrend of sales prices has slowed, centering around Seoul and its surrounding areas, while leasehold deposit prices have continued to rise at a pace similar to that in October.
The member also mentioned that the diffusion index has not been falling since July, while that of core items has been continuously climbing.
The member thus expressed the need to carefully monitor the situation in vulnerable sectors.
Labor market conditions have continued to be favorable with a low unemployment rate, despite a slowing increase in the number of persons employed.
The main details of the MPB Members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the changes in the domestic and international economic environments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
The member took the view that, in overall consideration of growth, price and financial conditions of the Korean economy, it would be appropriate to maintain the Base Rate hike stance to respond to underlying sources of inflationary pressures, while taking microeconomic stabilizing measures to deal with market unrest.
Looking at specific sectors, members expected exports and facilities investment to maintain their trends of improvement and the sluggishness in private consumption to ease gradually.
However, the member pointed out that consumer price inflation had risen significantly, reaching the mid- to upper 3% range of late, surpassing initial projections, driven by sharp increases in oil and agricultural product prices.
The member however emphasized that it would be necessary to choose appropriately among interest rate-focused monetary policy instruments in response to inflation and among market stabilization measures in pursuit of financial stability that would be fit for the situation and purpose.
The member noted that, even if consumer price inflation for this year rose to around 2%, as projected by the Research Department, consumer price inflation for 2019 and 2020 was only 0.4% and 0.5%, respectively, and core inflation would remain at the pressures was not a matter of concern, and inflation expectations implied in long-term interest rates were not high.
Meanwhile, one other member asserted that, although the possibility of debt deflation occurring as suggested recently in some circles was evaluated as not high, the household debt- and real estate-related issues—factors to which the Korean economy was structurally vulnerable— posed the risk of escalation to ignite a crisis at any time, and so measures to resolve them must be sought with continued interest in the future.
The member commented that, amid the ongoing slowdown in the global economy, exports had not been showing any sign of recovery, and it had become more difficult to expect a recovery in exports in the immediate future, due to recently growing uncertainties surrounding the US-China trade dispute.
Finally, the member found it difficult to be optimistic that the trend of household debt growth would stabilize next year, since demand for home mortgage lending was expected to be strong, led by apartments under construction that had already been sold, despite policy efforts to curb household debt.
The member, however, emphasized that a close watch should be kept on the impacts of the recently introduced anti-graft law and the government measures to stabilize the housing market.
In this regard, in the current situation in which demand-side inflation pressures were weak but sustained, it would be desirable to adjust incentives for savings and investment toward the level of the neutral interest rate to curb financial imbalances, and since this would coincide with an increase in fiscal expenditure for the vulnerable, it would not cause any significant changes in aggregate demand-pull pressures.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, members noted that stock prices had dropped significantly and the won-dollar rate had risen greatly, due to the outflows of foreigners’ portfolio investment funds following financial instability in China and falls in international oil prices, and long-term interest rates had decreased owing chiefly to the preference for safe haven assets due to heightened financial market volatility.
Another member presented the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level.
In conclusion, the member expressed the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at its current level of 1.75 percent at this meeting and keep an eye on future developments, and went on to argue that it would be desirable to carefully decide whether to further adjust the degree of monetary policy accommodation after comprehensively evaluating economic growth and inflation trends as well as changes in financial stability risks, based on economic indicators.
The member also pointed out that there was excessive liquidity in the financial markets, as seen in the real Base Rate falling short of the neutral interest rate and a surge in the money supply relative to its long-term trend.
The member noted that, although household lending growth was slowing, the household lending to income ratio still remained high.
The member diagnosed that, given recent economic conditions, growth for this year could run below 2% and it was difficult to be optimistic about economic recovery for next year.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows.
After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea', of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members covered the following areas: Concerning the global economy, members’ assessment was that the moderate economic recovery in the US had been sustained and the economic sluggishness in the euro area showed signs of easing, while economic growth in some emerging market countries continued to deteriorate affected mainly by export sluggishness and capital outflows.
- Currently available information suggests that the global economy has continued to recover, supported by accelerated vaccinations and the relaxation of restrictions on economic activity in major countries.
The member analyzed that this weak domestic demand was a key driver of disinflation in Korea, as it makes it difficult to pass on accumulated cost pressures to the second round, even in the face of supply shocks, such as the surge in agricultural prices since the second half of last year.
The member added that delinquency rates of some non-bank financial institutions, which had significantly increased their exposure to real estate financing, had also continued to increase sharply.
One member pointed out that, even if the Base Rate was maintained at its current level for December, a clear signal should be conveyed to the markets that the central bank's stance on interest rate normalization to achieve price stability remained in effect.
Members saw that, with respect to prices, consumer price inflation for this year would run above the path projected in May, due not only to upward inflationary pressures on the supply side but to gradually increased pressures on the demand side as well.
Going forward, domestic economic growth is expected to slow gradually, affected by the global economic slowdown and the increase in interest rates.
The member noted that global trade had remained sluggish, probably due to the fact that the global economic recovery since last year had been driven primarily by the services sector, and went on to state that global oil prices had risen, boosted by the extension of production cuts by OPEC+.
The member judged that, given the current inflation situation and the strong recovery of the real economy, however, it would be desirable to respond to underlying inflation pressure that had become more pronounced.
Looking at the real economy, the member’s assessment was that the slowdown in global trade growth had become a trend while exports and facilities investment had become more lackluster, and as a result, an economic slowdown had become apparent, with the growth rate far below the potential growth rate.
The member added that it would be necessary to consider conducting monetary policy with a greater focus on financial stability once the spread of COVID-19 eases and the domestic economy shows a marked recovery.
Accordingly, the member pointed out the need to keep a careful watch on developments such as political uncertainties in the US, and risks related to North Korea’s nuclear tests.
The member added that in doing so it would be important to continue closely monitoring changes in financial stability risks.
The member added that the MERS clusters were basically no more than an incidental and temporary shock that might affect the growth rate but neither the trend of economic activity nor the growth path; it would be a hasty move to respond by way of interest rates.
As for recent domestic economic developments, most members' assessment was that the domestic economy remained on a steady upward path, led by stronger exports and improved domestic demand.
Meanwhile, the member expressed the view that continued coordination with other policies would be needed to minimize potential policy costs incident to the Base Rate cut.
Stock prices and the Korean won-US dollar exchange rate have fluctuated considerably in line mainly with concerns about spreading trade protectionism and with the decline in risks related to North Korea.
With these taken into account, the member mentioned that the growth rate was highly likely to be lower than the May forecast.
The member took the view that the sluggishness in the global economy could ease somewhat toward the second half of the year, boosted by the normalization of China’s economic activity and improvements in the IT industry, but that it would not be easy to expect any rapid economic recovery due to the spillover effects of the short-term surge in interest rates on the financial sector and the real economy.
One other member also put forward the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, and added that there was a need to closely examine whether the channels of transmission of the August Base Rate cut were functioning properly.
The member thus asked that attention be paid to financial stability risks.
The member added that, given that there was also little sign of improvement in employment in the domestic demand-led services industry, the projection that ‘consumer price inflation will approach its 2-percent target in the second half of this year, dependent upon economic recovery’ also seemed somewhat uncertain.
By sector, members forecast private consumption to remain sluggish, affected mainly by a strengthening of social-distancing measures, and exports to exhibit a more modest recovery than originally expected due to the resurgence of COVID-19 in major countries and a delay in the recovery of the semiconductor industry.
However, the member assessed that financial conditions were still very accommodative given high growth in monetary aggregates and leverage was still increasing.
Volatility in global financial markets has increased sharply.
The member took the view that, if the current monetary easing stance continues, its negative side effects on the economy as a whole could be larger than its effect of supporting vulnerable groups, and in this regard, it would be necessary to use fiscal and financial support measures ensuring selective resource allocation for these groups.
The member noted, however, that a sharp correction in housing prices amid rising delinquencies in loans to the real estate sector could lead to an increase in credit risks and to financial market instability.
The member noted that, with major global institutions and investment banks adjusting their world economic growth outlooks for this year sharply downward, the real economy and financial markets in Korea would be inevitably hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The member noted that, on top of the preemptive Base Rate cut, if the government pushes ahead with its announced 10-trillion-won supplementary budget, Korea is expected to cope effectively with the contractions in consumer and investor confidence stemming from corporate restructuring.
In this regard, the member stated the view that there was an urgent need to collect micro-data related to household debt in order to gain an understanding of the exact state of household debt in Korea, including lending to self-employed business operators and the debt of unregistered landlords, and to set up a system of managing such data systemically.
The member however mentioned that, since a rise in interest rates was highly likely to increase interest repayment burdens on vulnerable groups at a time when there remained high uncertainties related to COVID-19, it would be necessary to strengthen coordination with other policies such as fiscal policy and the Bank Intermediated Suppor t Facility.
The member added that aggressive financial support was also needed for businesses and vulnerable groups experiencing a temporary crisis triggered by an unexpected shock.
economy and stabilize consumer price inflation at the target level over a medium-term horizon, while paying attention to financial stability.
In the housing market, the upward trends of sales and leasehold deposit prices slowed somewhat in both Seoul and its surrounding areas and the rest of the country.
The member noted that private consumption had remained strong, boosted by improvement in services sector consumption, and forecast that private consumption was unlikely to shrink rapidly in the second half as well, supported by employment growth and wage increases.
The member noted that consumer price inflation declined to 4.2% in March.
Concerning the direction of economic policy for the following year, the 1st Vice Minister disclosed that the government planned to pursue four major policy objectives: achieving macroeconomic stability and improving the fabric of the economy; revitalizing the economies of ordinary people and enhancing the quality of their lives; strengthening the base for domestic demand and developing new engines for growth; and enhancing Korea's national profile while reinforcing its international cooperation.
Fourth, with regard to financial stability conditions, short-term and long-term market rates and corporate bond spreads showed stable movements, while foreign portfolio investment inflows continued with the sustained risk appetite in the international financial markets.
Another member noted that, in view of the factors contributing to the vulnerability of the Korean economy, such as the excessive household debt level and low corporate profitability, as a precaution against further expansions of financial unrest in emerging market countries there was a need to thoroughly prepare measures in advance for responding to any sudden reversal of foreign capital flows.
In the U.S., the member noted that the consumption slowdown had continued moderately, and that economic growth had slowed at a lower-than-expected pace.
December, as the effects of the slowing in the downward trend of petroleum product prices and of the expansion in the extent of decline of agricultural product prices offset each other.
The member evaluated the growth divide as having become more serious and employment conditions as having worsened further of late, as recovery in the real economy was led by some export industries, such as IT, and shocks from the COVID-19 pandemic had been concentrated in the low-value-added services industries.
With respect to the domestic economy, the member judged that there were growing concerns about a weakening of growth momentum, as exports had been sluggish, affected largely by a slowdown in the growth of the global economy and trade and also in the global semiconductor industry.
the moderate economic recovery in the US to have continued, but the sluggishness of economic activities in the euro area to have persisted.
The member also added that the pace of recovery in private consumption has been slowing due to an aggravating burden for households to make principal and interest repayments, while inflation appears to have been slowing, as well.
The member added that, by sector, government income growth was estimated to greatly exceed 3 percent, while that in the corporate sector was significantly lower than 3 percent.
The member observed that household loans in the financial sector rose at a rapid pace, driven by the increase in apartment prices and transaction volume in Seoul and its surrounding areas.
The member’s further argument was that attention should be paid to the suggestion by some that, if the US economy improved, boosted for example by the Biden administration’s fiscal policy, and inflation pressure increased, the Federal Reserve might change its monetary policy stance sooner than expected.
Meanwhile, some members raised concerns about the possibility of low inflation affecting inflation expectations.
In the meantime, the member presented the view that the ensuing difficulties faced by vulnerable sectors should be addressed with appropriate microeconomic policy measures through concerted policy efforts.
Members evaluated that, in this regard, the US Federal Reserve and major central banks had strengthened their accommodative monetary policy stances.
The member assessed that the global economy had continued to exhibit a moderate recovery, crude oil and other commodity prices had rebounded, and asset prices had shown an upward trend in advanced countries, which had helped Korea’s exports shift to an increase and acted as a factor supporting a rebound in manufacturing production and facilities investment in related industries.
Members, however, pointed out that a closer look at the details of employment showed that the degree of improvement in overall employment conditions remained insufficient.
Going forward, the Committee anticipates that the negative output gap in the domestic economy will persist for a considerable time, due mostly to the prolongation of the euro area fiscal crisis and to the delay in recovery of the global economy.
The member expected core inflation to continue a gradual slowing trend going forward, but uncertainty remained regarding the pace of slowing due, for instance, to secondary spillover effects resulting from accumulated cost pressures and the possibility of hikes in public utility charges.
As to prices, the 1st Vice Minister disclosed that the government saw prices as the most essential element for stability in the lives of ordinary people, and was consequently concentrating its efforts to contain concerns over price instability, by monitoring prices and improving its response systems, while focusing on early stabilization of the prices of agricultural, livestock and fisheries products including vegetables.
In this regard, the member expected the overall economy to remain lackluster for the time being, even when accounting for the government’s active fiscal policy.
The member then assessed this as strongly attributable to employment growth in the health & welfare sector, led by the government’s job creation policy, and in the construction sector, associated with an increase in the availability of apartments.
The member noted that the consumer price inflation forecast for next year had been revised upward to over level for next year, following similar figures this year.
The member expected consumer prices for this year and next to be generally consistent with the October forecasts.
The Committee forecasts that the global economy will sustain its modest recovery going forward, centering around advanced economies, but judges that the possibility exists of its being affected by the changes in global financial market conditions stemming from the shift in the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy stance, by the weakening of economic growth in some emerging market countries, and by geopolitical risks in Eastern Europe.
Concerning financial imbalances, the member expressed the opinion that there was a need for close monitoring of the possibility of a recovery of profit-seeking demand in the housing market, and of whether unproductive demand for funds was increasing in the commercial real estate market.
Core inflation excluding agricultural and petroleum product prices was forecasts that inflation will continue at a low level, due mainly to the effects of low oil prices.
Looking ahead the Board expects that consumer price inflation will for the time being fluctuate at the 2% level, and for the year as a whole slightly exceed the January projection (1.8%).
He went on to note that the stability of inflation expectations had eroded due to the coexistence of conflicting market expectations as to the direction of monetary policy operation given the growing contradictions between the price stability and the financial stability targets in line with the persistent low inflation and the sharp increase in household debt.
Looking ahead the Board sees global economic growth as likely to be affected by factors such as the paces of monetary policy normalization in major countries, the movements toward spreading trade protectionism, and the directions of the US government's economic policies.
The member noted that inflation remained low in reflection of these domestic and international conditions, and price indices showing demand-side pressures remained flat in the upper-1% range.
The member evaluated that Korean economic growth had slowed since the second quarter to show a 0.6% quarter-on-quarter increase and annualized growth at the mid-2 percent level, and explained that the growth was dependent upon semiconductor exports and fiscal expenditure and thus seemed somewhat unstable, while employment in the private sector had been highly lackluster.
The member added that, if the Base Rate were lowered at this meeting, there would be only limited scope for further downward adjustments to the Base Rate, not only in terms of financial imbalances, but also in terms of policy effectiveness and possible capital outflows, although this judgment could of course vary depending upon changes in domestic and international financial conditions and the monetary policy operations of major economies.
Another member expressed the opinion that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, as domestic economic conditions had not changed much from the previous month and the international financial markets had shown stability in the short term.
Long-term market interest rates have increased, in reflection of the changes in interest rates in major countries.
The member explained that this was because the export slump had gradually been easing, and, on the domestic demand side, the effects of the accommodative monetary and fiscal policy measures taken so far were expected to continually rein in the negative impacts of COVID-19 and drive a recovery in demand from households and corporations.
The member thus noted that it was desirable to first utilize macroprudential policy to address these issues selectively.
The extent of growth in bank household lending has continued to lessen, but the substantial increase in household lending by non-banks has been sustained.
The member’s assessment was that, although Korea’s economic growth had been driven by facilities investment related to IT sector exports and by construction investment associated with household debt, the economic recovery had so far not been transmitted fully to household income.
He added that the channels for revival of the Korean economic growth potential and for returning to the appropriate price level needed to be examined closely, while also strengthening the macroprudential supervisory framework through cooperation among the related authorities with regard to financial stability risks including the increase in household debt.
The member stated that government bond yields fell sharply due mainly to the sharp decline in U.S. Treasury bond yields, and short-term market interest rates also declined significantly.
Accordingly, the member expressed the view that it would be appropriate to leave the Base Rate unchanged at the current 3.50% at this meeting.
Members saw that, although household lending growth had been slowing, attention should be paid to the continued strong growth in sole proprietor loans.
The Board judges that the additional high and is projected to be above the target level for a considerable time, although the domestic economic growth rate is expected to be below the November forecast.
The member also assessed domestic economic activities to have shown improvement, as the sluggishness in private consumption had eased somewhat and exports and facilities investment had increased.
The member presented the view that while deleveraging may be painful, it does ensure an economy’s soundness and sustainable economic growth in the long-term.
The member noted that, in general, economic growth and prices in the second half of this year would likely be consistent with their July forecasts, but various upside and downside risks had been growing of late.
He went on to argue that it would be desirable to maintain the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period since, due mainly to seasonal factors, there was not enough data to judge the strength of the economic recovery, and there was also a need to further observe the effects of the government’s front-loading of its budget implementation and of the BOK’s Base Rate cuts.
Members saw that, going forward, downside risks to prices would increase further, due to a plunge in international oil prices and the effects from the government’s measures to stabilize people’s livelihoods.
One member, while noting that there still was a possibility of international financial market volatility heightening with monetary policies in major advanced countries diverging, expressed the opinion that it would be better to keep a close watch on the monetary policy implementation by major advanced countries and the movements of international financial market price variables going forward, while closely monitoring their influence on the domestic economy.
The member thus judged them to be positive changes.
The member assessed that, considering these points, the domestic economy did not appear to have emerged greatly from its overall sluggishness, despite its partial and moderate recovery.
Overall growth in the U.S. is favorable, although there are signs of a slowdown in consumption, and the eurozone economy is recovering, led by consumption, amid political instability.
One other member presented the view that it would be appropriate to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period.
With regard to financial stability, the member’s evaluation was that some changes were witnessed to the previous year’s trend of household debt growth being led by leasehold deposit loans and credit loans extended by banks.
The member expected that the effects of the widening of interest rate differentials caused by further tightening in major economies on the Korean won to US dollar exchange rate would be limited.
The member assessed that, although consumer price inflation had risen significantly in January, inflation in 2017 was unlikely to deviate far from the January forecast of 1.8 percent, and went on to argue that, based on the forecast that supply-side inflation pressures would not be large, it would be possible to maintain accommodative monetary policy in consideration of downside pressures to the economy.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the changes in the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
One member pointed out that, if the growth momentum in major advanced economies weakened, a very critical touchstone in determining future economic trend would be whether the emerging market countries could successfully lead the global economy instead.
The member observed that global economic growth had fallen short of its long-term average, affected by global monetary tightening, but that growth had been uneven across countries.
The member also anticipated that facilities investment and fiscal expenditures would make a greater contribution to growth compared to this year, boosted by growth in semiconductor investment demand and a rise in tax revenue.
English on the Bank of Korea’s website.
Furthermore, the member expressed the view that, since the FX sector could remain highly volatile and work to destabilize financial markets for some time due to changes in expectations of major country monetary policies, external soundness should be a matter of policy concern as well.
As to leasehold deposit prices, the scale of their increase widened somewhat in Seoul and its surrounding areas, while their uptrend in the rest of the country exhibited a pace similar to that in the preceding month.
Another member meanwhile argued that the possibility of global economic recovery was also gradually increasing, thanks to the signs of improvement in U.S. employment and housing indexes, which had until then been a source of deep concern.
The member judged the uncertainty of the economic outlook to have heightened further as the unexpected US presidential election result had cast uncertainty on whether the world trade volume would recover, although the growth pattern of recoveries in exports and facilities investment serving as a buffer against slower construction investment was expected for 2017.
The member pointed out, however, that the faster growth in private consumption had not yet been seen to facilitate production in domestic demand-oriented industries represented by services industry and to improve employment in related labor markets.
The member noted that in consideration of these changes in domestic and international conditions, the Research Department had revised downward the growth forecasts for this year and the next to the upper-2% range and the mid-2% range, respectively, and revised upward the inflation forecasts to 4.5% and 2.9%, and these directions appeared to be appropriate overall.
They also noted that long-term interest rates had fallen, affected by stronger preferences for safe assets.
The member saw that market interest rates, as well as deposit and lending rates in the banking sector, had fallen to historic lows; growth in private-sector credit and market liquidity had sharply accelerated; and stock prices had recovered to the level seen before the COVID-19 outbreak.
The member added that this expectation was supported by large spillover effect on inflation, and in business cycle-sensitive price indexes, which reflect demand pressures; and (ii) the fact that the rate of inflation expected by the general public had held steady in the mid-2 percent range.
The Committee expects the pace of global economic recovery to be very modest going forward and judges the downside risks to growth to be large, owing chiefly to the euro area fiscal crisis and to the fiscal consolidation issue in the US.
The member thus expressed the opinion that the government should provide guarantees for solvency risks in advance to allow the central bank to preemptively respond.
However, the member expressed the opinion that high inflationary pressures would persist longer than expected, due not only to supply disruptions, but also to rapid recovery in demand, and changes in the labor supply and demand structure.
The member forecast that if oil prices recover next year as major institutes had projected, faster growth in EMEs would lead to a gradual recovery of the global economy, and inflation in Korea would converge to its target of 2 percent.
In this process it will judge whether to adjust the degree of monetary policy accommodation, while closely examining any changes in macroeconomic and financial stability conditions.
The member noted that the process of resolving accumulated financial imbalances could weigh on growth in the short term, but this would lay a foundation to further consolidate Korea’s economic fundamentals over the medium-term horizon.
After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea', of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members covered the following areas: Concerning the global economy, members’ assessment was that, while the moderate economic recovery in the US had been sustained, the economic sluggishness in the euro area showed signs of easing and the modest recovery in Japan had been maintained, bolstered by an expansion in domestic demand, economic growth in some emerging market countries had slowed, influenced in part by financial instability.
The member evaluated that the weakening of demand-side pressures was attributable to a decline in the potential growth rate to the mid-2% range or lower.
The member added that even if downside risks associated with the Ukraine crisis, slower growth in China and policy rate hikes in major economies materialized, growth would be unlikely to run below the potential level, at least in the short term.
The member noted that, in reflection of such sluggish domestic demand, inflation was declining as well.
After briefings by staff on ‘Recent Economic Developments’, ‘FX and International Finance’ and ‘Financial Market Trends’, the discussions of the Monetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered the following areas: With regard to the global economy, members’ assessment was that the US economy had shown robust growth with its employment indicators improving, that although markets had quickly steadied after the Brexit shock, the trend of recovery in the euro area had weakened due mainly to sluggish exports, and that the Chinese economy had maintained its growth, led by consumption.
The member went on to express the view that it would be desirable to maintain the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, in consideration of the trend of foreign securities investment fund outflows and an increase in household debt.
Lastly, one other member put forward the opinion that it would be advisable to carefully monitor the progress of overseas risk factors and monetary policy operations of major advanced countries, and to closely examine their effects on domestic business activities, prices and financial market conditions.
One member noted that, as the downside risks to the growth path were becoming ever more prominent at this time, financial and economic developments at home and abroad must be scrutinized while proceeding with policy adjustment at a measured pace.
The member meanwhile forecast consumer price inflation to remain high at around 6%.
He then argued that the Base Rate should be adjusted slightly downward from its current level, on the judgement that a succession of policy rate cuts would be more effective as a preemptive policy response.
Meanwhile, one member expressed the opinion that it would be desirable to adjust the Base Rate downward by 25 basis points from the current 1.5 percent to 1.25 percent this month.
Another member, on the other hand, expressed the view that it was desirable to keep the accommodative monetary policy stance in place for the time being, given that prices were currently relatively stable, the real estate market was depressed, and the uncertainties surrounding the domestic and foreign economies were deepening.
After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea', of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members covered the following areas: Concerning the global economy, members’ assessment was that the trend of economic recovery in the US had been sustained, and that the sluggishness of economic activities in the euro area appeared to be easing, with major sentiment indicators continually improving.
The member took the view that, considering the need to preemptively adjust monetary policy in a situation where heightened North Korea risk had not produced any noticeable shocks on the real economy, this seemed the right time to adjust the degree of monetary easing.
The member presented the opinion that, although the Bank of Korea Research Department had revised the economic outlook downward in reflection of those points, there could be additional downside risks due to high uncertainties.
The member first pointed out that there were growing uncertainties as to whether the trend of rapid growth in the world economy would continue in the future as well.
The member, meanwhile, saw that employment was very sluggish, particularly in the face-to-face services industries, influenced by the spread of COVID-19, and expected the sluggishness to continue for the time being.
Meanwhile, the member noted that inflation was generally following the movement of the expected path.
The member noted that, since last monetary policy decision meeting, inflation had remained in the mid-0% range and some indicators of inflation expectations had been responding to this.
Taking into consideration these domestic and overseas economic conditions, the member saw a need to keep the Base Rate unchanged at the current level of 3.50% this time and to monitor progress in the real economy and inflation relative to the projected paths for some time, while checking that both consumer and core inflation declined sufficiently in-line with their forecast paths.
The member expected that fiscal policy would contribute considerably to economic recovery, due to a large year-on-year increase in the managed fiscal deficit.
Meanwhile, the member added that sustained high rates of growth in various liquidity indicators including M2 implied that financial conditions were still very accommodative.
Looking ahead, it is forecast that consumer price inflation will remain high in the 4% range for some time, and run substantially above the February forecast of 3.1% for the year overall.
The member stated that entering this year, private consumption had shown signs of recovery on the back of pent-up demand, but that consumption regarding outside activities, such as food, accommodation, and travel, was sluggish due to the longer-than-usual rainy season and in particular considerable precipitation in May and July.
Another member presented the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, as inflation was not seen to have deviated greatly from the original forecast path and was expected to converge to near the inflation target over the medium-term horizon, despite growing uncertainties surrounding real economic conditions and exogenous variables.
In this regard, the member considered it appropriate to monitor future macroeconomic developments while holding the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period.
Most members evaluated the recent domestic economy as sustaining its solid upward path, led by strong export growth and the steady increase in domestic demand.
The member, however, expected it to pick up from the second half onward, given recent movements of prices of oil and agricultural, livestock and fisheries products, and planned hikes to public utility fees.
In terms of inflation, meanwhile, the member noted that consumer price inflation had slowed to the mid-1-percent range in the fourth quarter last year, due mainly to slowed growth in agricultural and livestock product prices and a fall in city gas bills, and added that, despite real economic growth, the wage growth rate and other labor market indicators had not yet exhibited signs of inflation pressures building up in line with improvement in the output gap.
On the employment front, the number of persons employed has shown a trend of increase above its average pre-global financial crisis level, led by the higher age groups.
Concerning labor market conditions, the member noted that the number of persons employed was maintaining its substantial uptrend, and household income conditions were improving thanks to a solid upward trend in wages.
The member, however, pointed out that the scale of household debt growth had been expanding since the second half of last year, as real estate prices in some regions continued to rise substantially.
The member took the view that, since policy uncertainties concerning exchange rate instability could distort economic agents’ decision-making regarding consumption and investment and cause herd behavior, various efforts should be made to stabilize the financial and FX markets.
Concerning the domestic economy, members’ evaluation was that the adjustments in facilities and construction investment had continued, exports had seen a greater decline, and employment conditions in the private sector had continued to be sluggish.
In this regard, the member judged that the possibility of a real-financial vicious circle, in which financial market unrest adds to the real economic shock, had been prevented to some extent.
One of these members assessed that, with downside risks to the global economy increasing, the domestic economy now faced heightened risks of slow growth and slow price rises owing to the contraction of domestic demand and exports.
The member thus emphasized the need to continue policy efforts to ease the risks of an accumulation of financial imbalances.
The member mentioned that, although facilities investment had somewhat slowed, exports had sustained their buoyancy thanks to robust global demand.
Many members shared the view that domestic demand including private consumption and investment was showing gradual improvement.
Concerning the domestic economy, the member noted that some real indicators were showing mixed signals, just like those in the US, with private consumption remaining relatively strong, the pace of increase in the number of persons employed slowing, and manufacturing production, service production and exports showing sluggishness.
The member, however, assessed this to be largely attributable not to demand factors but to policy factors, which include the government’s welfare policy measures, such as an increase in public heath care benefit coverage, an expansion of free school meals, and temporary cuts in the individual consumption tax and electricity fees.
One member noted that now was the moment when providing some momentum for the restoration of confidence was necessary, since the pace of economic recovery was judged to be still unsatisfactory and the economic slowdown had become prolonged, due particularly to a massive weakening in confidence of economic agents, while prices were seen likely to sustain a low rate of increase below the inflation target for the time being.
The member saw that, in the U.S., the economy exhibited strong growth thanks to robust consumption and employment conditions, and that inflation was falling slowly, prompting a longer duration of the Federal Reserve's tightening policy stance than initially expected.
Core inflation (excluding changes in food and energy prices from the CPI) recorded a negative rate, and the inflation expectations of the general public have moved down slightly within the upper-1% range.
The member also stated the view that the creation of new demand was limited because economic sentiment was souring amid economic uncertainty despite the government’s economic stimulus policies, such as fiscal front-loading and the extension of the cut in the individual consumption tax.
Going forward, the member stated that it is necessary to closely monitor the inflation and growth trajectories in the conduct of monetary policy.
In determining the monetary policy direction in these macroeconomic conditions, the member took notice of the following matters.
He reasoned, firstly, that although the GDP growth forecasts for 2015 had been revised downward, this was attributable to an extremely lackluster second-quarter performance due mainly to one-off factors and that the Board had expected it and responded preemptively by cutting the Base Rate in June.
Going into more detail, the member first stated that although there were high uncertainties in domestic and overseas economic conditions, the domestic economy was expected to continually hold to the January forecast path.
Next, the member assessed that Korea’s fiscal position was relatively sound compared to those of other advanced economies.
Another member expressed the opinion that, while maintaining the Base Rate at the current 1.25% level for the intermeeting period, it would be best to keep a careful watch on changes in risks to the macroeconomy and financial stability.
However, further monitoring is required to determine whether such buoyancy of domestic demand, including private consumption, will continue.
Some members mentioned that, despite slowed growth in household lending due to rate hikes and stronger regulations, corporate lending had been showing strong growth, and it would be therefore necessary to pay attention to financial imbalances stemming from increased leverage in the private sector.
The future path of inflation is likely to be influenced by international oil prices and exchange rate movements, agricultural product price trends, and whether public utility fees are adjusted.
Meanwhile, some members expressed the view that, although inflation had recently slowed somewhat and some inflation indicators, such as weighted median core inflation and short-term inflation expectations, had been improving, there still were high uncertainties including possible economic slowdowns at home and abroad and a buildup of upward pressures on public utility fees.
Regarding the future outlook, members anticipated that it would not be difficult for the domestic economy to remain on an upward track, as export conditions were likely to improve further, affected by the improvement of the US economy, and domestic demand conditions including employment, wages and stock prices were expected to be favorable.
The member expected household debt growth to remain stable overall, although the volume of household debt growth could increase somewhat in the second half of this year compared to the first half.
Household and corporate lending has been growing at a faster rate, driven by lower lending rates and by the provision of policy funding, but further monitoring is required as to whether this trend continues into the future.
On the employment front, the number of persons employed has continued to rise significantly year-on-year, although the unemployment rate has also risen as job search activities have increased.
Core inflation excluding the prices of agricultural and petroleum products fell slightly, from 2.3% to 2.2%.
The member went on to stress that continued vigilance and policy preparations were required in this regard.
The member pointed out that, on the external front, there was a low possibility of financial instability in EMEs spreading to Korea in consideration of its favorable external soundness, but the possibility of continued monetary policy normalization by the US Federal Reserve causing instability in Korea’s capital flows and domestic financial market price variables could not be ruled out.
With respect to financial imbalances, the member emphasized the inefficient allocation of resources stemming from population aging, and pointed out that, while for major OECD countries, the average household net savings rate had remained in the 6-percent range and household debt-to-disposable income ratio at the 140-percent level during 2012-2016, the household net savings rate in Korea had risen by 5.4 percentage points, from ratio had increased by 20 percentage points, from 150 percent to 170 percent during the same period.
the Base Rate cut and the economic policies of the government including the supplementary budget, strive to improve the sentiments of economic agents and lower inflation expectations, and conduct monetary policy so as to keep consumer price inflation within the inflation target range over a medium-term horizon while ensuring that the growth potential is not eroded due to the continuation of slow growth.
The member also stated that, with the recent inflation pressures attributable largely to supply-side factors, producer prices were rising faster than consumer prices.
Some members stressed that it would be necessary to remain on the alert against the possibility of uncertainties such as geopolitical risks and prolonged global supply constraints having a negative impact on the future domestic economic recovery.
With regard to employment, the member stated that growth in the number of persons employed had been slowing at a modest pace and that the pace of growth in basic wages had been slowing slightly.
Employment conditions have been sluggish, with the amount of increase in the number of persons employed having lessened substantially in December.
The member’s assessment was that the consequent overall sluggishness of consumption had kept core inflation within the mid-0% range, and that given the recent household income conditions, employment conditions and demographic factors, major changes were unlikely to be seen in the trends of private consumption and inflation.
The member expressed concerns that, after having improved slightly since October, face-to-face services industries might shrink again in line with the recent continuous growth in the number of domestic confirmed cases and the strengthening of social distancing measures.
The member also noted that there were signs of possible adjustments in household debt and the real estate market, influenced for instance by strong macroprudential policy.
As for household debt, the member stated that as the decline in household debt has continued since last year, the leverage that had been excessive has seemingly begun undergoing corrections.
have weakened more than originally anticipated, with the rates of growth in exports and domestic demand remaining at low levels.
Exports have continued to show solid growth on the back of the recovery in the IT industry and are forecast to improve steadily.
The 1st Vice Minister commented that the domestic economy was likely to maintain its robust movements for the time being, against a background of sustained buoyancy of domestic demand and exports and increased private sector employment.
The member meanwhile noted that the business climate for SMEs had not shown substantial improvement.
The member expected this sluggishness to ease into the second half of the year.
The member argued that, given that the current monetary policy tightening stance had begun in order to deal with a buildup in financial imbalances and inflation, it would be premature to let our guard down now.
However, the won-dollar exchange rate is unlikely to experience sudden fluctuations, as the U.S. dollar remains strong amid ample global dollar liquidity.
The Board sees continued rate hikes as warranted, as inflation is expected to run above the target level for a considerable time.
The member pointed out that the decline in the value of customs-cleared exports had accelerated since May while their volume had also reversed to a decrease, and went on to state that Japan’s export restrictions had the potential to substantially disrupt Korea’s production and exports depending on how the situation developed going forward, and thus it would be necessary to map out and analyze various scenarios concerning potential downside risks.
The member projected that domestic inflation would continue its gradual deceleration.
The member went on to state the necessity of closely monitoring the effects on the Korean economy of the recent rebound in international oil prices and of the monetary policy decisions of the ECB, the Bank of Japan, the US Federal Reserve and other major country central banks scheduled for this month.
won to US dollar exchange rate have risen, mainly driven by global financial market movements.
Looking at recent price conditions, the member saw that, as factors pointed to as upside risks such as an ongoing upward trend in commodity prices and prolonged global supply bottlenecks were materializing, strong upward trends in prices were witnessed across core items.
- Looking at the Korean economy, while export growth has slowed somewhat the Committee judges that the recovery of domestic demand has not been strong and the sentiments of economic agents remain weak.
The member evaluated that, since a rise in production activities driven by exports and the manufacturing industry was seen to have led to a recovery in employment and household income and the uptrend in prices had been spreading due to the pressures on inflation from the consumption demand side following the lifting of social distancing restrictions, there was good reason for maintaining the rate hike stance.
After briefings by staff on “Recent Economic Developments,” “FX and International Finance” and “Financial Market Trends,” the discussions of the Monetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered the following areas: Members evaluated that, despite slower growth in emerging market economies (EMEs), the global economy had continued to show strong growth, led for instance by the buoyancy of the US economy.
The member noted that other instruments of the Bank of Korea should be used when necessary concerning the Bank’s role as market maker and as lender of last resort, while the government’s macroprudential policies should be used first to manage economic agents’ leverage, risk-taking behaviors, and asset prices.
The member stated that with the time lag of monetary policy being long and variable, the effects of monetary policy could sometimes last until when it was no longer necessary.
Core inflation (excluding changes in food and energy prices from the CPI) has also increased slightly within the mid-0% range, and the inflation expectations of the general public have risen to near 2%.
although the increase in the number of employed slowed in September due to temporary factors, the trend of improvement led by the private sector appears to be continuing.
The member also expressed the opinion that the Base Rate should be held at its current level for the intermeeting period, and efforts should be made to return the Korean economy onto a stable path of growth as early as possible, by considering in a balanced manner the macro-economic risks to growth and prices together with risks to financial stability, while at the same time taking note of any changes in global financial and economic conditions.
The member added that a more accommodative fiscal policy would be underway this year, enhancing the contribution of fiscal expenditure to growth.
The member stated that the number of persons employed in December last year had declined at a much faster pace following the third wave of COVID-19, and went on to judge that the worsening of employment conditions since the outbreak of COVID-19 had resulted in a substantial degree of slack in the domestic labor market.
The member noted that, under the current domestic and international economic conditions, maintaining the current accommodative stance was inevitable, and this stance would have to be sustained for some time.
First, with the slumps in exports and manufacturing production continuing, there were significant uncertainties as to the future growth path and as to whether the present economic recovery dependent on fiscal policy could persist, and there were also domestic and overseas risk factors, including corporate restructuring and Brexit, and so a careful watch was needed on whether economic growth after the second quarter of this year would reach the potential growth rate, as had been forecast.
The 1st Vice Minister remarked, however, that the current account had posted a surplus of 4.2 billion dollars in October, wider than that of the previous month, and that it was estimated to have recorded a substantial surplus in November as well.
Members saw that, although consumer price inflation had risen at a slightly faster pace due to one-off factors such as rising agricultural product prices, demand-side inflationary pressures were still weak.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, members pointed out that stock prices had fallen and interest rates had risen, amid foreigners’ securities investment funds having flowed out on concerns about QE tapering by the US Federal Reserve, and that the Korean won had appreciated in line mainly with the current account surplus.
Concerning future inflation, the member forecast that upside risks would somewhat predominate in the short term, but with the effects of supply-side factors gradually diminishing, inflation would not deviate far from the January forecast path in the medium term.
The member assessed that Korea’s recovery had been sustained since the second half of 2023.
However, the improvements in the euro area have weakened.
The moderate recovery in the euro area had continued, bolstered by increased production, while economic growth in China had continued to slow.
ensure that the recovery of economic growth continues and consumer price inflation approaches the target level over a medium-term horizon, while paying attention to financial stability.
Looking at the economic conditions at home and abroad since the previous monetary policy decision meeting, the member evaluated that the economic shocks from COVID-19 appeared to have somewhat passed their peak, but uncertainties surrounding the recovery path seemed to remain high.
After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea' and the 'Financial Markets', the discussions by members of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) covered the following areas: Most members assessed that the global economy was sustaining its recovery overall, but that uncertainties were deepening further due to latent risk factors.
The member also noted that there would be a need to ensure space for monetary policy to some extent to prepare for a possibility of underlying low economic growth and the future economic cycle.
- The Board will continue to conduct monetary policy in order to sustain the recovery of economic growth and stabilize consumer price inflation at the target level over a medium-term horizon, while paying attention to financial stability.
With regard to prices, members noted that consumer price inflation had remained unchanged from the previous month’s 0.4%, and that core inflation excluding the prices of agricultural and petroleum products had fallen to slightly below the preceding month’s level at 2.0%.
Concerning the domestic economy, the member noted that the number of persons employed remained on a sharp rise and exports continued to be strong, while the recovery in facilities and construction investment had been delayed due to supply-side factors.
The member expected inflation to increase, albeit modestly, due mainly to rises in some public utility fees going forward.
The member expressed concerns that, although inflation in Korea had been expected to remain low throughout this year, the recent sluggishness of the real economy, inflation, and ultimately the entire economy was increasingly likely to be prolonged.
The member added that these forecasts reflected the widening of corrections in facilities and construction investment, and the negative impacts of the US-China trade dispute on exports.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, members pointed out that stock prices had shifted to sharp declines, long-term market interest rates had risen significantly, and the Korean won had also depreciated to a considerable extent, affected mainly by the possibility of an earlier-than-expected tapering off of US quantitative easing.
However, Mr. Ha, Seong Keun expressed clear opposition to the idea of holding the Base Rate at its current level, and argued for a 0.25 percentage point cut.
The member evaluated that private consumption was showing a sign of renewed improvement, albeit modest, bolstered by the relaxing of disease control measures, and the partial slowing of the spread of COVID-19, although recent supply chain disruptions and the heightened possibility of global economic slowdown were exerting a drag on the outlook for exports.
The member noted that the trend of world economic recovery had been spreading since the second half of last year, and the gradual monetary policy normalization in the US was proceeding smoothly.