The member added that it would be necessary to preemptively come up with financial support measures for vulnerable borrowers with weak debt-servicing capacity and SMEs with little access to financial services.
He expressed the opinion that there were thus concerns about a possible heightening of financial instability in the event of a future rise in interest rates, and so it was necessary to carry out micro analysis and to develop countermeasures in response.
In this regard, the member mentioned that it would be important to reduce the degree of monetary easing to weaken inefficient incentives for investment and curb financial imbalances.
Stock prices have fallen again, after having risen substantially, in line with shifts in the flows of foreigners’ stock investment funds, and the Korean won has depreciated recently, after having sustained a trend of appreciation due to continuation of the current account surplus.
The member, however, expressed concern that Korea’s economic growth in the upper-2 percent range, while consistent with the potential growth rate, was led by construction investment, and housing construction in particular, which was expanding at an unsustainable rate.
In global financial markets, government bond yields in major countries have declined affected by the resurgence of COVID-19.
The member also judged that, to prepare for a global economic downturn and the major impacts it would have on the Korean economy, it would be important at this point in time to prevent the accumulation of financial imbalances while carrying out intensive structural reforms to enhance the efficiency of the economy as a whole and to ensure policy space.
The member assessed that the global economy had continued to recover as in the previous year, but the pace of recovery had been slowing recently affected largely by the spread of Omicron, and inflation had continued to grow in major countries owing to the further uptrend in energy prices and prolonged disruptions in global supply chains.
Another member advocated the need for maintaining the Base Rate at its current level this month, while at the same time closely monitoring the effects of the economic policies put in place so far by the Bank of Korea and the Korean government, the changes in sentiment of economic agents, the strength of the domestic demand recovery, household lending trends, and the possibility of a change in the US Fed’s monetary policy stance.
While pivot risk on the inflation side has significantly decreased, pivot risk on the financial stability side stemming from the expansion of housing price growth has increased.
The member expressed the view that, while the accommodative monetary policy thus far had been working as a factor causing faster growth in household debt, it was assessed to have contributed greatly to easing deflation concerns by limiting the possibility of further deterioration in domestic economic activity amid difficult economic environments at home and abroad.
The member assessed that the domestic economy continued to recover and private consumption was picking up rapidly boosted by the rising vaccination rate, the easing of social-distancing measures and the implementation of the supplementary budget.
One member noted, however, that it was rather premature to consider the improvements in some economic indicators as implying a shift to economic recovery from the second half of this year, and that no clear momentum driving an economic recovery domestically was seen.
However, the member pointed out that the gap between economic indicators and economic sentiment had been widening even further, as improvement in exports had been enjoyed only by some industries and domestic demand including consumption and construction had been sluggish.
The Korean won-US dollar exchange rate has fluctuated in line with changes in the value of the dollar globally.
In June, consumer price inflation eased to 2.4%, driven by a substantial deceleration in agricultural product price increases, while core inflation remained in the low it is important to remain vigilant about the developments and impacts of major upside risk factors, such as international oil prices, exchange rates, and agricultural product prices.
The member also mentioned that corporate financing had been generally favorable and growth in household loans, particularly unsecured ones, had accelerated again.
Members stressed, however, that attention should be paid to the possibility of renewed financial market unrest due to the high uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, and also to the widening disparity between the recovery of financial markets and the sluggishness of the real economy.
The member thus presented the opinion that, given this point, it would be necessary to decide the pace of tightening cautiously going forward, examining the effect of Base Rate hikes so far and keeping a close watch on the developments of factors causing domestic and overseas uncertainties.
The member assessed inflation as nearing its target over a medium-term horizon amid weak but sustained demand-side pressures, and expected that a slight reduction of the accommodative monetary policy stance was unlikely to weaken demand-side pressures enough to have a significant effect on inflation but could contribute to curbing the widening of financial imbalances somewhat.
Members voiced concerns that, as household and business sentiments were contracting, growth in private consumption showed signs of weakening.
Incorporating the outcome of their earlier discussions, a statement was compiled reflecting the views of the majority.
One other member expressed the opinion that, while maintaining the Base Rate at its current 1.25% level for the intermeeting period, the Bank of Korea should keep a close watch on developments of domestic and overseas risk factors and their impacts.
Facilities investment has slightly increased and consumption growth has expanded, although construction investment and exports have continued to decline.
Looking at the financial situation, the member assessed that the current Base Rate was analyzed to be in restrictive territory, running well above the neutral rate range, while overall financial conditions had become much less tight compared with the previous year-end.
such a way as to firmly anchor the basis for price stability while the economy continues its sound growth.
First, the member noted that there existed latent risks of increases in agricultural product and energy prices as well as existing supply shocks from geopolitical risks.
One member presented the view that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current The member saw that, as trade disputes had escalated and political uncertainties had heightened since the previous MPB meeting, volatility in the global financial markets had increased and the trend of low growth had become further entrenched.
The member assessed that exports had been showing a faster-than-expected recovery, driven by growth in semiconductor exports and a slower decline in exports to China since September.
The member thus added that it would be necessary to observe a little longer to see whether these trends would continue.
Exports had posted negative growth in August, as in the previous month, affected chiefly by sharp decreases in those of major items including ships, automobiles and steel, and by the vacation season.
However, the member judged uncertainties surrounding the growth path to be heightened further, since major countries were changing their monetary policy stances rapidly to respond to higher inflation since the second half of last year, and geopolitical risks surrounding Ukraine were also increasing.
However, the member suggested a few reasons for preferring keeping the Base Rate unchanged, despite such concern.
The member went on to present the opinion that the foreign exchange policy authorities should therefore scrupulously and preemptively examine potential risk factors, while developing appropriate measures to bring about market stability under different possible scenarios.
The member raised the concern that excessively high leverage and housing prices could reduce consumption and investment capacities and worsen economic inequalities in the long term.
Accordingly, the member stated the view that it was desirable at this juncture to assess the direction of future interest rate policy based on a detailed analysis of the degree to which downside risks to growth and inflation would increase.
The member also took the view that, while exports were picking up in accordance with the global economic recovery, it would be necessary to promote structural reform rapidly and rearrange medium- and long-term strategies to create an environment in which households can shift from leveraged spending to income-based spending, and also to continue to prepare for population ageing through overseas investment.
One member presented the view that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level.
Concerning inflation, members saw that consumer price inflation had declined sharply, due mainly to a decline in petroleum product prices, and expected that it would fluctuate for some time below 1 percent amid modest demand-side inflationary pressures.
The member also stressed that the monetary authority should examine all possible policy measures and consider how to implement them in response to the slow growth and low inflation dragging on.
However, it is worth noting that delinquency rates are rising among households and SMEs, and there has been a recent rebound in household loans, as well as a steady increase in corporate loans.
In particular, the member commented that growth of monetary aggregates such as M2 and Lf had been on the rise, as funding to corporations had expanded thanks to improved sales performances and the easing of credit risk aversion, and as household and sole proprietor loans had also been increasing steadily.
Meanwhile, the member stated that manufactoring and service production-related indicators in the second quarter seemed to have been somewhat insufficient to be confident that the trend of economic recovery in the previous quarter was continuing.
Looking at the estimates of output and inflation gaps based on the discussion above, the member judged that the Bank of Korea would have to maintain its accommodative monetary policy stance, but unlike advanced countries that had experienced massive deleveraging since the global financial crisis in 2008, Korea had seen steady household debt growth and thus financial stability was gaining even greater importance.
He then noted that the government’s policy focus would be placed on such areas as price stability, boosting domestic demand and expanding the social safety net.
The member added that the abrupt exchange rate fluctuations in the US dollar, the yen and the euro, stemming from policy divergences among major advanced country central banks, signified that the promises made at the Seoul G20 Summit in 2010 were no longer being followed, and expressed the view that, against this backdrop, Korea should not only seek actively to reduce exchange rate volatility, but also devote efforts to securing various possible policy tools.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, members pointed out that, after having declined under the influence of the movements of major country government bond yields, long-term market interest rates had risen with the improvements in economic indicators, causing the spread between long- and short-term rates to widen.
Members assessed the domestic financial markets to be showing an overall pattern of stability as stock prices had risen and the exchange rate had fluctuated within a narrow range on the back of the improved domestic and overseas environment including, for instance, the upgrade of Korea’s sovereign rating.
Most members evaluated the domestic economy as maintaining its solid underlying trend of growth along the originally-projected growth path.
The member added that it should be noted that the transmission of accommodative monetary policy could be limited if a crowding-out effect from increased Treasury bond issuance caused market interest rates to rise significantly or continued global dollar weakness accelerated the appreciation of the Korean won.
dissented from this decision, and argued that the Base Rate should be raised by 25 basis points.)
The member also mentioned that, according to the Household Income and Expenditure Survey by Statistics Korea, the monthly average household income for the third quarter grew by 8.0% year on year and earned income by 6.2%, and income showed even growth across all decile groups, indicating that the economic recovery was leading to household income growth.
Mortgage lending posted a steady rise in July, as in the previous month.
- The Board judges that the solid trend of domestic economic growth has continued, as exports have sustained their buoyancy and consumption has improved moderately, although investment has slowed somewhat.
Looking ahead the Board sees the global economic recovery as likely to be affected by factors such as the directions of the new US government's economic policies, the pace of monetary policy normalization by the US Federal Reserve, the movements toward spreading trade protectionism, and the political uncertainties in the euro area.
The member judged that the economy would be able to withstand the growth loss stemming from rate hikes in light of the prospect that domestic demand would maintain relatively solid growth next year as well as this year.
The member also noted the ongoing corrections in facilities investment, which had shown a sharp increase last year in the semiconductor sector in particular, and in construction investment, which had remained buoyant for the past several years.
The Korean won-US dollar exchange rate has continued its uptrend seen since October of last year, in line with the strengthening of the US dollar globally.
However, concerns about the buildup of financial imbalances have increased due to rising housing prices and expanding household loan growth.
The member noted that households’ real purchase power did not improve last year, as the rate of increase in total wage bill was offset by consumer price inflation, which apparently weighed on consumption.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the changes in the domestic and international economic environments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
Most members expressed the view that, although exports were increasing constantly, boosted by the mild recovery in the global economy, export conditions were likely to be affected by the higher volatility of the KRW/USD exchange rate, a rise in raw material prices, and the unstable future directions of the economies in advanced countries and China.
One other member presented the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, based on the judgment that it would be appropriate to determine when to raise the Base Rate after further examining whether the uptrend in prices would accelerate or continue.
Concerning the domestic economy, members’ evaluation was that, along with sluggish exports, facilities and construction investment had continued to undergo adjustments, while private consumption had continued to grow albeit slowly.
In particular, the member noted that the increasing of tax benefits available on the Bank of Korea web site.
Given these points, the member stated that it had become more important to judge if the Korean economy would recover in the second half of this year in line with the Bank’s forecast.
This was because, although a slight downward shift in the growth path in line with the export shock from sluggish external demand was estimated to have brought about the widening of the negative GDP gap, domestic demand was expected to show a modest recovery due to improved economic sentiment, along with the gradual easing of export sluggishness.
The member’s assessment was that, while facilities investment was undergoing an adjustment, exports were maintaining high growth, bolstered by solid global demand, and private consumption was maintaining an underlying trend of recovery, thanks to a favorable increase in consumption of goods, despite a slight slowdown in face-to-face service consumption stemming from the worsening of the spread of the pandemic.
The member evaluated that there was ample liquidity in the market as a result of two Base Rate cuts and various measures to increase liquidity supply since March.
Accordingly, the member projected that the growth rate for the year would be 1.4%, slightly lower than the February projection of 1.6%.
The Monetary Policy Committee Members' discussions on changes in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Most members agreed that, although the Base Rate needed to be restored to a normal level before long, in view of the high economic growth and inflation rates, it should be left at its current level this month considering that economic uncertainty at home and abroad remained high and that tension between countries over foreign exchange rates had recently been escalating further.
The member stressed the need for attention to a possible rise in asset prices and to the consequent possibility of excessive credit expansion stemming mostly from overheated sentiment in the new housing market and the lack of a system of risk management for collective loans issued by financial institutions.
Fourth, there was still substantial spare capacity in both production and employment, with the manufacturing operation ratio remaining at a low level and broad labour underutilization indicator unemployment rate increasing.
The member judged the financial markets to still remain accommodative.
Among them, one member assessed that, although consumption and investment in the Korean economy had been showing trends of modest improvement, exports had exhibited a larger-than-expected trend of decline, downside risks to domestic growth and prices had become greater due to the emergence of external uncertainties in line with the global economic slowdown, household debt had maintained strong growth, and volatility and unrest in the foreign exchange market had heightened.
Some members noted that individual perceptions of prices and inflation expectations had also increased, in line with a substantial number of items in the CPI basket rising significantly and processed food and dining-out prices growing.
The member expected the positive GDP gap to widen gradually after the second quarter, as the economy would continue to show growth exceeding its potential level.
The member emphasized that, since the credit spreads of corporate bonds had widened due to aversion to credit risk, it was necessary to closely monitor the relevant developments.
Although the real estate sector is likely to remain stable for the time being, uncertainties are high.
All MPB members supported the decision unanimously.
The member assessed domestic real economic fundamentals as being overall similar to those previously forecast.
With regard to financial stability, the member took the view that the current slowing trend, albeit slight, of household debt growth would likely continue, as the effects of strengthened micro-level regulations had started to materialize and were combined with the effects of the reduction in the degree of monetary easing, but continued vigilance would be necessary as household debt growth had continued to outpace income growth and demand for household loans was likely to be substantial amid a rise in the number of move-in ready apartments.
The member then expressed the view that vigilance was needed in order to avoid falling into a liquidity trap in the medium and long term.
The member added that Korea, with its three Base Rate hikes since August last year, is one of the major countries which started normalizing monetary policy preemptively.
The member thus emphasized the need for thorough monitoring of various possible upside and downside risk factors.
However, the member expressed the need to determine the time and pace of an additional Base Rate hike depending on developments in economic and financial conditions.
This member continued by noting that if the Bank Intermediation Support Facility, a non interest-rate policy tool, were utilized, it could minimize the growth of household debt and have an economic stimulus effect by channeling credit into corporate lending only, with household lending excluded.
After pointing out that exports had continued to decline for the fourth month in a row, and that exports to Japan and the euro area in particular had fallen to considerable extents, due largely to the depreciations of the Japanese yen and the euro, he went on to point out that, although Korea continued to run a substantial bilateral current account deficit against Japan, the imbalance in the won/yen exchange rate had been worsening recently due to the yen’s weakness while the won had been feeling appreciation pressures owing to Korea‘s widening bilateral current account surplus vis-a-vis the US.
The member pointed out that, as concerns had recently been raised about exports driven by the electrical and electronic industry, the relevant trends should be analyzed closely.
The member also added that the accommodative monetary policy stance should be kept unchanged in order to supplement and support an expansionary fiscal policy.
The member, however, emphasized that forecasts of future economic trends had become more uncertain due to geopolitical risks, such as Korea's deployment of THAAD and the North Korea nuclear issue.
Finally, the member judged that, with the US Federal Reserve highly likely to lower its policy rate in July, concerns about the widening of the interest rate gap between Korea and the US, which had been showing an inversion, could ease to some extent, given a change in the monetary policy stance of the US Federal Reserve.
prices of agricultural, livestock and fisheries products and to the larger increase in petroleum product prices.
The member stated that the decrease in global goods trade had not been as large as previously forecast and Korea’s exports would accordingly recover faster than originally expected.
The member noted that the government’s fiscal policy space was reduced, private consumption was restrained by structural factors and thus unlikely to drive economic recovery, and there was no high possibility of exports recovering within a short space of time, as the lack of global growth momentum continued.
Looking ahead the Bank of Korea forecasts that consumer price inflation will remain at a low level for the time being, and then gradually rise as the effects of the low oil prices diminish.
The member noted that, more specifically, the housing price growth rate based on the Housing Price Index had stood at 1.1% in 2018 and –0.4% in 2019, and housing prices outside of the Seoul metropolitan area in particular had continued to fall for the second consecutive year, suggesting that an overall housing price surge related to liquidity conditions was not materializing.
The member assessed that foreign reserves were currently abundant, the short-term external debt ratio was relatively low, the banking sector was maintaining a favorable level of soundness, and the correlation coefficient of flows of funds for bond investment in Korea and emerging market countries had decreased, all of which could be seen as positive factors.
and financial unrest in EMEs.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, members mentioned that long-term market interest rates had fallen and stock prices had risen with the stabilization of the international financial markets, but the Korean won-US dollar exchange rate had remained highly volatile and bank household lending had declined.
One member expressed the opinion that, while maintaining the Base Rate at its current 1.25 percent level for the intermeeting period, the Bank of Korea should keep a close watch on changes in financial and economic conditions at home and abroad, and in particular on developments of domestic and overseas risk factors and their impacts.
The member added that the won-dollar exchage rate had rapidly increased recently, as expectations of future U.S. monetary policy had been adjusted.
Concerning corporate credit, meanwhile, the downturn phase of the corporate credit cycle had continued owing to the sharp decreases at both large corporations and SMEs and to sustained net corporate bond redemptions.
Other members pointed out that housing prices were continuing to increase despite the fact that households’ mortgage interest rates had recently risen above the pre-pandemic level.
Long-term government bond yields in major economies, which had fallen in anticipation of a rate cut by the Federal Reserve, rose again due to factors such as economic indicators surpassing market expectations, and the U.S. dollar also showed strength.
The member projected that the domestic economy would likely continue to improve modestly, with a weaker consumption recovery, but with ongoing strong exports.
The member expressed the view that, although the global economy had overall maintained favorable growth and global trade had rebounded in the second quarter, uncertainties had increased, since, from the second half of this year, the repercussions of the US-China trade dispute were likely to increase more than originally expected and the US Federal Reserve was forecast to continue to normalize its monetary policy in line with the sustained US economic growth.
The member also expressed concerns that the pandemic was likely to accelerate the trend of the outflow of population from provincial areas and the inflow of population into Seoul and its surrounding areas, which had slowed for some time.
In addition, one member made the point that rate normalization must be carried forward persistently so as to allow real interest rates to move out of negative territory, in that, should a low interest rate stance prevail for a long time, there was concern that economic imbalances could deepen largely owing to an expansion of household debt and delay in corporate restructuring and that the high level of macro leverage could pose a potential risk for the Korean economy.
Concerning the global economy, the member noted that the possibility of a soft landing for the U.S. economy was rising, supported by brisk consumption and production based on solid employment.
The Board forecasts that the domestic economy will sustain its trend of modest growth going forward, owing chiefly to expansionary macroeconomic policies, but in view of economic conditions domestically and abroad judges the uncertainties surrounding the growth path to be high.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, many members assessed the stock, bond and foreign exchange markets to have all exhibited stable movements, with the soothing of market sentiment and inflows of foreigners’ portfolio investment funds driven chiefly by the additional quantitative easing policies of major advanced countries and Korea’s sovereign rating upgrade.
One member took the view that it would be appropriate to raise the Base Rate to The member mentioned that the recovery in the global economy had slowed somewhat and there were high uncertainties, both upside and downside, in line with geopolitical risks, monetary policies in major countries and the development of China’s COVID-19 restrictions.
Going forward the Committee judges that the global economy will show a recovery, albeit a moderate one, but that downside risks to growth are high, due mostly to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and to the possibilities of the slumps in major country economies and the unrest in international financial markets continuing.
However, the member commented that in order to effectively address the accumulated household debt, it would be desirable to assess not only the overall quantity of household debt, but also its qualitative aspects, including evaluations of risk weighted HH debt amounts based on the distribution of DSR.
Long term market interest rates have declined in response to the planned reduction in the volume of Treasury bond issuance and foreigners' sustained bond purchases.
Externally, the member noted the growing concerns about the US-China trade dispute, expressing the opinion that if trade protectionism became more globally widespread, consumption and investment could be constrained greatly through strengthened risk aversion, although losses in exports stemming from already finalized trade sanctions were estimated to have been limited.
The member thus stated that it would be desirable to continue to reduce the degree of monetary policy accommodation to stabilize consumer price inflation at the target level over a medium-term horizon.
The member expected that the economic spillover effects of COVID-19, which had been spreading rapidly since the February MPB meeting, would be greater and last longer than previously forecast.
Finally, the member emphasized that the best policy to achieve the inflation target under the current economic conditions was to minimize production capacity losses.
With respect to the financial and foreign exchange sectors, the member assessed that economic agents’ search-for-yield across asset markets had abated, and macroprudential indicators appeared favorable in the internal and external sectors.
Another member pointed out that the uncertainties on the external front had increased with the recovery in the euro area being blown off course following the Greek crisis and with the persistent sluggishness in China and other emerging market countries even as the timing of a US interest rate hike approached.
Meanwhile, the member noted that, as exports had grown at a faster pace for the fourth consecutive month since November last year, due mainly to increased demand in the global semiconductor market and recoveries in petroleum product exports in line with rising oil prices, there was a heightened possibility that this could represent a trend going forward.
risen as foreigners’ stock investment funds have recorded net inflows in line with continued risk-taking tendencies globally.
They meanwhile forecast that economic activity would maintain its upward trend in the future as well, driven largely by the economic recovery centering around advanced countries and by the improvements in domestic demand conditions.
The member argued that, considering financial and economic conditions at home and abroad, the Base Rate should be kept at the current level for this meeting.
Meanwhile, the member’s evaluation was that housing price growth had accelerated, particularly in Seoul and its surrounding areas, and home purchase sentiment and expectations of higher housing prices were also rising again.
The member thus stated that the outlook for future growth paths was more uncertain than in the past.
A majority of members forecast that the inflation rate would remain at a stable level below the midpoint of its target for the time being, with the easing of inflationary pressures owing primarily to the economic slowdown and to international oil price stability.
Finally, the member noted that, from the perspective of the Balance of Payments, Korea generally saw sustained net inflows of foreign domestic bond investment funds during the past inversions of the US and Korean policy rates, but judged that if the inversion period were to last longer with the interest rate gap widening going forward, it would not be easy to rule out a possibility of some foreign capital outflows.
- Consumer price inflation has remained high in the mid- to upper-3% range due to the ongoing sharp rise in the prices of petroleum products, as well as the accelerating increase in the prices of personal services and industrial products.
The member pointed out that these growth imbalances were highly likely to continue even after the COVID-19 pandemic ends.
The member thus noted that it was necessary to prevent, as much as possible, the coronavirus shock from leading to permanent damage to the foundation for growth.
The member, however, evaluated that the subsequent spread of the virus to the rest of the world, including the US and Europe, had developed into a crisis situation that raised concerns about shocks to global economic activity and global financial markets.
The member expressed the opinion that, if the trend of an easing of disease control measures being followed by a rebound in consumption repeated itself, the recent resurgence of the pandemic would likely to have a limited impact on aggregate demand or the underlying economic trend over the medium to long term horizon.
Another member stated that it would be appropriate to raise the Base Rate to On the domestic economic front, the member stated that economic growth was slowing more rapidly than initially projected.
The member, however, noted that concerns about a global economic slowdown remained and a super boom in the business cycle of the semiconductor industry was entering a correction phase, and thus it was necessary to pay attention to the future developments.
The member added that, considering various external soundness indicators, Korea was unlikely to be affected greatly by a US policy rate hike, but it would be necessary to work in closer cooperation with the government going forward while strengthening the monitoring of domestic and overseas financial market trends.
With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, members noted that interest rates and stock prices had dropped significantly and the Korean won had depreciated against the US dollar, with Korea seeing outflows of foreigners’ securities investment funds brought about in part by developments in international financial markets.
In the housing market, the upward trends of sales and leasehold deposit prices have accelerated in both Seoul and its surrounding areas and the rest of the country.
One other member presented the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.50 percent for the intermeeting period.
The member assessed that the employment situation was favorable overall, with the number of persons employed continuing to rise and the unemployment rate remaining low.
Meanwhile, the member noted that, while the risk of financial imbalances related to domestic household debt was easing gradually, banks had been gradually relaxing their lending attitudes of late.
The member saw that the real economy could not deviate greatly from the potential GDP path, although consideration should also be given to the quality of employment, demographic changes, and the possibility of structural change during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Core inflation (with food and energy product prices excluded from the CPI) has fallen to the 1% level, and the rate of inflation expected by the general public has been in the mid- to upper-2% range.
The member then argued that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.50% for the intermeeting period, while more closely monitoring major factors affecting the growth and stability of the Korean economy.
The member also saw that the future recovery of the domestic economy was dependent upon how the COVID-19 situation would develop.
Incorporating the outcome of the above discussions, the following Monetary Policy Decision statement was compiled.
The member, however, judged that business conditions had been sluggish in the areas of the private sector not directly linked with fiscal support, and with respect to the labor market as well there was little meaningful employment growth to be found in the private service sector apart from health care and social welfare.
The member also noted that it would be necessary to prepare against the possibility of shocks to vulnerable groups developing into systemic risks in order to fulfill the central bank’s mandate of ensuring financial stability, and that it would also be necessary to pay attention to overseas factors.
Meanwhile, the member emphasized that, although the implementation of the Measures for the Management of Household Debt announced in August was expected to gradually curb the pace of household lending growth, it was necessary to continually keep a close watch on the trend of household lending given the existence of factors fueling an increase in lending demand, such as a buoyant Seoul metropolitan housing market.
The member stated that, at a time when U.S. dollar supply and demand conditions had been worsening for some time, it would be important to closely monitor global risk factors and changes in indicators of external soundness in order to maintain Korea’s international credit standing.
Accordingly, the member noted that it would be better to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
Incorporating the outcome of their earlier discussions, a statement was compiled with the unanimous consent of all members.
As for the global financial markets, members judged that, as risk aversion had increased, due for instance to the escalation of the US-China trade dispute, stock prices had fallen and the currencies of emerging economies had depreciated.
The member however evaluated that, although inflation had exceeded the target in most countries, measures to cope with this varied from country to country.
After the discussions detailed above, all members agreed on maintaining the Bank of Korea Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period, and passed a resolution to this effect[3)].
are posted on the Bank of Korea website.
This member went on to note that, while the trend of a narrowing of the price gap itself had not changed, there was a possibility that its pace would be quite moderate.
Another member mentioned that the global economy was expected to show higher growth than initially expected earlier this year, thanks to the strong performance of advanced countries and the resumption of economic activity in China.
The member also noted that, as the effects of the central bank’s monetary policy ultimately depended on the behavior of commercial banks that are at the center of monetary policy transmissions, it would be also important to assess the capacity of Korean commercial banks to create credit and seek measures to enhance such capacity.
The member pointed out that, in this situation, the COVID-19 outbreak was placing an additional burden on the domestic economy.
Some members saw that rises in international commodity prices and agricultural and livestock product prices were leading to a second round of spillover effects such as rises in durable goods and dining-out prices.
Another member argued that the slack in the labor market would work as a factor reducing the upward pressures on wages and inflation.
Some members expressed the view that the economy had already passed beyond the recovery phase and had entered an expansionary phase.
large corporations and the exacerbation of household debt problems caused by higher market interest rates.
Labor market conditions have continued to improve, with a sustained year-on-year increase in the number of persons employed.
The member stated that net household assets relative to GDP in Korea were falling below the OECD average, and the pace of population aging was likely to be twice the OECD average in the future.
First, the member noted that although the real economy was showing export-oriented and facilities investment-led growth, the buoyancy of exports had been confined to the IT industry, mainly in semiconductors, and since such strength was attributable to increases in unit export prices rather than growth in export volume, it was not likely to stimulate much additional production in related industries.
The member evaluated that the improvement in private consumption had moderated somewhat, owing to the tightening of domestic COVID-19 restrictions, but the moderation had not been as severe as during the previous resurgences, thanks to learning effects from the past and changes in consumption patterns.
One member took the view that it would be appropriate to leave the Base Rate unchanged from its current level of 1.25 percent this month.
Another member stated his opinion that a small downward adjustment of the Base Rate from its current level of 1.75% would be advisable since, with the exception of the trend of changes in household lending other recent policy conditions were all indicating a need for further monetary policy easing.
The member noted that it would be appropriate to adjust the pace of tightening going forward, depending on the evolution of domestic and overseas economic conditions in the future.
Another member judged that it would be appropriate to make an upward adjustment of the Base Rate to 1.00% from the current 0.75%.
- In the financial markets, long-term and short-term market interest rates and stock prices have shown a sharp run-up in line with the improvements in economic activity.
On the other hand, the member argued that there remained serious concerns about worsening financial imbalances, since household loans in the financial sector maintained their subtantial increase to more than six trillion won, driven chiefly by government-sponsored loans.
The member explained that these doubts had been raised because accumulated financial imbalances may have already been expanded due to interest rates, which should play the most important role in resource allocation, remaining low for a long period.
The member, however, presented the view that the recent situation, with no visible change in prices and a large slowdown in employment growth, implied that aggregate demand was not expanding.
Looking at financial conditions, the member’s evaluation was that excessive yield-seeking behavior had been easing somewhat, with stock prices fluctuating within a narrow range and household debt continuing to exhibit slower growth.
One member expressed the view that, while keeping a careful watch for example on the situation of risks in the Chinese economy, and on the monetary policy operations of major advanced countries, it would be wise to closely examine the influences of these factors on the domestic economy, prices and financial market conditions.
that, while emerging market economies have shown favorable performances, major advanced economies have exhibited signs of sluggishness.
GDP is forecast to grow at the lower-2% level this year, below the April forecast (2.5%).
In this regard, it was deemed appropriate to keep the Base Rate at its current level at this meeting.
5-year Treasury bond yields in Korea and the US had been inverted since mid-December 2016, following 10-year Treasury bond yields.
As a result, the member added that the financial market had witnessed a substantial decline in government bond yields, while credit spreads for corporate bonds had widenend.
The member’s assessment of financial stability was positive.
mainly to concerns about an economic slowdown in China, but have since then shifted to a rise in line chiefly with the continuation of improvements in US economic activity.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Most members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current level of 0.50%, while one member argued for raising it by One member presented the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at the current level of 0.50%.
The member expressed the opinion that the decrease in the contribution of exports to real growth would be smaller than the decrease in export value but still considerable.
He pointed out that, although foreign portfolio investment funds had experienced large outflows in July and the won had depreciated against the dollar, this was attributable to a weakening of the won in line with the global strength of the US dollar, and to some EMEs’ need to secure foreign currency liquidity, rather than to changes in Korea’s economic fundamentals.
Another member noted that efforts should be exerted to preemptively block the possibility of expected inflation working as a factor amplifying the second-round effects from supply shocks, and that there was a need to develop more active communication strategies, particularly given that the scope for operation of interest rate policy was limited.
Members, meanwhile, assessed that, although prices of some financial assets had undergone corrections due to stronger expectations for policy rate hikes at home and abroad, financial conditions still remained accommodative.
declines in leading indicators for two consecutive months.
The member indicated that the semiconductor industry appeared to be bottoming out, boosted by production cuts at major suppliers and by AI-related demand.
in November, due mainly to declines in petroleum product prices and to slowdowns in the rates of industrial product price increase.
Meanwhile, the member added that household debt had exhibited another sharp rise in June and the rate of growth in M2 and other liquidity indicators remained high.
As a result, growth in the first quarter had fallen short of the original forecast, and thus there was an increased possibility of a widening negative GDP gap.
The member mentioned that this forecast implied that the factors that had negatively affected the domestic economy in the first quarter would not do so or would even positively affect the Korean economy going forward.
Second, there must be economic restructuring and housing price stabilization.
Members also evaluated that the favorable conditions in international financial markets would continue for the time being, but FX and asset market volatility was likely to increase in line largely with changes in major countries’ monetary policies.
The scale of the growth in mortgage lending has widened in response chiefly to low lending rates, even though house transactions have been inactive.
The main details of the MPC Members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: Most members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international economic environments and the future outlooks for both, it would be desirable this month to cut the Base Rate by 0.25 of a percentage point from its current level for the intermeeting period.
The member went on to assert that in the past, such developments often formed a virtuous circle with the real sector economy through improved consumer and business sentiment, with some time lag.
With regard to prices, members noted that consumer price inflation stood at 1.4%, lower than in the previous month, and forecast that it would remain at a low level for the time being.
Concerning the domestic economy, the member projected that the recovery momentum for consumption would weaken, while exports and facilities investment would continue to improve moderately, led by the recovery in the global semiconductor business.
First, there must be a stabilization of the foreign exchange market.
The member estimated that, although financial conditions had become less accommodative, due to a steep rise in market interest rates entering this year, the real Base Rate had fallen below the average for last year and was running considerably below the neutral interest rate.
However, Mr. Lee, Il Houng and Mr. Koh, Seung Beom expressed clear opposition to the idea of keeping the Base Rate at its current level and argued for raising it by 0.25 of a percentage point.
The member also expressed the view that, with the risk aversion tendencies in the domestic and overseas financial markets having strengthened, stock prices had fallen and EME currencies including the Korean won had weakened, and as a result, household and corporate economic sentiment had weakened.
The member expected that the sustained accommodative stance, combined with the expansionary fiscal policy, would contribute to driving demand-side pressures and maintaining inflation expectations.
In global financial markets, risk aversion has strengthened due to the acceleration of policy rate hikes in major countries and consequent concerns about economic slowdown.
The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning a change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows: The majority of members presented the view that, in overall consideration of the domestic and international financial and economic environments, it would be desirable to lower the Base Rate by One member presented the view that it would be appropriate to lower the Base Rate from the current 1.25% to 0.75%.
The members forecast the domestic economy to grow by 2.6 percent this year and next, with the contribution of fiscal expenditure to growth likely to increase, and mentioned that uncertainties surrounding the future growth path were high, due mainly to changes in monetary and trade policies―particularly in the US―and concerns about a possible Chinese economic slowdown.
The member assessed that, with the global economy continuing to improve, the Korean economy had maintained its trend of recovery led by exports, and private consumption had been recovering at a modest pace.
The delinquency rate on corporate lending has increased and real estate project financing risks have remained, but, for now, their impacts on the financial system as a whole seem limited.
The member meanwhile presented the view that, although the Chinese economy had been recovering rapidly since its reopening, led by domestic demand, the country’s imports and exports had continued to decline due to the sluggishness of the global IT industry and a high level of inventory, which would likely limit the growth path of the global economy.
The member judged that, despite persistently high uncertainties and risk factors, including higher-for-longer rates, geopolitical conflicts, and supply chain segmentation, many countries had been witnessing their growth and inflation returning to their equilibrium levels, boosted by aggressive monetary and fiscal policy responses so far, achieving a soft landing of their economies.
The member noted that consumer price inflation, which had rebounded to 3.4% in the fourth quarter of 2023, fell back to 2.8% in January this year driven by a weakening in demand pressures and a decline in oil prices.
The member also expected that it would likely to take substantial time for the export-driven economic recovery to lead to stable expansion of household income, wages, employment and consumption.
- Consumer price inflation has slightly risen within the mid-0% range, in consequence mainly of the smaller decline in petroleum product prices.
In this process it will thoroughly assess the severity of the resurgence of COVID in financial stability, and the effects of the policy measures taken in response to the pandemic.
After briefings by staff on _Recent Economic Developments_ (July 2022),[2)] _FX and_ Monetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered the following areas.
Core inflation (excluding changes in food and energy prices from the CPI) has also remained at the lower-0% range, and the inflation expectations of the general public have stayed at the mid-1% level.
Facilities investment has somewhat slowed due to global supply constraints.
As to domestic financial markets, many members attributed the large fluctuation in price variables, including interest rates, stock prices and exchange rates, to external factors such as the possibility of an escalation of the sovereign debt problems in Europe and a slowdown in U.S. economic recovery.
First, the sensitivity of the financial sector and risks from the financial stability perspective had increased following the SVB crisis.
The member also noted that, coupled with rising inflation expectations, the increase in perceived inflation among individuals ― driven by the recent rise in consumer prices, especially for daily necessities, such as agricultural and energy products ― could also contribute to a gradual slowdown in overall inflation.
Long-term market interest rates have risen, in response mainly to expectations of a policy rate hike by the US Federal Reserve and of an increased volume of Korean Treasury bond issuance.
However, the member saw that the recent improvements in investor sentiment in global financial markets were greatly diverging from the tightening monetary policy stances in major countries, including the US, and took the view that attention should be paid to the point that instability in the domestic financial and foreign exchange markets could recur in the process of policy rate hikes by the US Federal Reserve and other central banks.
Members assessed that inflation remained high, with consumer price inflation standing at the upper-5% level and core inflation and inflation expectations among the general public at the lower-4% level, boosted by the acceleration of the rise in processed food prices and the hike in electricity and gas fees, more than offsetting the slowing growth in petroleum product prices.
As positive points, the member mentioned the relative stability of international financial markets, thanks for instance to changes in the monetary policy stances of major advanced economies, and the increasing possibility of an agreement in the US-China trade dispute.
The member, however, judged that uncertainty surrounding the recovery path had not yet been eased substantially.
The member presented the opinion that household loans exhibited slower growth owing to a decline in other loans, while housing-related loans sustained strong growth.
The domestic economy was estimated to have grown faster than originally projected during the first quarter, as construction investment, previously forecast to undergo a correction, had shown more favorable movements than expected, and consumer sentiment and the sentiment of domestic demand-oriented companies, including those in the services sector, had been showing signs of recovery.
The member added that these policy efforts were expected to contribute to promoting stable growth in the medium to long term by addressing asset imbalances, which had widened during the pandemic.
Meanwhile, the member noted that, although Korea’s fiscal soundness is much more favorable than that of major countries, fiscal expenditure is likely to make far less contribution than before to growth, due mainly to the plan to lower the rate of growth in fiscal expenditure in this year’s budget and to the frontloading of budget spending during the first quarter of 2016.
He went on to express the view that, with regard to steady rising overseas investment, it was essential to evaluate in detail the future influence of overseas corporate investment on the dynamism of domestic demand, and that attention should be paid to the declining share of fixed-rate lending in overall household debt.
In addition, the member stressed the need for paying attention to the possibility that these financial easing conditions could work to build up the risk of financial imbalances, as could be seen in the recent growth in credit related to real estate and the run-up in real estate prices in some parts of the Seoul Metropolitan region.
Looking at financial conditions, the member evaluated that volatility had increased considerably, as market interest rates were rising significantly on changes in expectations for monetary policy at home and abroad and stock prices had been sensitive to changes in the international political landscape.
The member diagnosed that the downward revision of the growth path was mainly because the growth trend in the first quarter had been lower than original projection, due to mounting uncertainties about external conditions, including the financial and economic instability in China.
The member added that exports continued to grow based on favorable external demand, and employment was approaching the pre-pandemic level thanks to a steady increase in the number of persons employed.
The Committee forecasts that the global economy will sustain its modest recovery going forward, centering around advanced economies, but judges that the possibility exists of its being affected by the changes in global financial market conditions stemming from the shift in the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy stance, by the weakening of economic growth in some emerging market countries and by geopolitical risks.
One other member set out the view that it would be desirable to carefully examine and analyze both the background and future trend of major variables critical to the growth and stability of the Korean economy, while holding the Base Rate at the current level for the intermeeting period.
Finally, in the domestic financial markets, members assessed that stock prices and long-term interest rates had fallen due to strengthened risk aversion stemming from the spread of COVID-19, and stressed that it was necessary to pay attention to the possibility of greater volatility.
Some members appraised the domestic financial markets as having stabilized overall, with stock prices rising sharply and the exchange rate falling, while geopolitical risks had gradually eased after their increase following the shelling of Yeonpyeong Island by North Korea.
Long-term market interest rates had risen, but have since declined.
The member noted that the output gap was close to zero and consumer price inflation was nearing 2 percent, which suggested a heightened need for narrowing the degree of monetary easing.
He went on to express the view that these upward trends should be monitored closely going forward.
The member mentioned that, led by the buoyancy of the IT sector, exports and facilities investment would likely contribute significantly to Korea’s economic growth, and this trend was expected to continue next year.
The member emphasized that, particularly since various indicators were showing that there was ample liquidity in domestic financial markets, policy efforts to induce capital flows into productive sectors had become more important.
The member observed that the combination of short-term factors, such as the prospect of prolonged tightening monetary policy stances in major countries and continued high interest rates, and structural factors, such as the decline in international investment and in supply chain efficiency resulting from geopolitical conflict, excessive debt, demographic shifts, and climate change, may cause economic players to be pessimistic about the future outlook, suppressing private consumption and investment for some time.
Furthermore, the member evaluated consumption as having shown gradual improvement if the effects of the slowdown in automobile sales resulting from the termination of individual consumption tax cuts in June were excluded.
The member noted that vigilance was needed most of all against the fact that COVID-19, the main cause of the current global economic slump, was likely to abate later than originally forecast.
Meanwhile, the member noted that labor market conditions were partially improving, with the number of persons employed shifting to an increase in March, but had not reached pre-pandemic levels.
the moderate economic recovery in the US to have been sustained but the sluggishness of economic activities in the euro area to have continued, while economic growth in emerging market countries such as China has slowed somewhat.
Considering the matters mentioned above, the member found the current macroeconomic policy mix and stance to be appropriate.
The member’s evaluation was that the won’s depreciation reflected mainly changes in the macroeconomic conditions at home and abroad and was not serious enough to raise concerns about a fall in Korea’s international credit standing.
The member also stressed the need for decisive and principled restructuring and for close cooperation with the relevant authorities concerning decisive household debt measures.
The member noted that, despite a possible virtuous circle of stock or housing price increases leading to real economic growth through the wealth effect, if the gap between the asset markets and the real economy widened too much or asset price increases triggered household debt, this could increase financial vulnerabilities and limit the medium- to long-term growth path.
However, uncertainties over the pace of future growth increased with growing concerns about an economic recession in the U.S.
Employment conditions have been somewhat sluggish, with the number of persons employed having continued to decline in the manufacturing sector while its trend of increase in the service sector has slowed as well.
Finally, in terms of financial stability, the member assessed that growth in household lending and housing prices had slowed since the second half of last year, but continued caution about the risk of a buildup of financial imbalances was required.
They forecast that the economic recovery would be maintained, driven largely by the economic recovery centered around advanced countries, and the restoration of consumer and investor confidence.
Long-term market interest rates have rebounded slightly, after having declined.
The improvements in the euro area, although weak, have continued, and the Chinese economy has maintained its moderate growth.
One member pointed out the possibility of a future slowdown of economic growth in emerging economies influenced by the delayed recoveries in advanced economies and persistence of international financial market unrest.
the pace of decline in inflation to be modest in the coming months, given stubbornly high inflation expectations, although factors such as declines in agricultural product prices and the base effect from last year will work to bring inflation down.
The member noted that consumer price inflation had decelerated in-line with the forecast, and expected it to reach the target level in the second half of to increases in oil prices and the exchange rate.
First, looking at the recent macroeconomic trends, there seemed no significant changes in the upside and downside risks to growth and inflation since the April MPB meeting.
One member however forecast that Korea’s growth rate would not deviate greatly from its long-term trend level, unless a situation such as during the 2008 global financial crisis recurred.
Regarding the future outlook, many members anticipated that the domestic economy would remain on an upward track on the back of export buoyancy, notwithstanding latent external risk factors.
The member mentioned that, given the role of Chinese manufacturing industries in the global supply chain and global trade flows, and the amount of local production by major Korean enterprises, production setbacks in China caused by the COVID-19 outbreak were direct and indirect risk factors for the domestic economy.
The member, however, commented that economic agents seemed to have responded somewhat excessively given the coexistence of upside risks, such as fiscal expansion to support job creation and income, government policy measures including a cut in the individual consumption tax, and major large corporations’ plans to expand their investment.
The member noted that the trade account had recorded a surplus for four months in a row since June, led by an increase in exports of automobiles and vessels and a decline in energy imports.
The member noted that the decoupling between the real economy and asset prices was a global phenomenon stemming from the exogenous shock of COVID-19 and from accommodative monetary policy, but the degree of decoupling was higher in Korea, due mainly to a housing policy factor and the skewed recovery of the real economy.
Most members expressed concerns about issues such as the contractions in consumer and investor confidence and the weakening of consumption due to structural factors, while some noted the possibility of a further delay in the economic recovery going forward.
Considering these factors, he expressed the opinion that it would be best to maintain the Base Rate at its present level for the intermeeting period.
The member also assessed that returns from inefficient leveraged investment had not led to sustainable revenues, which had been gradually increasing deadweight loss in the Korean economy.
The member specifically noted that the materialization of recovery in the semiconductor industry this year was expected to have positive impacts on the momentum for improvement in exports and facilities investment.
The member emphasized that attention should be paid to the possibility that price variable volatility would rise again and household and corporate credit risks would increase in the event of a delay in economic recovery due to prolongation of the pandemic.
Some pointed out the possibility that maintaining the Base Rate at its current level, to which it had been steeply cut to counteract the crisis, might give rise to serious side effects such as herd behavior in the markets, adding that if this should undermine market confidence in the monetary authorities, they would have to shoulder a very heavy cost burden.
The member noted that, although the effects of monetary policy seemed to have weakened compared to those in the past, effects from both fiscal and monetary macroeconomic policy still clearly existed.
increases in prices of industrial products, and core inflation rose compared to the previous month as well.
Many members forecast that, although inflation would remain stable for the time being as demand-side pressures were weak, it would rise gradually from the latter half of 2013, influenced for instance by an increase in the prices of agricultural and marine products and by a base effect.
The member stated that investment was undergoing a correction phase, but exports and consumption remained strong.
The member took the view that, given pent-up service demand since the outbreak of the pandemic and growth in surplus saving so far, there was an underlying trend of recovery in solid consumption demand.
- Consumer price inflation registered 0.8% in June, the same as in May, in line mainly with declines in agricultural product prices.
The member took the view that, although a supplementary budget that the government had been working on would make up for the sluggishness of the domestic economy to a certain extent, the domestic economy would not be able to avoid the effects of the global economic slowdown.
One other member pointed out the need to examine the effectiveness and capacity of fiscal policy, which along with monetary policy forms the two main pillars of macroeconomic policy.
Taking these domestic and overseas developments into consideration, the member cited the following as the major reasons for the judgment that the Base Rate should be kept unchanged.
The member’s evaluation was that the economy had been expected to slow this year, due largely to the negative effects of declining semiconductor prices, but the –0.34% GDP growth rate during the first quarter had been worse than expected.
The member went on to note that any delay in changing the Base Rate, on the other hand, would lead to accumulated economic and social losses stemming from increased idle resources.
The member thus expressed the need to pay attention to this point.
The member raised concerns that most of the growth improvement since the second quarter had come from the US.
The member also noted that the Korean won to the U.S. dollar exchange rate had risen considerably, due to expectations for a prolonged tightening stance at the U.S. Fed and to the strong dollar.
The member commented that the price and growth trends and financial stability conditions would be considered together in a balanced manner in Base Rate rate operations going forward.
today to leave the Base Rate unchanged at 2.50% for the intermeeting period.
One member meanwhile expressed the view that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current level of 1.50 percent for the intermeeting period.
has continued, as exports have sustained their high rate of increase and consumption has recovered moderately although investment has temporarily slowed.
Another member presented the view that it would be appropriate to maintain the Base Rate at the current level of 3.50% for the intermeeting period.
The member judged that the economic growth rate for this year seemed to have declined somewhat rapidly due to the base effect from excessive construction investment over the past few years and the readjustment of IT-related facilities investment that had shown fast growth last year, but recorded growth was within the margin of error of the forecast path and at the level of the potential growth rate, which itself had remained on a downward path.
In this regard, the member evaluated that more time should be taken to monitor movements of macroeconomic indicators while holding the Base Rate at its current level.
The member also presented the opinion that, if the rate differentials between Korea and the US widened further than expected due to any further rate hike by the US Federal Reserve, there could be possibility of heavier depreciation pressure on the won, which could act as a negative factor on domestic prices and growth.
The slack in the labor force, meanwhile, had increased for the third consecutive month in June, with growth in the unemployment and time gaps more than offsetting the lack of substantial changes in the participation gap.
The Bank of Korea forecasts that the global economy will maintain its recovery going forward, albeit at a moderate pace, centering around advanced economies such as the US, but judges that the possibilities exist of its being affected by heightened international financial market volatility due for example to a shift in the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, and by the weakening of economic growth in emerging market countries.
The member forecast that domestic economic growth would be dampened significantly by COVID-19, with production and retail sales declining and facilities investment delayed.
Members also judged that, in the international markets, the US dollar had strengthened, interest rates had generally declined, and stock prices had risen centering around advanced countries.
rates rose, due mostly to international financial market stability and improvements in economic indicators in major countries, and the Korean won appreciated against the US dollar owing chiefly to the continued surplus in the current account.
On the other hand, the member added that core inflation was only in the lower-1 percent range due to sluggishness in administered items, leasehold deposits, monthly rental payments, and industrial products.
The member thus assessed that the possibility could not be ruled out that consumer price inflation would exceed the target for a longer period of time than the Research Department’s current projection.
The member assessed that the output gap seemed to have turned slightly positive but, considering that inflationary pressures were not yet large, it would be necessary to keep the current monetary easing stance for the time being, and went on to state that now seemed the time to closely monitor the real economic trend since the previous Base Rate hike and to analyze whether the current economic recovery would be sustainable in the medium and long term.
One member presented the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current 3.50% at this meeting.
The member saw that goods prices which had led low inflation since 2013 had rebounded last year, influenced by rising oil prices and supply disruptions, to record 4.5% growth in the fourth quarter, and would likely maintain high growth this year as well under the influence of a rise in the won-dollar exchange rate.
Regarding the current account, the member mentioned that the trade account deficit was worrisome, but considering its dependence on energy imports, Korea’s current account to GDP ratio was more favorable than those of major countries and Korea’s ratio of the current account to GDP excluding energy was even higher than those of major countries.
In this process it will thoroughly assess developments related to the pandemic, the impact on the economy and financial markets here and abroad, changes in financial stability such as household debt growth, and the effects of the policy measures taken in response to the pandemic.
Second, the member stated that it would be necessary to keep a close watch on how that day’s Fed rate hike and policy rate projections by the FOMC meeting participants would affect international financial markets and domestic financial and foreign exchange markets.
He pointed out that some new external factors making for uncertainty were emerging, however, including the intensification of disputes among countries over exchange rates and signs of a renewed run-up in global grain prices.
The member pointed out that, in the credit and securities markets, credit spreads had narrowed considerably, and anxiety in the PF-ABCP market had eased somewhat.
The member saw that risk aversion in the financial markets had eased somewhat, thanks to recent active policy responses by individual countries, but the shock to the real economy was increasing further, due to the implementation of strong quarantine measures, such as lockdowns or business suspensions in major countries, including the US.
The member voiced concern that changes in the domestic and international economic environments had been worsening further since the last MPB meeting.
As for housing prices, one member appraised those in Seoul and its surrounding areas as having continued their fall, as in the previous month, while the pace of their increase in the rest of the country had slowed, due chiefly to burdens stemming from their previous rapid surge.
The Board sees the domestic economy as likely to continue its trend of recovery going forward, and forecasts a rate of GDP growth for this year higher than the April projection (2.6%).
The member added that retail sales and construction investment were improving, facilities investment was sustaining a strong recovery, and export growth was increasing.
Another member judged that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate at its current level of 0.75%.
One other member argued that, although the growth path was judged to have been adjusted slightly downward in comparison with the October the fourth quarter of 2015, and to downward adjustments to the rates of growth of the world economy and global trade, and the price path was judged to have been adjusted substantially downward, as a further decline in international oil prices of late had acted as a downward pressure, these downward adjustments to the paths of growth and prices were mainly attributable to unforeseen changes in external factors, and the Base Rate’s current level still seemed accommodative, even in light of the downwardly adjusted outlook.
Meanwhile, another member presented the view that it would be appropriate to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level.
The member judged that, although the Base Rate had been already lowered to the still had room for a further rate cut considering the level of the policy rates of major countries.
The member took the view that this was attributable substantially to base-period effects and government support measures, but the trickle-down effects of wide-ranging export strength and the wealth effects of asset price rises were also responsible.
Members, however, diagnosed uncertainties surrounding the outlook for recovery as remaining high, as the possibility of a second wave of COVID-19 or a protracted pandemic had increased.
With regard to prices, the member noted that, amid ongoing pressure on the demand side, pressure on the supply side, including oil prices, exchange rates and wages, had increased further, and, as a result, consumer price inflation stood at 6.0% in June, the highest level since 1998.
One member expressed the opinion that it would be desirable to raise the Base Rate to 0.75% from the current level of 0.50%.
in the prices of agricultural, livestock and fisheries products and to increases in petroleum product prices.
The member meanwhile assessed that, when making a simple comparison among major OECD countries with respect to the combined effects on GDP growth of fiscal stimulus for this year and of recent policy rate changes, Korea was implementing the most expansionary macroeconomic policy.
First of all, the member forecast that underlying inflation would bottom out in the first quarter of this year and rebound afterwards.
Lastly, emphasizing the need for an approach to the causes of the slow growth that accorded with a focus on the structural contraction of private consumption rather than attributing it solely to the sluggish global economy, another member suggested it was necessary to ascertain whether the critical point had now been reached beyond which the recovery of private consumption would be held back for a long time by the influence of household debt.
The member judged that overall financial conditions remained stable, with flows of corporate credit gradually recovering and with economic activity improving.
The member, however, pointed out that leverage in the private sector continued to increase, with household lending sustaining strong growth led by accommodative financial conditions, and went on to argue that attention should be paid to the possibility that this could heighten medium- and long-term financial vulnerability and negatively affect the efficiency of resource allocation.
consumption has contracted due to the recent coronavirus resurgence, facilities investment has continued to recover and export growth has increased, led by the IT sector.
Long-term market interest rates have meanwhile moved within a narrow range.
Prior to the members' discussion regarding the Base Rate, the Chairman gave the floor to the 1st Vice Minister of Strategy and Finance, who explained the government's assessment of the current economic situation and the measures to stabilize prices of items closely connected with the lives of the general public, and then left the meeting.
Concerning the domestic economy, members’ evaluation was that it was continuing to grow at its potential level with the steady growth of private consumption and exports, although facilities and construction investment had been going through corrections.
Looking at financial stability, the member assessed the exchange rate and capital flows as showing limited volatility thanks to improved external soundness, although stock market volatility had expanded due to a likely early tapering by the US Federal Reserve and the Russia-Ukraine conflict.
The member judged that overall growth had been fluctuating in accordance with the degree of the growth contribution of the government sector, with growth in the private sector being almost at a standstill since the fourth quarter of last year.
The member projected that, while the domestic economy would maintain a slowing trend for some time, it would gradually recover in the second half of this year.
The US dollar has remained strong and stock prices have fallen considerably, while government bond yields in major countries have fluctuated significantly.
The member noted that financial unrest could spread, as seen in unrest in the asset-backed securities market and the shrinkage of the credit bond market, as a slowdown in the real estate market and the weakening of investor sentiment would continue for some time.
The member thus raised the concern that reversals of elements that had all moved in only one direction during the pandemic, such as expansionary fiscal policy based on government bond issuance at low rates, rising asset market prices based on leveraged investment, and expansions in household and corporate debt, could trigger unforseen shocks.
Regarding international financial markets, the member noted that major price variables fluctuated substantially, influenced largely by changing expectations of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s monetary policy and political uncertainties in the U.S. and Europe.
The member added that the Korean won to US dollar exchange rate had risen significantly and then had fallen back, influenced by global movements of the US dollar.
The member expected inflation to exceed the path projected in November for a considerable time, given the ongoing sharp rise in international commodity prices, the prolongation of global supply disruptions, and the growing upward pressures on the domestic demand side.
Another member expressed the opinion that it would be advisable to keep the Base Rate at its current level for the intermeeting period because, if the changes in the domestic and international financial and economic situation over the previous month were looked at comprehensively, economic activity and consumer prices were judged to have not strayed far from the path forecast in April, and considering the uncertainties surrounding domestic and foreign economic movements and the possibility of heightened international financial market volatility, there was a need to secure room for future monetary policy maneuver.
Concerning FX swap and FX market stability, meanwhile, the member’s assessment was that overall market conditions had remained normal and stable, with capital flows and prices reflecting real economic conditions, while the sustained geopolitical risk and the US Federal Reserve’s rate hike stance had only limited effects on the flows of global investment funds into Korea and related price variables.
Members shared the view that the corporate and household sectors were in good shape overall financially, but raised concerns about a possible rise in delinquency rates in some industries including the sluggish construction industry.
- Looking ahead, while supporting the recovery of economic growth the Committee will conduct monetary policy so as to maintain price stability over a medium-term horizon and pay attention to financial stability.
One other member argued that downside risks to the future growth and price paths were high, taking into account that although economic activity was expected to follow the path forecast in July, downside risks to the growth path for the second half had increased due to a prolonged slump in exports and the manufacturing industry, and considering that although consumer price inflation was judged to be falling somewhat short of the path forecast in July due mainly to the decline in international oil prices, core inflation was holding to the original forecast path, and keeping in mind that the slack in the production sector and the overall spare capacity in the labor market had expanded somewhat.
Looking ahead the Board forecasts that consumer price inflation will remain at a low level for the time being, and then gradually rise as the effects of the low oil prices diminish.
One member was of the opinion that the Bank of Korea should on the one hand work to constantly refine its monetary policy instruments, by examining the side-effects arising from the prolongation of low interest rates, the controversies related to the stimulative effect of Base Rate adjustment and the effectiveness of the recently reorganized Aggregate Credit Ceiling Loan, while on the other hand also strengthen its efforts, as the central bank, to put forward policy alternatives for the sound development of the Korean economy in view of the heightened concerns over entrenchment of a trend of low growth caused by the recent delay in economic recovery.
Particularly, one member mentioned the possibility of a double dip recession, in line with the growing downside risks arising from sluggish employment conditions and a slowdown in the housing market.
As to the domestic economy, many members commented that, although production indicators had shown partial improvements, the recovery of domestic demand as evident from consumption and facilities investment appeared feeble, while indicators of economic agents’ sentiment had deteriorated.
The member also argued that, despite the overall recovery in global goods demand, supply chain bottlenecks were unlikely to be resolved any time soon.
One of these members, however, put forward the opinion that the possibility needed to be borne in mind of factors such as the still high expected inflation and the unstable international grain prices working to destabilize prices.
The member noted that, despite the substantial increase in the government’s transfer payments, the decline in household consumption growth has not been eased.
On the employment front, the number of persons employed has continued its substantial uptrend, led by increases in the 50-and-above age group and in the service sector.
Going forward the Board expects domestic economic growth to be somewhat below the path projected in July, but to sustain a rate that does not diverge significantly from its potential level.
Although Korea does not have large trade volumes with Russia and Ukraine, negative supply shocks might be seen through higher commodity prices, and negative demand shocks via an indirect route through for instance the EU.
Meanwhile, one member mentioned that real estate prices remained weak in Seoul and its surrounding areas while their uptrend in the rest of the country was subsiding to some degree, and that their pace would slow further in the coming months—mostly on the weakening economic recovery and the expansion in supply of apartments, particularly small and medium-sized units.
On the employment front, as the number of persons employed increased in September, the employment-to-population ratio rose compared to that in September of last year while the unemployment rate maintained the same level.
The member added that, as IT-related investment, in particular, would cause job quality in sectors other than capital-intensive new industries to continue to decline, average wages would decrease further, thus possibly leading to a reduction in the share of labor income over the medium term.
Concerning domestic inflation, the member argued that consumer price inflation had declined substantially due to the base-period effect of petroleum prices, but that the decline was slower than originally expected, with personal service prices sustaining strong growth.
The member, however, argued that, in this process, consumer price inflation would be likely to exhibit high volatility in monthly terms due mainly to a base-period effect, which could cause confusion in the formation of inflation expectations.
He also asserted that, to engineer a soft-landing of the household debt problem, the costs and benefits of various policy measures including a Base Rate hike must be reexamined, and ways for mitigating their side effects sought.
The member expected that, although private consumption had been recovering slowly, it would likely maintain a modest upward trajectory going forward, depending on future improvements in real household incomes.
Concerning inflation, the member mentioned that attention should be paid to the fact that core inflation with regulated prices excluded was projected at around 2% for the second half of this year and the first half of next year.
to recover despite the spread of COVID-19 variants, supported by accelerated vaccinations and the relaxation of restrictions on economic activity in major countries.
The member commented that consumer price inflation had risen above the 2% inflation target, influenced by accelerating upward trends of oil prices and agricultural, livestock and fisheries product prices.
previous month, owing primarily to the stability in prices of livestock products and industrial goods, and core inflation excluding the prices of agricultural and petroleum products continued to run at a low level at 1.2%.
First, further tightening could be considered necessary in order to stabilize inflation quickly at the target level, but the benefits seemed to be very small or uncertain considering the current policy and market rates.
In this process the Board will thoroughly assess developments related to COVID-19 as well as the effects of the policy measures taken in response to the pandemic, while paying attention to changes in financial stability conditions such as fund flows to asset markets and household debt growth.
The Korean won has fluctuated within a narrow range, after having appreciated owing chiefly to the easing of financial unrest in emerging market countries.
Looking at domestic demand, the member expressed the opinion that retail sales were estimated not to have recovered from the decline seen since September and services production remained unchanged, together implying a slowdown in the recovery of private consumption.
The member also presented the view that maintaining the monetary tightening stance long enough would help facilitate the deleveraging of household debt that had increased excessively, and strengthen the long-term soundness of the Korean economy.
The Korean won has weakened slightly, as the influences of the continued current account surplus and the outflows of foreigners’ securities investment funds have overlapped.
Another member presented the view that it would be appropriate to hold the Base Rate steady at the current level of 3.50% for the inermeeting period.
The member then noted that, with such conditions making it difficult to be optimistic about the overall economy, underlying inflation was unlikely to converge toward the 2% target.
Members diagnosed that volatility in global financial markets had increased, with government bond yields and stock prices falling substantially in major countries.
The member evaluated that, looking at the major economic indicators released since the previous meeting, the average growth rate during the first half of this year would not deviate far from the April forecast, and added that the secular improvement in the output gap had continued.
As for other considerations with regard to inflation in future Base Rate decisions, the member mentioned the time lag with which rate hikes are transmitted, the speed of disinflation, and the economic situation for next year.
The member also noted that, to prevent excessive anxiety stemming from the recent heightened volatility in global financial markets, the Bank should assure economic agents that Korea’s capacity to respond to external shocks was relatively sound, thanks to its large current account surplus, abundant holdings of official foreign reserves, and banks’ safe external debt structures.
The member argued that the Korean economy had been overcoming the crisis relatively successfully based on strong goods exports, but it was now faced with a new challenge — increases in interest rates and inflation had caused the production costs of businesses to rise and household purchasing power to weaken compared with the pre-COVID-19 period.
Housing prices and leasehold deposits in the rest of the country rose at rates similar to those in December.
One other member expressed the opinion that it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level for the intermeeting period.
One member, however, stated that economic sentiment among the public had improved only slightly, owing to the modestness of the economic recovery and the persistently sluggish employment situation.
The Committee forecasts that inflation will gradually rise, but judges that for the time being inflationary pressures will not be high.
Regarding the financial markets, the member mentioned that, although household debt growth had slowed, credit to the corporate sector had maintained strong growth and liquidity growth remained at a high level.
Meanwhile, one other member noted that, although a look at changes in financial and economic conditions at home and abroad over the past one month showed that there had been no large changes in the price path, the growth path was judged to have been adjusted slightly downward, affected for instance by the MERS outbreak and sluggish exports.
The member emphasized that efforts to normalize funding costs and policy cooperation among the relevant authorities should be strengthened.
The member noted that there were growing concerns in the stock market about overly optimistic expectations from individual investors and leveraged speculative transactions.
He added that, with spending power having declined owing primarily to the growing household debt and the worsening of the income distribution structure, economic momentum might weaken rapidly if exports became less brisk in response to the world economic slowdown.
The member also explained that investment related to real estate, construction and IT, which had once led economic growth, had continued to undergo corrections, which had seemingly contributed to a fall in the domestic economic growth rate to a level near the downwardly adjusted potential growth rate.
remained at a weak level, with indicators related to exports and domestic demand alternating between improving and worsening.
Government bond yields in major countries have risen sharply and stock prices have fallen considerably.
On the domestic front, the member’s judgment was that, since sluggish domestic demand had not shown any sign of recovery, for the time being it would be difficult to expect any significant economic recovery beyond a technical rebound.
Next, the member emphasized the need to keep an eye on the negative effects of strong growth in private-sector credit amid the accommodative financial conditions.
As a result, most central banks in advanced economies began cutting rates or have signaled the possibility of doing so.
Members also mentioned that household debt was expected to stabilize, thanks for example to government measures, but its growth had continued to outpace that of household income, while sole proprietor loans had also maintained strong growth, all of which required constant attention.
The member emphasized once again that in the current situation in which the buildup of financial imbalances had expanded not only in Korea but also in most advanced economies due to the negative side effects of prolonged accommodative monetary policies, it was very important to rethink the dynamic trade-off mentioned above.
Notably, he expressed the view that it would also be necessary to monitor and develop measures in response to the increases in capital flows and sharp fluctuations in exchange rates that might be caused by the different timing of the unwinding of quantitative easing by major countries such as the US and Japan.
has continued, as private consumption has improved moderately and investment has shown favorable movements, while exports have sustained their high rate of increase.
The member nevertheless expressed support for a 50 basis point hike due to the strong need to respond to persistent high inflation and pursue financial and FX market stability.
The member added that this was because supply-side inflationary pressures had recently increased to a greater extent than expected due to rising oil prices and to the exchange rate, and, if the situation in the Middle East worsens, there was a significant risk of a further rise in oil prices and a further strengthening of the U.S. dollar simultaneously.
rising prices of petroleum products and agricultural, livestock, and fisheries products as well as the accelerating increase in service prices.
However, the member expected the degree of contraction in consumption this time would not be greater than those during the past waves, while exports and facilities investment in particular would continue their solid recoveries.
A number of members noted that housing transactions had become more active and the trends of increase in housing sales and leasehold deposit prices had accelerated, owing mainly to shifts from deposit-based tenancies to outright sales or monthly payment-based rentals, while bank household lending had sustained its trend of increase centering on the Bank of Korea website.
Moreover, the member added that reviewing the soundness of financial institutions would be necessary, considering that it had been almost two years since the policy rate hike stance began, and that the possibility of a tightening stance would continue for the time being.
such as interest rates, stock prices and exchange rates have widened, due mainly to the effects of external risk factors including the sovereign debt problems in Europe.
The member judged that, although the sharp rise in the Korean won to US dollar exchange rate was largely attributable to the strong dollar in line with the US Federal Reserve’s strong tightening stance, and the domestic economy’s overall fundamentals such as official foreign reserves remained favorable, amplification of such instability could negatively affect domestic price and real economic trends.
In local financial markets, however, financial conditions have continuously eased, with falling short- and long-term interest rates and a stock price rally.
To stabilize prices of essential goods, crucial for low-income households, more structural and fundamental policies are needed.
The member mentioned that inflation expectations of economic agents had grown rapidly amid the recent sustained uptrend in prices.
The member saw that employment remained favorable overall, although growth in the number of persons employed was gradually slowing.
Mr. Woosik Moon, however, dissented, expressing his clear opposition to lowering the Base Rate by 0.25 of a percentage point, and arguing for keeping it at the existing level.
Members assessed that, despite a recovery in private consumption, driven by face-to-face service consumption and ongoing favorable labor conditions, domestic economic growth was slowing due mainly to sluggish investment as well as slowing export growth stemming from a weakening of economic growth in major countries.
The member was also concerned that core inflation was running within the 0% range and the trend of decline in inflation expectations was continuing.
The Korean won to US dollar exchange rate has risen significantly, reflecting the global strengthening of the US dollar.
economy has strengthened, supported by accelerated vaccinations and the relaxation of restrictions on economic activity in major countries.
The member added that despite the decline in goods prices, supercore inflation and housing services inflation had remained elevated, pushing back the expected timing of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s pivot to beyond the mid-year.
The same member then expressed the view that, considering the time lag before the effects of the August Base Rate cut materialized, and the possibility of an increase in household debt risk, it was necessary to maintain the Base Rate at its current level for the month, and to keep a close watch on the future movements of economic indicators.
He opined as well that, since household debt and savings were two sides of the same coin, it was necessary to adopt a balanced stance on interest rate policy, taking both financial debt and savings into consideration.
First, the Base Rate hikes delivered so far have already begun to have an effect on the real economy, and the current level of the Rate was fairly tight, given the likelihood of the economy slowing further than the earlier forecast.
The member also expected that core inflation excluding administered prices would also come in at the upper-1% level, and estimated that core inflation felt by the general public would be higher when taking into account the recent sharp rise in owners’ equivalent rent that is excluded from the consumer price statistics.
The member’s assessment was that the 1.25% nominal level of the Base Rate could not be assessed to be low under recent macroeconomic conditions with the inflation falling to a historically low level, and that the real interest rate with underlying price inflation excluded remained the highest among major advanced countries.
The member added that growth in leasehold deposit loans, which are guaranteed loans, seemed to have been boosted by the increased guarantees provided by guarantee institutions seeking housing stability for the general public, and in this regard, curbing household debt would require policy instruments aiming at adjusting the degree of growth in leasehold deposit loans.
In addition, most members judged that, with destabilizing external factors including the sovereign debt problems in the euro area and economic sluggishness in major countries persisting for a long time, the timing of GDP growth rate’s return to trend was very likely to be delayed longer than expected.
The member judged that, taking these points into overall consideration, it would be appropriate to raise the Base Rate to 0.75% from 0.50%.
The member also found it desirable to keep a close watch on whether the foundation for economic recovery would spread to domestic demand, leading to further inflationary pressures, while examining whether risk related to household debt, which had increased sharply in line with the boom in the real estate market, would gradually diminish.
The member forecast that, despite uncertainties related to developments of the Omicron variant and global inflation, and related policy measures, the global economy would maintain a recovery, as seen in the strong growth of world trade.
The member commented that consumer price inflation had recently rebounded owing to rises in agricultural prices and global oil prices.
The member stressed that it was difficult to respond to irregular exchange rate fluctuations in a consistent manner by adjusting the Base Rate and that, unless faced with a critical situation such as sudden capital outflows and a fall in Korea’s international credit standing, priority consideration should be given to the domestic economy, inflation and financial stability conditions.
The member also noted that, regarding employment conditions, there was an upward trend in the number of employed women and of those aged 60 and older, driven by the services sector.
As the recovery in the Korean economy is expected to be slow and inflationary pressures on the demand-side are forecast to remain weak due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Board will maintain its accommodative monetary policy stance.
The member expected that consumption would continue to slow, weighed down by an economic slowdown, declining real purchasing power, and the growing burden of loan principal and interest repayment, in addition to the decrease in consumption capacity.
As to export and import trends, the 1st Vice Minister remarked that exports had shown slower growth in October, due chiefly to the base effect and to decreased exports to the US and the EU in line with the global fiscal crisis, while imports had fallen from the preceding month owing largely to the depreciation of the Korean won against the US dollar and the decline in international commodity prices.
As for the global financial markets, members mentioned that the volatility of stock prices and exchange rates in the US and other advanced economies (AEs) had increased, but the financial unrest in some emerging market economies (EMEs) had eased.
About financial markets, the member commented that despite the rise in market interest rates driven by weakened expectations for the U.S. Fed’s early rate cuts, market sentiments had generally remained stable, but that the potential risk associated with real estate project financing was still high, with home mortgage loans and corporate loans continuing to soar.
While the recovery in facilities investment has been subdued, the correction in construction investment has continued.
to sharp rises in the prices of some agricultural and livestock products.
Taking into account factors such as the sustained high growth in household and corporate loans, the member found it desirable to maintain a tightening monetary policy stance going forward.
Long-term market interest rates have fallen back, after having risen in response mainly to interest rate movements in major countries and to domestic economic indicators.
Looking ahead, the Board sees global economic growth and global financial markets as likely to be affected largely by global inflation movements, monetary policy changes in major countries, geopolitical risks, and COVID-19 restrictions in major countries.
The member projected meanwhile that a majority of major countries had been adjusting their monetary easing stances to tackle inflation and, in this process, financial conditions in Korea would continue to be affected by increasing global financial market volatility.
The member, however, noted that, the recent slowbalization was heightening concern that economic prosperity backed by expanded international trade and market opening could be reversed.
The member projected that the domestic economy would likely continue to show gradual improvement, led by exports.
On the domestic economy, the member saw that exports, led by semiconductors, had recovered strongly and were driving growth.
Another member presented the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 0.50% for the intermeeting period.
Concerning some negative forecasts for major industries, the member stressed that the structural problems of those industries should be reviewed to expand their mid- to long-term growth potentials.
The member stated that the 3-year Treasury yield had risen significantly in a short period of time and banks’ household lending rates had become much higher than during the pre-COVID-19 period, and went on to express concerns that this could work to increase debt-servicing burdens and funding costs, ultimately limiting the real economic recovery.
European countries, on the other hand, have been simultaneously experiencing both declining inflation and sluggish growth due to a stagnation in labor productivity resulting from the sluggish manufacturing sector and to a delay in any recovery in demand.
The member noted that the world economy was sustaining its moderate pace of growth, and the impacts of impending US rate hikes on the international financial markets and the foreign exchange market in Korea were likely to be limited.
The Committee does however recognize the presence of potentially destabilizing factors, such as pressures to hike public utility fees and the ongoing high inflation expectations.
The member’s diagnosis, however, was that uncertainties surrounding the future growth path remained high, owing to the uncertainty of pandemic-related developments and to the signs of a reescalation of US-China trade tensions.
The member presented the opinion that, particularly since consumer price inflation had run in the 0% range for two years in a row and the trend of recovery in consumption was expected to be delayed due to the resurgence of COVID-19, present conditions did not give rise to concerns about upward inflationary pressures over a medium-term horizon.
Looking ahead the Board forecasts that consumer price inflation will fall considerably short of the 2% inflation target for the time being, due mainly to the low oil prices.
The member thus expressed the view that it was desirable to keep the Base Rate unchanged at the current 1.25% level.
The member commented that this showed that low inflationary pressures on the demand side were a major cause of the low inflation.
Rate by 25 basis points, from 3.25% to 3.50%.
The member evaluated that the reflation trend in the world economy was gradually spreading, as the international financial market and emerging market economies remained stable.
Toward the fourth quarter of this year, however, inflation was expected to decline slightly to around the target level, with the base-period effects from temporary supply shocks and regulations fading away.
The member noted that, driven by the recovery in domestic demand, combined with supply-side factors including a surge in energy prices and supply chain disruptions, upward pressures on inflation had increased more than originally expected, and core inflation also stood at the mid-2% level, with inflationary pressure expanding into core items such as personal services and durables.
Another member presented the view that it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its current level.
The member also took the view that advanced countries had experienced a sharp drop in the propensity to consume at around retirement age, and the fact that the baby boomer generation, which accounts for a substantial share of households in Korea, was approaching retirement could be a factor causing household consumption to contract.
Third, amid the recent positive external conditions, including the boom in the IT industry, it would be desirable to ensure macroeconomic policy space and promote medium-term growth, rather than adopting short-sighted approaches such as expanding investment and boosting consumption.
The members stressed that, despite a slowdown in household debt growth, it would be necessary to constantly examine growth in loans such as leasehold deposit loans and loans to sole proprietors.
Another member assessed the financial and foreign exchange sectors to be very sound, with the external debt profile and the foreign currency situation greatly improved compared to past financial crises, and the capacity to withstand rapid capital outflows thus heightened.
The member went on to point out, however, that the recent housing market movements had not been serious enough to raise concerns in terms of monetary policy.
Volatility in global financial markets has increased.
The member noted that the domestic financial market was maintaining a relatively stable situation with volatility in price variables declining and credit spreads falling slightly.
recoveries in major advanced economies to have exhibited signs of being somewhat delayed, while emerging market economies continue to show favorable performances.
The member saw that such shocks would likely have only limited impacts on growth during the course of world economic recovery, but expected the extent and duration of global inflation to increase further, due to rising international commodity prices and worsening global supply chain disruptions.
The member, meanwhile, added that a shock to capital flows stemming from an inversion of the US and Korean policy rates would likely be absorbed smoothly through flexible exchange rate adjustments based on Korea’s favorable external soundness, including current account surplus and ample foreign reserves, accumulated for about last 20 years.
The member added that the Chinese economy had been in a structural decline, particularly in the real estate sector.
However, the member noted that, despite the unprecedentedly low Base Rate, mortgage lending rates had already risen above the pre-pandemic level, and the housing transaction volume and new lending related to housing sales had been gradually declining of late.
Members also evaluated that, with respect to the global financial markets, with major advanced countries adopting diverging monetary policy stances, global financial market volatility had been increasing due to concerns about an escalation of the US-China trade dispute, and that attention needed to be paid to the possibility of tougher financial market conditions in line with the rising cost of raising dollars in the short term.
One member assessed that, although domestic foreign exchange market volatility had risen considerably over the previous three months, it was markedly improved compared to the time of the global financial crisis in 2008, and attributed this mostly to the strengthened fundamentals of the Korean economy, to the improved external debt profile, and to the expanded sizes of Korea’s currency swap arrangements with Japan and China.
The member took the view that it would be necessary in this regard to adjust the degree of monetary easing and change the policy stance to meet changing financial and economic conditions.
After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea', of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members covered the following areas: With regard to the global economy, members’ assessment was that the trend of economic recovery had continued led by the US, the euro area, Japan and other advanced countries, and that the Chinese economy was also maintaining its solidly-based growth.
The member projected that GDP growth for this year would be similar to the previous forecast, but the economic slowdown was likely to deepen somewhat next year.
With regard to construction investment, the member’s assessment was that its growth rate had peaked but that it would increase slowly until next year.
One member, meanwhile, expressed the opinion that it would be appropriate to hold the Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.
In addition, the member noted that, with the Base Rate below the neutral interest rate, the tightening of financial conditions following a rise in long-term interest rates was not yet at a concerning level, and that long-term interest rates, having been lowered excessively due chiefly to the effects of advanced countries’ quantitative easing, had been normalized to some extent, which would have the positive effects of curbing the exposure of the financial system to real estate risks and the risk of further debt leveraging.
The member pointed out that, although this suggested that monetary policy transmission channels are working smoothly in the financial markets, continued attention should be paid to the possibility of the accumulation of financial imbalances that could be brought about by the continuation of accommodative financial conditions.
rates have fallen and the Korean won depreciated against the US dollar, influenced mainly by external risk factors.
The contrasting effects of external and internal demand are offsetting each other, leading to overall economic growth that does not significantly deviate from previous forecasts.
As to prices, members noted that consumer price inflation had exceeded its target of 2 percent during the first quarter, influenced by strong growth in the prices of oil and agricultural, livestock and fisheries products.
Concerning the financial markets, the member pointed out that risk preferences had been weakening somewhat, with interest rates rising substantially and stock prices falling on the back of strengthening expectations of policy rate hikes at home and abroad, while M2 growth had accelerated led by the expansion in private-sector credit supply.
However, the member mentioned that two conditions have to be met first if there is to be a rate cut.
The member, however, stressed the need to recognize that it takes quite a long time for an economy to recover in the event of an unusually large economic shock.
The member commented that in FX markets, the Korean won to U.S. dollar exchange rate had remained high with its volatility expanded.
Third, the member evaluated that, despite the three Base Rate hikes since August last year, monetary policy still remained accommodative.
factors and the consequent changes in financial and economic conditions at home and abroad, and conduct monetary policy so as to stabilize consumer price inflation at the inflation target over a medium-term horizon while continuing its efforts to lower inflation expectations and ensuring that the growth potential is not eroded.
The member noted that financial conditions did not appear to be greatly constrained given that M2 growth remained high at the 8% level.