The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Similarly to other monthly activity indicators, the one related to industry has shown volatility in recent months, which, in part, reflects ajustments in the number of working days due to floating holidays.
In June, the industrial production increased in 22 out of the 27 surveyed activity sectors, on a month-on-month basis.
On the other hand, the production of intermediate goods remained stable, according to the same comparison basis.
The reduction in the WAP growth rate during the last years has contributed to the maintenance of the unemployment rate at historically low levels.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness in the labor market, despite more evident signs of moderation at the margin.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, a scenario of low growth prospects in important advanced economies prevail, notably in the Euro Zone, and volatility indicators have responded to the prospects of monetary policy change in the US.
High unemployment rates in Europe, coupled with the efforts of fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, are translated into investment decline and low growth.
Regarding monetary policy, accommodative stances have prevailed in the advanced economies.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Zone, and in Japan, it is slightly above zero.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 77 bps and 18 bps spreads for the fourth quarters of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
As a consequence, it stands above the inflation target.
For the second quarter of 2015, the inflation forecast stays above the target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as 4 well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity this year have remained, with trend of intensification over the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
There are localized improvements in advanced economies, although the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of domestic demand.
However, the Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as greater volatility and dollar appreciation trend in the US.
The Copom evaluates that the main scenario encompasses a more intense domestic activity pace in this and in the upcoming year.
Recent information indicate resumption of investments and continuity of household consumption growth, the latter favored by public transfers and by the vigor in the labor market, which reflects in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth.
In general, domestic absorption has expanded at rates higher than GDP growth rates and tends to be benefited by the effects of fiscal policy actions, by the expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporates, and by the program of public services concession, among other factors.
However, the Committee notes that the speed of materialization of these expected gains depends on the confidence strengthening of companies and households.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
For the Committee, conditions are created so that, in the horizon relevant for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, strengthens the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Despite the moderation signs, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Committee considers that the exchange rate depreciation and volatility observed in the recent quarters enable a natural and expected correction in relative prices.
For the Committee, these movements in the local currency market, to some extent, reflect prospects for the transition of international financial markets towards normality, among other dimensions, in terms of liquidity and interest rates.
It is also important to highlight that, for the Committee, the aforementioned exchange rate depreciation is a source of inflationary pressure in shorter periods.
However, the secondary effects stemming from it, and that would tend to materialize over longer periods, can and should be limited by appropriate monetary policy handling.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for inflation to show resistance.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the deterioration in the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are also included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, in the Committees view, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it is reverted.
In this context, the Copom understands that it is appropriate to continue the adjustment pace of the monetary conditions underway.
The Committee evaluates that this decision will contribute to set inflation into decline and ensure that this trend persists in the upcoming year.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to be relatively robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the remaining effects of the policy actions recently implemented.
These effects, the programs of public services concession, the permissions for the exploration of oil, among others, create good prospects for investments and industrial production.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario still represents an aggregate demand restraining factor.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, businesses and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain especially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation rates, such as the ones observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 94 months in July, representing increases of 0.4 month, month-on-month, and 13.8 months, year-over-year.
The average tenure related to individuals reached 133.9 months, increasing 1.2 month, month-on-month, and 19 months, year-over-year.
In the corporate segment, the average tenure reached 63 months, decreasing 0.6 month, month-on-month, and increasing 9.3 months, year-over-year.
The global economic recovery remains at a moderate pace, highlighting the acceleration in the advanced economies.
Recent economic indicators for the region, such as the economic sentiment index, the industrial production and the composite PMI, which rose in August to the highest level in 26 months, point to continued growth in the third quarter.
In the UK, the composite PMI for July, calculated by Markit, reached 59.8, the highest level of the series started in In Japan, the private consumption was the main driver of growth in the first two quarters of the year, followed by net exports and government spending.
The manufacturing industry PMI in China rose to 50.1 in August, up from 47.7 in July, after three consecutive months of decline.
In this sense, there was an additional increase in annual yield of US Treasury ten-year bonds.
In this environment, the US dollar appreciated against emerging economies currencies, notably South Africa, Brazil, India, Indonesia and Turkey, while decreased relative to the euro, the pound and the yen.
The indexes representative of the stock market rose in Germany, South Africa, Brazil, China and France, in contrast to the decreases in the stock markets of Japan, India, Turkey and Malaysia.
In the international commodities market, the prospects for good crops in contributed to the decrease in the agricultural prices, except for soybeans, with significant increase in the most recent period, due to unfavorable weather outlook in the US.
Metal commodity prices advanced significantly, highlighting the increases of tin and iron ore, the latter driven by the growth of imports of the metal by China.
In the segment of energy, it is worth mentioning the rising of the barrel price of the Brent crude oil, due to geopolitical tensions in the Middle East.
The central banks of the US, Euro Area, Japan and UK maintained their respective official interest rates at historical minimum, while the monetary authorities of Australia, Hungary and Romania expanded again the expansionary stance of their policies, by reducing their respective basic rates.
In contrast, the central bank of Indonesia increased its basic interest rate.
The ECB added to its communication that the current stance of monetary policy will remain accommodative for the time deemed necessary, confirming that the rates will remain at current levels or below, for a prolonged period.
On the foreign outlook, the expected reduction, in the short term, of the monetary stimuli by the Fed, continued to influence the markets dynamics, maintaining the global trajectory of appreciation for the US dollar and the increase of the US Treasury bonds rates.
The increase in the yield curve was partially reversed at the end of the period, after the realization of repurchase auctions of fixed interest rates bonds by the Treasury and the announcement of a program of daily foreign exchange market interventions by the Central Bank.
Rates for maturities of one, two and three years increased by 0.84 p.p., 0.88 p.p. and 0.73 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also carried out overnight repo agreements on 35 occasions as a borrower.
It also conducted leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenure of two working days.
