The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
At the same time, the industrial businessmen confidence continues in a gradual recovery trajectory.
The slow recovery in confidence partially explains why investments havent reacted yet to stimuli introduced in the economy.
In particular, exports for Argentina, European Union and Japan were negatively impacted by the fragility of economic activity in these regions.
The indicators of Credit Conditions, constructed by the Central Bank based on quarterly consultation held with representative institutions of each credit market segment, evidence, for the first quarter of 2013, compared to 2 the last quarter of 2012, moderation in the pace of concessions approval to corporations, which is partially explained by seasonal factors.
Regarding credit to individuals, the analysis suggests growth scenario for both consumer and housing segments, boosted by demand.
Production declined in 15 of the 27 branches of activity.
Commerce and services sectors registered positive balance, while the change was negative in the six remaining sectors.
In short, the set of available data indicates that the labor market remains robust, although there are signs of moderation at the margin.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by moderate credit expansion.
Global economy continues to face a period of uncertainty, with prospects of low growth for a long period in important economies, despite the recent accommodation in the volatility and risk aversion indicators.
High unemployment rates for a long period coupled with the implementation of fiscal adjustments, the limited space for countercyclical actions and political uncertainties are translated into projections of low growth for mature economies, mainly in Europe.
Regarding monetary policy, advanced economies persist with strongly accommodative stances.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Area, and negative in Japan.
Unconventional policy actions, announced in mature economies, tend to increase liquidity in their markets and contribute to the decrease in the likelihood of extreme events.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with other countercyclical policies.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 41 bps and 21 bps spreads for the fourth quarter of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
For 2014, in both scenarios, the inflation forecast is slightly above the midpoint inflation target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investments and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Copom understands that there were significant structural changes in the Brazilian economy, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction in risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the ninth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of 5 primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of the decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these transformations are characterized by high degree of persistence - although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur - and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also evaluates that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In this context, despite identifying decrease in the probability of occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, the Copom considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity remained unchanged.
In mature economies, the space to use monetary policy seems to be limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the next years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has intensified, supported by the resilience of domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of price pressures in metal commodity markets, to some extent, offset by moderation in segments of agricultural and energy commodities.
The Copom evaluates that the pace of recovery in domestic economic activity - less intense than previously anticipated - is essentially due to limitations regarding the supply side.
Given its nature, therefore, these difficulties cannot be addressed by monetary policy actions, which are, par excellence, demand control tools.
By the way, despite the weakness of investment, which reflects, largely, the increased uncertainties and the slow recovery of confidence, domestic demand will continue to be driven by the lagged effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, as well as by the moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate.
The Copom believes, additionally, that domestic activity will continue to be favored by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, which is reflected in historically low unemployment rates and in wage growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates that the greater dispersion of consumer price increases recently observed and the reversal of tax exemptions, combined with seasonal pressures and pressures localized in the transportation segment, tend to contribute that inflation shows resistance in the short term.
The Copom emphasizes that its main scenario includes more intense domestic activity pace in this year and limited risks, but which have recently intensified, regarding the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
The Committee highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
Furthermore, the Copom emphasizes that the outlook for the upcoming semesters indicates moderation in the prices dynamics of some real and financial assets.
In short, the Copom highlights that the balance of risks for inflation worsened in the short term and that the recovery in domestic activity was less intense than expected, as well as that some complexity still involves the international scenario.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession, the inventories at adjusted levels and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create prospects for the investment resumption.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate the balance of the public sector in expansionary position.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario represents an aggregate demand restraining factor restraining aggregate demand.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal field and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
In this context, the Copom believes that the stability of monetary conditions for a sufficiently long period of time is the most adequate strategy to ensure the convergence of inflation toward the target.
The monthly result reflected acceleration in market prices and deceleration in regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA change mainly stemmed from the increases in the prices of food and beverages, and personal expenses, with respective contributions of 0.25 p.p. and 0.16 p.p..
The IPC-DI acceleration in December was mainly influenced by the higher increases in the prices of food group, whose contribution to the monthly index increased from 0.13 p.p.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased two days in November, reaching 524 days.
The tenure related to individuals increased five days and that related to the corporate segment decreased two days, reaching 626 and 431 days, respectively.
The housing market continues to signal recovery, with housing prices, sales of existing homes and confidence in construction companies at high levels.
In the Euro Area, the most recent indicators of industrial production, consumption, economic sentiment and unemployment rate reinforce the prospects of continued contraction of economic activity in the region.
In this scenario, the perception of risk dropped, the major stock exchanges reported significant increases and the annual yields of the ten-year bonds from the US, Germany, UK and Japan increased.
In the currency market, the dollar depreciated against the major currencies, except for the yen.
In the other economies, the rates also remained at the previous levels, except for Australia, Hungary, Poland, Sweden, Turkey and Israel, which reduced their basic rates, and Uruguay, which increased.
In Japan, the BoJ expanded again by 10 trillion, to approximately 101 trillion, its assets purchase program and defined the operational limits of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility.
The provision of new funding for these two programs and for the Loan Support Program, scheduled for the next 15 months, exceeds 50 trillion.
The fall in the rates was influenced, domestically, by the release of economic activity data below market estimates, while on the international scenario, uncertainties persisted about the final solution for the US fiscal issue.
The rates for one-, two- and three-years maturities declined 0.17 p.p., 0.16 p.p. and 0.19 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations, in 27 opportunities as a borrower and 5 as a lender of resources, and carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of one and two working days.
