The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Industrial production increased month-on-month in 13 out of the 27 branches of activity surveyed.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite some signs of moderation at the margin.
In the global economy, low growth prospects for a long period in important advanced economies remain, notably in the Euro Zone, and indicators of volatility and risk aversion have shown some stability.
High unemployment rates in Europe, coupled with the efforts of fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties,are translated into declines in investment and low growth projections.
Regarding monetary policy, the advanced economies have persisted with strongly accommodative stances, coupled with, in some cases, unconventional monetary policty actions.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Zone, and negative in Japan.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 52 bps and 16 bps spreads for the fourth quarters of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Copom understands that there were significant structural changes in the Brazilian economy, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction in risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the ninth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of the decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these transformations are characterized by high degree of persistence - although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur - and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also evaluates that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments, have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate.
In this context, despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity remained, with trend of intensification over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
In this context, there are localized improvements in advanced economies, although the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has intensified, supported by the resilience of domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of commodities prices in international markets, as well as greater volatility and dollar appreciation trend in the US.
The Copom evaluates that, despite the limitations in the supply side, the main scenario encompasses a more intense domestic activity pace in this and in the upcoming year, that means, a growth trajectory, in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, more in line with potential growth.
In this context, recent information indicate investments recovery and continuity in household consumption growth, favored by public transfers and by the vigor in the labor market which reflects in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth.
In general, domestic absorption has expanded at rates higher than GDP growth rates and tends to be benefited by the effects of fiscal policy actions, by the expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporates, and by the program of public services concession, among other factors.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables, despite recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
The Committee notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, strengthens the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Despite the moderation signs, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary pressures of costs.
The Copom evaluates that the high inflation level and the dispersion of prices increases, as recently observed, contribute for inflation to show resistance.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the deterioration in the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it is reverted.
Therefore, the Committee understands that the intensification of the adjustment pace of the monetary conditions underway is appropriate.
The Committee evaluates that this decision will contribute to set inflation into decline and ensure that this trend persists in the upcoming year.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the remaining effects of policy actions implemented in For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession, the inventories at adjusted levels and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create prospects for investments intensification and industrial production recovery.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario still represents an aggregate demand restraining factor.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, shows that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, businesses and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Copom notes that, in the short run, 12-month inflation shows elevation trend and that the balance of risks for the prospective scenario is unfavorable.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain specially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation rates, such as the ones observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
Among the use categories, intermediate goods increased 1 p.p.
The ICS, carried out by the FGV considering seasonally adjusted data, reached 119.4 points in May.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 90 months in April, representing an increase of 4 months, month-on-month, and 15.9 months, year-over-year.
The tenure related to individuals increased 1.9 months and 19.1 months, respectively, and that related to the corporate segment increased 5.6 months, month-on-month, and 13.3 months, year-over-year, reaching 128.9 months for individuals and 60.2 months for corporate.
The global economic recovery remains at a moderate pace.
In the US, the activity growth was lower than expected and occurred under the impulse of inventories formation and private consumption.
In the Euro Zone, the economic activity is at its longest period of contraction.
In Japan, in the midst of fiscal and monetary easing policies, the economy shows signs of recovery.
The Composite PMI, although having retreated in April, remains at a level in line with expansion activity since the start of the year.
In China, the slowdown of activity continued for the second consecutive quarter.
However, monthly April figures for fixed asset investment, retail sales and industrial production were 11 higher than the ones recorded in the quarter ended in March.
It is worth noting, additionally, the decline of the manufacturing PMI to 49.6 in May from 50.4 in April, signaling the first contraction of Chinese industry in seven months.
Financial markets remained operating in an environment of low volatility in most of the period, and the index CBOE VIX oscillated around thirteen points.
The ample liquidity in the financial markets, the upgrade of the Greece sovereign bonds and the perception that, if necessary, the authorities will continue to act in a coordinated way to enlarge the monetary policies easing stances have supported the recovery of confidence, favoring the valuation of assets and the retreat of the sovereign risk in the most vulnerable economies in the Euro Zone.
In this scenario, the major stock exchanges appreciated especially the DAX, from Germany, and the Nikkei, from Japan.
In the international commodities market, the improvement in the grain supply scenario and the prospects for good crops in , coupled with the moderate recovery in global activity, have favored the maintenance of a downward trend in prices for great part of the commodities, in particular, corn, sugar, coffee and iron ore.
On the other hand, the resurgence of geopolitical tensions in Syria favored upward adjustment in oil prices from the last ten days of April, after two months of reduction in the prices of Brent barrel.
The scenario of moderate growth and decline in commodity prices also favored the maintenance of official interest rates at historical minimum rates by the central banks of the US, Japan and the UK, while the monetary authorities of Australia, South Korea, Denmark, India, Turkey, Poland, Hungary and Israel expanded the expansionary stances of their policies, reducing again their respective basic rates.
In the month, there was no spot intervention in the domestic exchange market.
Among the factors underpinning this movement, it bears highlighting, in the international scenario, the expectation of reduction of monetary stimuli by the Fed, the appreciation of the US dollar relative to other currencies, the elevation of the US treasuries rates and the continuity of uncertainties regarding the global economic recovery.
Domestically, the slow economic recovery and the collection of higher prices led to fluctuations in the short end of the yield curve.
The rates for one and twoyear maturities decreased by 0.03 p.p. and 0.06 p.p., respectively, while the three-year rate increased by 0.01 p.p.
The BCB also carried out overnight repo agreements on 29 occasions as a borrower.
It also conducted leveling operations at the end of the day, with tenure of two business days.
The main factor driving the liquidity contraction in the period was the net revenues of the Government.
