In short, regulated inflation retreats, at the same time that non-tradables inflation remains at high levels and the tradables inflation continues to increase.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The Credit Conditions Indicators elaborated by the Central Bank based on quarterly surveys with institutions representing each credit market segment evidence for the third quarter of 2013, compared to the second quarter, prospect of moderation in the pace of concessions of new credit operations for the segment of big companies, and maintenance in the case of micro, small and medium companies.
Regarding credit to individuals, the indicator suggests stability in the pace of concessions of credit lines directed to consumption and moderation in the concessions regarding housing.
Similarly to other monthly activity indicators, the one related to industry has showed volatililty in recent months, which in part reflects adjustments in the number of working days due to floating holidays.
In May, industrial production decreased month-on-month in 20 out of the 27 branches of activity surveyed.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, low growth prospects in important advanced economies prevail, notably in the Euro Zone, and volatility indicators have responded to the prospects of monetary policy change in the US.
High unemployment rates in Europe, coupled with the efforts of fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, are translated into investments decline and low growth.
Regarding monetary policy, accommodative stances have prevailed in the advanced economies.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Zone, and in Japan, deflation is still recorded.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 69 bps and 12 bps spreads for the fourth quarters of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
As a consequence, it stands above the inflation target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting 4 regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
In this context, despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity this year have remained, with trend of intensification over the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
In this context, there are localized improvements in advanced economies, although the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched to expectations, despite the resilience of domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as greater volatility and dollar appreciation trend in the US.
The Copom evaluates that the main scenario encompasses a more intense domestic activity pace in this and in the upcoming year.
Recent information indicate resumption of investments and continuity of household consumption growth, the latter favored by public transfers and by the vigor in the labor market, which reflects in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth.
In general, domestic absorption has expanded at rates higher than GDP growth rates and tends to be benefited by the effects of fiscal policy actions, by the expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporates, and by the program of public services concession, among other factors.
However, the Committee notes that the speed of materialization of these expected gains can be limited if the current decline registered in the business and consumer confidence is not promptly reverted.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables, despite recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
The Committee notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, strengthens the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Despite the moderation signs, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Committee considers that the exchange rate depreciation and volatility observed in the recent quarters call for a natural and expected correction in relative prices.
For the Committee, these movements in the local currency market, to some extent, reflect prospects for the transition of international financial markets towards normality, among other dimensions, in terms of liquidity and interest rates.
It is important to also highlight that, for the Committee, the mentioned exchange rate depreciation is a source of inflationary pressure in shorter 5 periods.
However, the secondary effects arising from it, and that would tend to materialize over longer periods, can and should be limited by appropriate monetary policy handling.
The Copom evaluates that the high inflation level and the dispersion of prices increases, as recently observed, contribute for inflation to show resistance.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the deterioration in the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, in the Committees view, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it is reverted.
In this context, the Committee understands that it is appropriate to continue the adjustment pace of the monetary conditions underway.
The Committee evaluates that this decision will contribute to set inflation into decline and ensure that this trend persists in the upcoming year.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to be relatively robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the remaining effects of the policy actions implemented in For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession, the permissions for the exploration of oil and the inventories at adjusted levels, among others, create good prospects for investments and industrial production.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario still represents an aggregate demand restraining factor.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, shows that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, businesses and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain especially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation rates, such as the ones observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 98.6 months in May, representing an increase of 8.1 months, month-on-month, and 18.9 months, year-over-year.
The average tenure related to individuals increased 1.3 months, month-on-month, and 18.9 months, year-over-year and that related to the corporate segment increased 13.1 months and 18.4 months, according to the same comparison basis, respectively, reaching 130.2 months for individuals and 74.1 months for corporate.
The global economic recovery remains at a moderate pace.
The global PMI retreated to 51.4 points in June, down from 52.9 in May, due to the deceleration of the growth in the emerging economies and to the continuity of activity contraction in the Euro Zone.
In the US, the most recent economic indicators indicate that the economic activity continues to benefit from the recovery in the housing and labor markets, which point, respectively, elevations in the confidence indices of the building companies and more elevated pace of job creation, registering 195 thousand new job posts in June.
In this context, the US dollar valued against the main currencies in emerging economies.
In the international commodities market, the ample supply of grains and the prospects for good crops in have maintained the prices of the agricultural commodities in a downward trend, in particular for corn and wheat.
In the metallic commodities market, the retreats in prices continue to be explained by the uncertainties regarding the Chinese demand and by the US dollar valuation, more recently deepened by the prospect of decreasing the monetary stimuli in the US.
On the other hand, the increase of geopolitical tensions in Syria and Egypt translated into upward pressure for the oil prices.
The scenario of moderate growth and cooling in commodities prices favored the maintenance of the official interest rates at minimum historical levels by the G4 central banks, while monetary authorities in Poland and Hungary resumed the deepening of their expansionist policies stance, reducing their respective basic interest rates.
The period was characterized by the increase of volatility and of risk aversion in global scope.
In the external scenario, the expectation of reduction of the monetary stimuli by the Fed resulted in valuation of the US dollar against the main emerging currencies and in increase of the rates related to the US Treasury securities.
In the local market, according to market analysts, among the factors underpinning this movement, it bears highlighting the upward revision of the expectations regarding intensity and length of the tightening monetary cycle, the uncertainties regarding the effective accomplishment of the fiscal targets of the federal government, the devaluation of the BRL against the US dollar and the downward prospect of the sovereign rating by a risk classification agency.
The rates for one, two and three-year maturities increased by 0.86 p.p., 1.24 p.p. and 1.55 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also carried out overnight repo agreements on 29 occasions as a borrower.
It also conducted leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenure of two business days.
The main factors driving the liquidity expansion in the period were the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury and the net expenditures of the Government.
