The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
At the same time, the industrial businessmen confidence continues in a gradual recovery trajectory.
Production increased in 13 of the 27 branches of activity.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness margin in the labor market and accommodation at the margin.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, prospects for low growth for a long period in important advanced economies remain and there was some accommodation in the volatility and risk aversion indicators.
High unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, are translated into projections of low growth for advanced economies, mainly in Europe.
Regarding monetary policy, advanced economies have persisted with strongly accommodative stances.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Area, and negative in Japan.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 45 bps and 32 bps spreads for the fourth quarter of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Copom understands that there were significant structural changes in the Brazilian economy, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction in risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the ninth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of the decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these transformations are characterized by high degree of persistence - although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur - and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also evaluates that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments, have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate.
In this context, despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity remained unchanged.
In mature economies, the space to use monetary policy seems to be limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the next years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has intensified, supported by the resilience of domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of international commodities prices.
The Copom evaluates that the pace of recovery in domestic economic activity - less intense than previously anticipated - is essentially due to limitations regarding the supply side.
Given their nature, therefore, these 5 impediments cannot be addressed by monetary policy actions, which are, _par excellence, demand control_ tools.
On the other hand, the Committee highlights that recent information points to the investment resumption and to a growth path more aligned with potential growth.
Moreover, the Committee notices that domestic demand will continue to be boosted by the lagged effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, as well as by the moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate.
Additionally, domestic activity will continue to be favored by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, which is reflected in historically low unemployment rates and in wage growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom emphasizes that its main scenario includes more intense domestic activity this year.
In this context, the Committee highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
Furthermore, the Copom emphasizes moderation recently observed in the prices dynamics of some real and financial assets, which, in the assumption of remaining at the current levels, will constitute important disinflationary strength.
The Copom evaluates that the greater dispersion of consumer price increases recently observed, seasonal pressures and pressures localized in the transportation segment, among other factors, contribute for inflation to show resistance.
Although this unfavorable dynamics may not represent a temporary phenomenon, but a possible accommodation of inflation at a higher level, the Committee considers that remaining uncertainties stemming from foreign and domestic fronts - surround the prospective scenario and recommend that monetary policy should be administered with caution.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession, the inventories at adjusted levels and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create prospects for investment intensification.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate the balance of the public sector in expansionist position.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the still fragile international scenario represents an aggregate demand restraining factor.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, shows that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investment.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening the planning horizons of households, businesses and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The tenure related to individuals increased 2.3 months and 18.4 months, according to the same comparison bases, and that related to the corporate segment fell 0.6 month-onmonth and increased 13.6 months year-over-year, reaching 125.3 months for individuals and 60.5 months for corporate.
In the US, GDP stability reflected the negative contributions of inventories, governmental expenditures and exports, and increases of positive contributions of household consumption and gross fixed capital formation.
The housing market remains in recovery.
Notwithstanding, the last indicators of industrial production, for December 2012, and of economic sentiment, relative to February 2013, showed improvement.
In Japan, the contraction in the last quarter of 2012 was influenced by the declines in business investment, exports and change in private inventories.
However, industrial production, which rose in three of the last four months through January; the trade flow, which in January reported the first year-over-year growth in eight months; and the February Manufacturing PMI, increasing for the second consecutive month, suggest improvement in economic conditions.
In China, despite the marginal deceleration of GDP, the average of the monthly growth rates of fixed asset investment, industrial production and retail sales increased in the fourth quarter, quarter-over-quarter.
The Composite PMI, after increasing for five consecutive months, dropped to 51.4 in February.
Stock exchanges recorded distinct behaviors, with most indexes referring to the developed economies booming, especially the Nikkei, from Japan, and the ones relative to emerging economies, going down.
Regarding international commodity prices, there were reductions in most of it.
Among agricultural commodities, it bears highlighting the reduction in the prices of sugar, coffee, corn and wheat, and the increase in cotton.
In the other economies, the rates also remained at the previous levels, except for Colombia, Hungary, India and Poland, which reduced their basic rates.
Among the factors underpinning this movement, it bears highlighting, on the domestic scenario, the disclosure of more pressured price indices and the market expectation for the start of the Selic target increase cycle.
The rates for one-, two- and three-years maturities increased by 0.62 p.p., 0.70 p.p. and 0.64 p.p. respectively.
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations on 32 occasions, being a borrower in 31 of them.
It also conducted leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of two working days.
The main factors that contributed to the contraction of liquidity in the period were the net revenues of the Government and the net issuance of securities by the National Treasury.
