The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Credit conditions indicators, elaborated by the BCB based on quarterly consultation to institutions representing each credit market segment, evidence, for the second quarter of 2013, expectation of moderate increase in the pace of concessions of new credit operations for all segments.
For corporate, the expectation of concessions increase is partially due to the expectations of improvement in the domestic economy conditions and of retreat in the delinquency rate relative to micro, small and medium-sized companies.
Regarding credit to individuals, an increase in concessions is expected, boosted by the retreat in delinquency and in the household banking debt service, in the case of consumer credit; and by the competition, in the case of the housing segment.
Production decreased in 15 of the 27 branches of activity.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite some signs of accommodation at the margin.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, low growth prospects for a long period in important advanced economies remain and there was stability in the volatility and risk aversion indicators, despite negative shocks in the financial system in the Euro Zone.
High unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, are translated into projections of low growth for advanced economies, mainly in Europe.
Regarding monetary policy, the advanced economies have persisted with accommodative stances.
In the emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Zone, and negative in Japan.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 47 bps and 18 bps spreads for the fourth quarter of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
According to the market scenario, 2014 IPCA inflation forecast decreased, but is above the midpoint inflation target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Copom understands that there were significant structural changes in the Brazilian economy, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction in risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the ninth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of the decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these transformations are characterized by high degree of persistence - although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur - and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also evaluates that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments, have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate.
In this context, despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity remained unchanged, with trend of intensification over the relevant horizon.
In this context, there are localized improvements in advanced economies, although the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has intensified, supported by the resilience of domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of international commodities prices.
The Copom evaluates that, despite the limitations in the supply side, the pace of domestic economic activity intensified in the first quarter.
Moreover, it notes that recent data point to a resumption of investment and a growth trajectory, in the relevant horizon, more in line with potential growth.
The Committee notes that the domestic demand will continue to be driven by the lagged effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, as well as the moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporates.
Additionally, the domestic activity will continue to be favored by the public transfers, as well as by the strength 5 of the labor market, which is reflected in historically low unemployment rates and wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables, despite recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, strengthens the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom emphasizes that its main scenario includes more intense domestic activity in this an in the upcoming year.
In this context, the Committee highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
It bears noticing the recently observed moderation in the price dynamics of some real and financial assets, which, in the assumption of remaining at the current levels, will constitute disinflationary strength.
The Copom evaluates that the high inflation level and the dispersion of price increases, among other factors, contribute for inflation to show resistance and demand a monetary policy response.
On the other hand, the Committee considers that domestic and, mainly, external uncertainties surround the prospective scenario for inflation and recommend that monetary policy should be administered with caution.
The judgment of all the Copom members is convergent with respect to the need for a monetary policy action aimed at neutralizing risks that arise in the prospective scenario for inflation, especially for the next year.
Part of the Committee, however, considers that there is an ongoing reassessment of global growth and that this process, depending on its intensity and length, may cause positive impacts over domestic prices dynamics.
For those members of the Committee, an immediate action of monetary policy would not be recommended; however, this view was not supported by the majority of the Board.
Aldo Luiz Mendes and Luiz Awazu Pereira da Silva.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession, the inventories at adjusted levels and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create prospects for investments intensification and industrial production recovery.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives point to an expansionist position of the public sector balance.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario still represents an aggregate demand restraining factor.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, shows that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, businesses and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Monetary Policy Committee notes that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy must remain especially vigilant in order to minimize risks that high inflation levels, as the observed in the last twelve months, persist through the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 86.8 months in February, representing a retreat of 6.8 months, month-on-month, and an increase of 9.6 months, year-over-year.
The tenure related to individuals increased 0.3 months and 18.2 months, respectively, and that related to the corporate segment fell 12.5 months month-on-month and increased 3.1 months, year-over-year, reaching 125.6 months for individuals and 57 months for corporate.
In this scenario, the dollar showed low oscillation, rising against the currencies of Japan, Korea, Russia and Brazil and depreciating against the euro and the pound sterling.
In the same period, most of the stock exchanges recorded losses, among them, the ones from Germany, UK, Brazil, China, India, Mexico and Russia.
In the international commodities market, it bears noticing the maintenance of a downward trend in prices, due to the improvement in the supply of grains and to the slow recovery in global activity.
The central banks in the US, Euro Zone, Japan and the UK maintained their respective official interest rates at historical minimum lows, while the monetary authorities of the major mature and emerging economies maintained their basic rates unchanged, except for Colombia, Mexico, Hungary, Turkey and India, which reduced.
Therefore, the BoJ decided to change and double the assets purchase program and chose monitoring the monetary base as the main operational target, instead of monitoring the non-collateralized overnight rate, stating that it plans to expand the monetary base at an annual rate of 60-70 trillion.
Among the factors underpinning this movement, it bears highlighting the disclosure of still more pressured current inflation indices, including the various core measures, the maintenance of inflation projections at high levels and expectations of agents regarding the start of the 12 monetary tightening cycle by the Central Bank.
The rates for one-, two- and three-year maturities increased by 0.64 p.p., 0.44 p.p. and 0.32 p.p., respectively.
As a result of the operations in the period, the BCB had its net position in foreign exchange swap contracts reduced to zero.
The BCB also carried out overnight repo agreements on 29 occasions, on 28 of them as a borrower.
It also conducted leveling operations at the end of the day, with tenure of two business days.
