The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The consumer confidence reached the highest level since February.
Credit Conditions Indicators, elaborated by the Central Bank based on a quarterly survey carried out with institutions representing each segment of the credit market, evidenced, for the fourth quarter of 2013, the 2 expectation of maintenance of the volume of concessions of new credit operations, both for the segment of big companies and for the micro, small and medium companies.
Similarly, regarding credit to individuals, the analysis suggests some stability in the pace of concessions of credit lines destined to consumption which were affected by the combined effect of interest rates elevation, improvement of default indicators and some cooling in the labor market.
For the housing credit, which presents greater inertial component, the elevation in the concession levels is expected.
In August, the industrial production increased in 15 out of the 27 surveyed activity sectors, on a month-on-month basis.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness margin in the labor market, although there are some signs of moderation at the margin.
Retail sales performed positively in July.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, a scenario of low growth prospects in important advanced economies prevails, notably in the Euro Zone, and volatility indicators have responded to the prospects of monetary policy change and to the fiscal policy deadlocks in the US.
High unemployment rates in Europe, coupled with the efforts of fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, are translated into investment retreat and in low growth.
Regarding monetary policy, accommodative stances have prevailed in the advanced economies.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy is expansionist.
Inflation has remained at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Zone, and in Japan, it consolidated above zero.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates 115 bps and 4 bps spreads for the fourth quarters of 2013 and 2014, respectively.
For the third quarter of 2015, the inflation forecast stands above the target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Committee evaluates that, in general, the prospects for moderate global activity this year have remained, with trend of intensification over the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
There are localized improvements in advanced economies, although the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of domestic demand.
The Copom evaluates that the main scenario encompasses a more intense domestic activity pace in this and in the upcoming year.
Recent information indicate resumption of investments and continuity of household consumption growth, the latter favored by public transfers and by the vigor in the labor market - which reflects in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth.
In general, domestic absorption has expanded at rates higher than GDP growth rates and tends to be benefited by the effects of fiscal policy actions, by the expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporates, and by the program of public services concession, among other factors.
Regarding the external component of the aggregate demand, the main scenario anticipates a more benign course than that registered in recent years.
However, the Committee notes 5 that the speed of materialization of these expected gains depends on the confidence strengthening of companies and households.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
For the Committee, conditions are created so that, in the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, on the one hand would contribute to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates; on the other hand, would contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating the concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Despite the moderation signs, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Committee considers that the exchange rate depreciation and volatility observed in the recent quarters enable a natural and expected correction in relative prices.
For the Committee, these movements in the local currency market, to some extent, reflect prospects for the transition of international financial markets towards normality, among other dimensions, in terms of liquidity and interest rates.
It is also important to highlight that, for the Committee, the aforementioned exchange rate depreciation is a source of inflationary pressure in shorter periods.
However, the secondary effects stemming from it, and that would tend to materialize over longer periods, can and should be limited by appropriate monetary policy handling.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for inflation to still show resistance.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are also included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, in the Committees view, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it is reverted.
In this context, the Copom understands that it is appropriate to continue the adjustment pace of the monetary conditions underway.
The Committee evaluates that this decision will contribute to set inflation into decline and ensure that this trend persists in the upcoming year.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to be relatively robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the remaining effects of the policy actions recently implemented.
These effects, the programs of public services concession, the permissions for the exploration of oil, among others, create good prospects for investments and industrial production.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario still represents an aggregate demand restraining factor, despite the prospects of progress in the relevant horizon.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain especially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation rates, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
The ICS, carried out by the FGV, considering seasonally adjusted data, reached 116.3 points in September.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 98 months in August, representing increases of 4.1 months, month-on-month, and 14.6 months, year-over-year.
The average tenure related to individuals reached 134.6 months, increasing 0.7 month, month-on-month, and 18.9 months, year-over-year.
In the corporate segment, the average tenure reached 69.6 months, increasing 6.6 month, month-on-month, and 11.1 months, year-over-year.
The global economic recovery remains at a moderate pace, highlighting the acceleration in the advanced economies.
The global composite PMI for the third quarter reached its highest level since the first quarter of 2012, suggesting an increase in the overall growth rate in the period.
In the US, the manufacturing PMI rose to 11 56.2 in September, from 55.7 in the previous month, while the services PMI fell to 54.4, down from 58.6 on the same dates.
However, the increase, from May, of the average rate on 30-year fixed mortgage represents a risk to this recovery.
The PMI in September rose to 53.2, the highest value in four months.
The manufacturing PMI rose to 50.2 in September, the second consecutive increase, helped by improved external demand stemming from Europe and the US.
The dollar fell against the currencies of South Africa, Australia, Brazil, Chile, India and Turkey, offsetting the the gains observed against these same currencies in the previous period.
In the international commodities market, the agricultural presented disparate trajectories, with the prices of corn and soybeans dropping sharply in contrast to the increases of sugar, cotton, wheat, beef and pork.
Regarding metal commodities, we highlight the advance in the price of tin and decline in the price of iron ore.
In the energy segment, it bears highlighting the reduction in the price of Brent oil barrel, due to the cooling of geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and to the resumption of production in Libya.
The central banks in the US, Euro Area, Japan and the UK maintained their respective official interest rates at historical low levels, as well as the size of their assets purchases programs, at the time that the monetary authorities of Hungary, Israel, Mexico and Romania returned to expand the expansionary stance of theirs policies, reducing their respective basic rates.
In the opposite direction, the central banks of India and Indonesia raised their basic interest rates.
While the short end of the yield curve has always maintained the upward trend, the rates for maturities greater than two years at first 12 rose, but reversed the movement from mid-September, falling to levels below the one registered in the previous period.
The release of the Inflation Report, considered more conservative, and the market's expectation for continued monetary tightening cycle contributed to the increase of the domestic short-term rates.
Rates for maturities of one, two and three years retreated by 0.04 p.p., 0.15 p.p. and 0.25 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, on 30 occasions, as a borrower.
