Most members stated that the global economy began to show a slight recovery in May and June, after having declined sharply in March and April, although one member pointed out that timely indicators for July indicate a moderation in the recovery rate. Most members attributed the recovery of the global economy to the partial reopening of activities in certain economies. Some members added the impact of fiscal and monetary stimuli. One member considered that the recent performance of economies also reflects: i) the dynamics of the pandemic, its contagion, and mortality rate; ii) the relative importance of the most affected sectors; iii) the flexibility of the labor market; iv) financial conditions and availability of funding, and v) the soundness of the financial system. Some members underlined that economic activity is still far from the levels prior to the pandemic. One member stated that the strongest repercussions were registered in manufactures, person-to-person services, and small businesses. Regarding the labor market, he/she pointed out that in the U.S. the unemployment rate increased significantly in April and May, above 14%, and later declined to levels close to 10%. In contrast, in the euro area, in the United Kingdom and Japan, the unemployment rate increased moderately, and the use of job preservation programs increased. Most members pointed out that a strong contraction is anticipated for this year and a moderate growth for 2021, although these projections are subject to high uncertainty. One member noted that, even though the recovery is foreseen to continue until the end of this year and during the next one, the magnitude of sequential increases is expected to moderate gradually. Another member stated that infection rates in advanced economies show large differences, which generates uncertainty regarding expectations of economic recovery. Among risks to global economic activity, most members mentioned unfavorable dynamics of the pandemic. In this respect, they highlighted the upsurge of new cases in different countries. Some members highlighted the possibility that the pace of removal of restrictions to economic activity slows down or that said restrictions are implemented again. One member mentioned that heterogeneous results in the health sector could lessen the momentum and the sustainability of the recovery. He/she added the risk that the stimulus measures are withdrawn or reduced prematurely. Although this would hardly apply to monetary policy, considering the central banks’ commitment to maintain accommodative monetary policy stances, he/she expressed concern over the fiscal measures, especially in contexts where the room for maneuver is limited or politicized. Most members mentioned the risk of negative effects on financial markets. One member highlighted the possible contagion of the crisis to the financial system and to the sustainability of public finances, in view of the maximum historical levels of sovereign and corporate debts. Another member pointed out the possibility of higher delinquency rates of credits to businesses and households, although in some economies the relief programs have eased this risk. He/she added that low commodity prices imply lower public revenues and a deterioration in the terms of trade in various emerging economies. He/she noted that, unlike advanced economies that have a reserve currency, the higher public sector borrowing requirements in emerging economies will exert pressure on the availability of financial resources. Finally, some members mentioned the risk of a resurgence of trade conflicts, as well as political and geopolitical factors. Most members mentioned that headline and core inflation in advanced economies are below the targets of their respective central banks. One member pointed out that this derives from the fact that the reduction in services prices have offset the rebound in energy prices. Another member stated that in the U.S. and the euro area a recomposition of spending was observed, with increases in food prices and falls in the prices of a broad range of services. He/she mentioned that despite the possible negative effects on supply, in those cases the weakness of demand has prevailed. He/she stated that the central banks in these economies expect inflation to remain at low levels for a long time. He/she added that the minimum levels at which short-, medium- and longterm interest rates are in these economies, reflect an expectation of weakness in demand and its deflationary effects. Some members noted that in various emerging economies, inflation also remains at low levels. However, one pointed out that some of these economies show upward pressures, due to the higher prices of food merchandise and energy products, foreign exchange depreciations and other idiosyncratic factors. In this sense, he/she considered that there is heterogeneity in the behavior of inflation at the global level. members emphasized that monetary authorities have maintained accommodative policy stances. They mentioned that different central banks have expressed their willingness to maintain easing measures for as long as necessary and even to reinforce them. Some members highlighted that the US Federal Reserve is anticipated to maintain the federal funds target range between 0 and 0.25% for a prolonged period and that, if necessary, it would be ready to expand its asset purchase programs. One member added that the Fed also announced the extension of some lending and liquidity facilities. Regarding emerging economies, another member highlighted that in most of them the reference rate is very close or below the latest inflation figure and that, on average, interest rates are expected to lie around highlighted the fiscal stimulus measures adopted in different countries to mitigate the negative effects on employment and on households’ and businesses’ incomes. One member mentioned the agreement that in this regard has been recently attained in the European Union. Most members noted the positive performance of global financial markets, reflecting the effects of the fiscal, monetary and financial measures adopted in advanced economies, and the gradual improvement is also due to the relatively favorable evolution of the pandemic, as well as to recovery indicators and better-than-anticipated corporate results. Some members underlined the increase in stock indexes, the higher prices of precious metals, and the depreciation of the US dollar against a broad basket of currencies. One member added that the dollar even depreciated against emerging economies’ currencies. However, some members stated that the financial conditions that prevailed prior to the pandemic have not been achieved. One member underlined that, in light of the mentioned risks, new volatility episodes may be observed. He/she added that, despite the relative stability in financial markets, the recent experience shows that adjustments stemming from changes in markets’ sentiment can be disorderly. economies’ financial markets also exhibited a favorable performance. One stated that in these economies, the financial shock was intensified by the fall in commodity prices and in other external revenues, which led to downgrades in the ratings and outlook of sovereign risk, thus strengthening the financial shock in a procyclical manner. Nevertheless, he/she stressed that this shock has moderated and that portfolio recomposition has been contained. Another member noted that risk appetite for fixed income assets has increased, although equity markets continue registering outflows. Some members noted that, despite this improvement, restrictive conditions and caution prevail in markets. One member emphasized that the gap between public sector borrowing requirements and the demand for fixed-income instruments persists. Summing up, most members considered that global financial conditions will remain subject mainly to the effects of the pandemic and that an Regarding economic activity in Mexico, all members highlighted the deep contraction in view of the effects of the pandemic. In this regard, most members highlighted that during the second quarter the GDP flash estimate fell significantly, by 17.26% as compared to the previous quarter. Some members emphasized that this is the sharpest fall on record for this indicator. One member stressed that the economy has already been contracting for five consecutive quarters. Some members pointed out that economic activity registered its deepest contraction in April and that it bottomed out in May. On the supply side, some members emphasized the contraction in the primary, industrial and services sectors. One member noted that in April and May, over 50% of subsectors registered annual falls of over two digits, which is higher than the figure observed in the two worst months of the 2009 and industrial production of over 26% between March and May. He/she indicated that the use of installed capacity in the manufacturing industry in April and May fell by over 36% and, in some subsectors, by over 60%. Another member indicated that during the second quarter industrial activity and services dropped by 23.59% and 14.54%, respectively, while the primary sector contracted only 2.48%. On the demand side, most members underlined the weakness of consumption and investment. One member emphasized the monthly contractions of 19.6 and 1.7% of consumption during April and May, respectively. Most members pointed out that consumption and investment are foreseen to continue showing weakness, as a result of the pandemic’s evolution, lower household income, and low confidence levels. Some members added the lower availability of financing to households and businesses, although one mentioned that remittances have grown, thus supporting domestic spending. Another member argued that the lower dynamism of consumption and investment is accounted for by the fact that their determinants remain highly deteriorated. He/she considered that, as the pandemic and the economic recovery have evolved, it is becoming more evident that the consequences of the current crisis will go beyond those generated by the initial supply shock. As for external demand, most members pointed out that in June exports recovered slightly, in view of the US economy reopening. Thus, some members emphasized that the recovery of external demand and manufacturing production has been greater than that of domestic demand and services. indicators point to an economic recovery in June, although starting from low levels, in response to the reopening of some sectors, the loosening of restrictions to mobility and the recovery of external demand. Some members highlighted that the most significant rebound has been observed in the export-oriented industrial sector, while the growth of services has exhibited a greater lag. One member noted that industrial production registered a monthly rebound of 17.9% in June, although it still presents an annual contraction of 17.5%. Another member mentioned that, although information for July is limited, available indicators continue to show an upward trajectory, although from very depressed levels. One member pointed out that ANTAD sales went from registering an annual contraction of 14.8% in June to one of 10% in July. Regarding the labor market, all members employment, although some members noted that recent data indicates a slight recovery. One member specified that, at the margin, the recovery has been concentrated in the informal sector. Some members mentioned that according to INEGI’s Telephone Survey on Occupation and Employment, between April and June, 12 million full-time jobs were lost. One member stated that, out of these, about 7 million individuals were left unemployed and that the rest were reclassified as underemployed. Another member pointed out that the total number of unemployed, underemployed or workers who are not economically active but who are available to work reached almost 26 million in June, as compared to members highlighted that during the first half of the year around one million formal jobs were lost. One member mentioned that, in this context, withdrawals from Afores related to unemployment continued to increase during June, reaching historical highs. unemployment rate has increased, although some stated that said increase has been moderate, since a high number of individuals have left the economically active population. One member argued that this is due to the difficulty to find employment amid lockdown policies. He/she pointed out that when the increase of 7.3 million individuals who are available to work but economically inactive is considered as disguised unemployment, the extended unemployment rate rose from 12% in March to 24.9% in June. He/she added that, when the underemployed are included in the extended unemployment, the concept of labor gap is attained, which registered 40% in June, twice as large as the figure of March, but below the 53% recorded in May, which indicates that it has already bottomed out. He/she warned that, given the definitive closure of businesses, it is not clear when the lost jobs will be recovered. expectations have continued to deteriorate. They pointed out that even double-digit contractions are anticipated for 2020. One member pointed out that, according to Banco de México July’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters, the expected contraction for 2020 increased from 8.8 to 9.9%, and the expected growth for 2021 rose from 2.8 to 3.0%. uncertainty about economic recovery. They stated that it will depend on the containment of the pandemic, as well as on the development of a vaccine and an effective treatment. Some members mentioned that although a recovery is expected due to the easing of lockdown measures, it will be gradual and prolonged. One member noted that economic activity will remain depressed for a long period, with a greater negative impact on the labor market. He/she highlighted that, given a recession of a magnitude unseen in 88 years, a pattern of recovery is still not visible. He/she added that several scenarios suggest a period of between two and six years for GDP to recover to the level observed in 2018. Among the risks for growth, some members mentioned the possibility that the impact on the production of goods and services and on firms’ and households’ incomes will continue. One member added that pressures on public revenue may affect the sovereign risk outlook and that households’ and firms’ solvency problems may put pressure on the financial system. In the external environment, in addition to the abovementioned global risks, another member included a slower than expected recovery in advanced economies, particularly in the United States. One member underlined that such risks are intensified by the modest support of fiscal policy and added that in light of the possibility of new COVID-19 outbreaks, a second episode of contraction cannot be ruled out. Another member mentioned that the degree of fragility of the economic recovery is high taking into account the medium- and long-term damage to businesses and investment, the latter of which was already affected before the health crisis emerged. Most members pointed out that economic growth is subject to significant Most members agreed that greater economic slack is expected within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Some members stated that economic slack increased significantly due to the impact from the pandemic. They added that there is now a greater slack than that registered in previous crises, such as those of 2008-2009, 1995 and at the beginning of the eighties. One member mentioned that while in the worst month of 2009 the output gap was -7%, in April 2020 it was close to -24%. Most members mentioned the increase of annual headline inflation, due to increases in both its non-core and core components. Some members pointed out that, despite the sharp economic weakness, the recent path of inflation has recently surprised to the upside. In this regard, one member considered that inflation dynamics should be analyzed, given that headline inflation and its components have registered levels consistently above forecasts, despite the wide economic slack and the peso exchange rate appreciation. He/she added that, in this context, the disinflationary effect attributed to the cyclical component of economic activity should be reconsidered. Another member considered that headline inflation’s increase in July does not put price stability at risk. He/she stated that the recent increase should not distract us from the favorable evolution exhibited by several of its components. The majority of members pointed out that the evolution of non-core inflation has responded mainly to the behavior of energy prices. They highlighted that these prices have increased after having fallen sharply in March and April, which has contributed to the rise of non-core inflation. One member stated that the above has occurred after this component registered in April a negative annual rate of change for the first time in history. Another member stated that, despite the increase in energy prices, they remain below the level registered at the beginning of the year. He/she added that the lower commodity prices, particularly of fuels, and their effect on production costs have a favorable impact on inflation. All members mentioned that within core inflation, effects in opposite directions are observed, with a decrease in the annual rates of change of merchandise, with high annual rates of change in food prices. Most members pointed out that services prices have reflected the weakness of demand. As for merchandise prices, they highlighted that these are being affected by supply and demand shocks and by the exchange rate adjustments. One member considered that these effects intensified the inflationary pressures on international food prices that have been observed since last year. These upward pressures in merchandise prices represent a significant rearrangement in relative prices given the slowdown of services prices. Another member noted that such pressures, which concentrated on food merchandises initially, have spread to non-food merchandises and considered worrisome that core inflation is following a higher than expected path, emphasizing that in July it reached its highest level in thirteen months. Some members mentioned that the increase in food merchandise prices may be due to a change in consumption patterns as a result of the pandemic. One member considered that, although they may be putting upward pressures on the prices of these merchandises, disruptions in supply chains are transitory and that the exchange rate depreciation may explain only part of these price increases. He/she argued that such increases may be due to the existence of firms with market power, which, in face of an increased demand, may increase their prices and profit margins. He/she considered that this could also explain why inflation is greater in Mexico than in other countries with currencies that have depreciated in an equal or greater magnitude. He/she added that these factors act on the supply side and do not imply sustained shocks on prices, and, therefore, little can be done by monetary policy to contain them. He/she also mentioned that a weak demand may be putting downward pressures on the prices of some merchandise items, such as clothing and shoes, which have even registered deflation. Most members stated that the recent inflation adjustments contributed to an increase of headline inflation expectations for the end of 2020, while those for the medium and long terms have remained at levels above the 3% target. One member noted that, after April, expectations for the end of 2020 have remained above Banco de México’s target. Another member highlighted the contrast between the median of forecasters’ expectations for 2021 and those of the Central Bank. He/she added that long-term expectations have become more firmly entrenched above the target, given the increasingly lower dispersion around 3.5% observed for headline inflation and the increase during this year of core inflation expectations, to practically 3.5%. He/she considered that prospects of a relatively high inflation until the second quarter of expectations more difficult. Another member argued that the general reading of different instruments that measure expectations is that these are contained despite the recent increase of inflation. He/she added that expectations drawn from market instruments lay at 3.2% for the 1-10 year average. As for the future path of inflation, one member noted that Banco de México’s scenario in the short term reflects the effects of some recently observed price adjustments. He/she pointed out that such adjustments have led to increases in core inflation and, in the case of non-core inflation, some comparison base effects are expected on energy prices. Nevertheless, he/she specified that, in the 1224-month forecast horizon, both headline and core inflation are expected to lay around 3%. Another member stated that supply shocks are foreseen to fade over time and, in light of the outlook of a very wide negative output gap, it seems reasonable to anticipate that inflation will converge to the target during the second half of 2021. One member considered that the recent rise of inflation does not imply a major concern for inflation ahead. He/she mentioned that data for the second fortnight of July is consistent with these expectations since it shows signs of stabilization in energy prices and in food merchandise prices at the margin. Another member stated that the dynamics within the components of inflation has led to an upward adjustment of forecasts. He/she considered that the risk of inflation failing to converge to the target within the forecast horizon has increased and that deviations appear to be increasingly less attributable to transitory factors. He/she also highlighted that such deviations have a regressive impact since they mostly affect the lower income deciles. One member noted that the behavior of inflation will reflect the effects of adjustments in relative prices that are taking place and those of the profound weakness of both global and domestic aggregate demand. He/she mentioned that these factors are also occurring in other economies, although in most of them the impact of a weak demand has prevailed. He/she stated that, in contrast with Mexico, in advanced and in a large sample of emerging economies, headline and core inflation lay at levels clearly below their target. He/she highlighted that, in such economies, both inflation and output gaps point in the same direction. Regarding risks for inflation, some members mentioned to the downside a greater than expected impact of the negative output gap. As for upside risks, some members pointed out the possibility of additional episodes of foreign exchange depreciation. One member noted that this could be due to internal and/or external factors. Some members highlighted the risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. One member stated that if short-term expectations continue to be revised upwards, they may affect long-term expectations, which remain above the target. Another member added that an additional deterioration from the supply side cannot be ruled out. One member considered that there is a risk that upward pressures on food merchandise prices persist and that they are not offset by other price reductions generated by the economic slack. He/she noted that, likewise, the downward path of inflation in the past year may currently exert upward pressures on prices due to a comparison base effect. Another member stated that the risks are limited due to: i) the deterioration of aggregate demand is of an unprecedented magnitude and will persist for an undetermined number of quarters; ii) the peso exchange rate has remained relatively stable for almost three consecutive months, and iii) the outlook for financial markets, although still uncertain, is better than during the worst moments of the pandemic. He/she pointed out that, for all of the above reasons, greater inflationary pressures associated to these factors are not anticipated. He/she added that, in line with their international references, fuel prices are expected to remain below the level registered at the beginning of the year, which will continue to exert downward pressures on the rest of goods and services prices through their impact on production costs. In this context, most members agreed that the balance Most members mentioned that financial markets have exhibited a relatively stable behavior as a result of the lower risk aversion worldwide and the measures adopted by Banco de México. The majority of members highlighted the stability of the peso exchange rate and the reductions in interest rates throughout the entire yield curve. Some members added that the sovereign risk continued to decrease moderately and the stock market exhibited a slight downward adjustment. Some members pointed out that foreign investment outflows have diminished. Nevertheless, some members highlighted that, despite such improvements, financial conditions have still not returned to their normal state. One member underlined that elements that call for caution persist. Among these elements, he/she mentioned that trading conditions remain deteriorated; that the negative balance of the net currency position continued to widen; and that outflows in fixed income instruments have accumulated over USD 15 billion so far this year, a figure that stands out among emerging countries. Another member stated that the peso may be subject to pressures in the following months due to idiosyncratic factors, including Pemex’s situation, this and other challenges for public finances, and their impact on the sovereign credit rating, as well as a difficult external environment characterized, among other risks, by the US election process. One member mentioned that the country faces a sentiment of risk aversion due to the aforementioned election process, as well as to trade tensions and geopolitical conflicts. Another member noted that the economic growth outlook is a major determinant of financial markets and thus it is fundamental that it improves so that markets perform more favorably. One member added that, in a complex environment, a sound and sustainable macroeconomic stance that contributes to an orderly adjustment of financial markets and of the economy overall is required. The above, in a framework that maintains the sustainability of public finances, a low and stable inflation and a sound and well-capitalized financial system. Some members pointed out that the situation of public finances is a risk factor. Some members highlighted that they are expected to deteriorate and that the public debt-to-GDP ratio is anticipated to increase. One member stated that this would occur due to the shortage of budgetary revenues which, even after taking into account the use of extraordinary resources, such as those from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP) and oil hedges, may lead Public Sector’s Borrowing Requirements to reach between 5 and 6% of GDP. Another member added that the main fiscal indicators are anticipated to be more unfavorable than those reported by the authorities in their latest report. Pemex’s situation. One member emphasized that, in addition to its operational deterioration, the Stateowned company will face large maturities that will probably call for an increased fiscal support. Thus, some members highlighted the risk of a downgrading of the sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating. One member pointed out that, according to a recent survey conducted by an investment bank, most investors surveyed estimate that the investment grade would be lost in 2021 or 2022. He/she highlighted the situation of Pemex and public finances as the main underlying factor. In this regard, he/she mentioned that the impact of the pandemic now adds up to the previously observed difficulties and that, if timely actions are not adopted, the costs will probably materialize relatively fast, in light of the markets’ tendency to anticipate their reaction to this type of events. Another member highlighted that the possibility of losing the investment grade has already led to a tightening of financial conditions, and that, if it were to materialize, financing costs would increase even further. Most members noted that the impact of the pandemic is already being reflected in financing to firms and households. Some members mentioned that delinquency rates of certain bank and non-bank loan portfolio segments have increased, although one member considered that the measures implemented by Banco de México have contributed to adequately absorb the shock. Another member mentioned that the real annual growth rate of financing has been decreasing and that in June it was even negative. He/she added that new credit card loans, car loans and payroll loans have declined sharply and bank credit to small firms decreased by more than 10 billion pesos during the first half of the year. He/she emphasized the reduction of new loans to firms with less than 100 employees. He/she also noted that lending conditions are now stricter and that interest rate spreads have increased, especially for small- and medium-sized firms. Some members pointed out that the proposed pension system reform has positive elements for financial markets and for the Mexican economy in general. One member considered that the announcement helps to remove a factor of uncertainty, which was weighing on markets and sends the right signal that the reallocation of the government's contribution to lower-income workers will make it possible to increase the perceived and real value of a large number of formal jobs, without increasing firms’ costs. He/she said that, for this reason, the reform will help to promote labor formality. environment of public policies is unfavorable for stimulating private investment and that there is no counter-cyclical fiscal policy to support the productive sector. One member warned that the above not only hinders the economic recovery, but also increases the possibility of long-term damage to productive activities. He/she pointed out that the consequences for potential growth can be considerable, especially in view of the contraction of investment, which fell additional 32% in the following two months, and the need to implement a set of actions focused on increasing productivity. Considering the referred risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets, and considering the room for maneuvering that on balance these provide to monetary policy, most members agreed on decreasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 4.5%. One member voted to One member stated that monetary policy is facing challenges in two dimensions: the deep economic contraction and its effects on inflation, and the impact of the global financial shock. He/she added that in order to achieve an orderly adjustment of the economy, as well as low and stable inflation, it is necessary to promote the sound functioning of domestic financial markets, especially the foreign exchange and fixed-income markets, avoiding abrupt portfolio adjustments and capital outflows. He/she indicated that this offers a greater margin for maneuver, since the financial shock operates on a shorter horizon than the shock to economic activity. In this context, he/she pointed out that it is necessary to identify the challenges and dilemmas monetary policy faces, by incorporating all available information and considering a wide range of scenarios. Another member considered it important for monetary policy to continue its easing cycle, without ruling out the possibility of reaching a real interest rate close to zero or even negative. He/she recalled that in the 2008-2009 financial crisis there was also a real shock and a financial shock, and that despite an increase in expected inflation, which surpassed easing, which brought the real interest rate to negative levels in less than 10 months. He/she mentioned that the accommodative policy stance was maintained and intensified over the next few years, allowing the economy to recover, while financial markets were favored by the improved economic outlook, which led to an exchange rate appreciation, and there was a sustained decline in inflation expectations. He/she pointed out that the magnitude of the estimated output gap currently implies that it has been affected twice as much as during 2008-2009. He/she argued that this reflects the need for a real interest rate which contributes to improve the outlook on the economic recovery in the near future and at the same time remains compatible with price stability. He/she also considered that the economy would benefit from a less restrictive monetary policy, without implying putting price stability at risk. He/she pointed out that, on the contrary, monetary easing so far implemented by Banco de México has had a favorable effect on financial markets, given that the exchange rate has recovered lost ground and remained relatively stable over the last quarter. He/she argued that a lower interest rate would positively affect financing, which for some firms could make the difference between closing and surviving. He/she pointed out that, although firms’ credit risk has increased, this implies that the risk-free rate should be further reduced to avoid an increase in their financial costs. He/she said that he/she does not believe that a more accommodative stance could lead to higher inflation or financial instability, but rather may end up being favorable for financial markets as long as it affects the economic outlook positively. One member highlighted that the issue regarding the end point of the monetary easing cycle has gained relevance, especially in view of the possibility that the rate will remain at that level for a long period. He/she added that the economic and social crisis demands continuing decisively with the accommodative cycle to stimulate the economy. Nevertheless, the velocity at which we approach the cycle’s endpoint is key to prevent premature and undesirable monetary policy reversions, which could take place upon the materialization of some of the existing risks. In that sense, the terminal reference rate and its trajectory will have to continue being determined according to the information provided by the circumstances. He/she pointed out that it is important to avoid premature and undesirable reversions in monetary policy, which might occur if some of the existing risks materialize. He/she added that most analysts anticipate the reference rate floor to be between 3% and 4.5%, which suggests that the market expects the easing cycle will not conclude yet. He/she argued that this is supported by the good performance of inflation, the stability of financial markets, and expectations of a long period in which the economy will remain depressed. He/she pointed out that the relative monetary policy stance offers certain room for maneuver, but it is more limited due to the risks in international markets. He/she mentioned that pressures on the Mexican peso and volatility may arise, since the three-month rate spread adjusted for exchange rate volatility is already in the average range of the emerging complex, and given the greater use of the peso as a FX hedge. He/she added that a lower yield also encourages capital outflows. He/she pointed out that as for the absolute monetary policy stance, the gap between the neutral and the reference rate, indicates that there is still room to maintain an expansionary policy. This, as a result of certain downward pressures on the neutral rate generated by structural and circumstantial causes, some of them related to the pandemic. He/she argued that monetary policy in the short term must counteract the effects of the pandemic on economic activity and employment, but always targeting the stabilization of inflation expectations. He/she expressed that the most effective defense for lower-income groups is to protect their purchasing power and to mitigate the impact on employment. He/she emphasized that it is necessary to ensure that inflation remains on a trajectory of convergence to its target and that short-term inflationary pressures yield. He/she stressed that otherwise it will be necessary to reflect more deeply on the scope and speed of the current downward cycle. One member argued that the behavior of inflation expectations poses a challenge for the credibility of the inflation target and for monetary policy. He/she added that this situation could be the result of the economy's exposure to external shocks and the implementation of domestic policies, even in fields different from monetary policy. He/she indicated that the risks entailing additional interest rate cuts have intensified, due to persistent inflationary pressures and the potential implications of a lower interest rate differential in an economy that is very open to capital flows and with a highly liquid currency in global markets. Regarding this point, he/she stated that in order to compare the reference rate in Mexico with those of other emerging economies, the rates adjusted for foreign exchange risk must be considered. He/she argued that in the absence of capital flows that justify it, to determine the reference rate in Mexico according to its level in other emerging economies would be like trying to define the monetary policy of a country based on the inflationary performance of another. He/she added that the monetary policy stance in Mexico has played a key role in containing increases in long-term interest rates. He/she stressed that these are lower in Mexico than in several other emerging economies with lower reference rates. On the other hand, he/she pointed out that lowering the reference rate to a level of 4.5% would place it below the range estimated for the neutral rate, although noting that the latter is most probably being affected upwards by the lower access to external financing and the increased uncertainty, and downwards by the likely decrease in potential growth. He/she stated that even though under these circumstances it is difficult to make an accurate assessment of the monetary policy stance based on this indicator, available information suggests that it is currently in expansionary territory. He/she considered that with a reference rate of 4.5%, the margins for additional reductions, if existent at all, would be significantly narrower. He/she stated that, due to the above, monetary policy must be even more cautious in the following months and, if available information suggests that there is still room for an additional easing, the adjustments should be expected to be more gradual than those observed in recent months. He/she highlighted that the cautious approach to monetary policy implementation adopted by the Central Bank has worked satisfactorily. Another member indicated that Banco de México took a proactive role, responding in a timely and decisive way in face of the enormous challenges that the pandemic implied, in order to achieve its goals and its primary objective. He/she highlighted that in March the pace of monetary easing accelerated. In this regard he/she highlighted two considerations. First, given the nature of the shock, the priority was to guarantee liquidity and the well-functioning of markets. With this aim, extraordinary measures were announced, which had to be accompanied by a faster pace of monetary easing, acknowledging that by itself it would be insufficient to offset the collapse in economic activity. Second, there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding the evolution of inflation given the presence of factors that were operating in opposite directions. For such reason, actions were taken cautiously, following a gradual approach, taking into consideration incoming information in a timely way, and guaranteeing the convergence of inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Nevertheless, he/she argued that the outlook has changed significantly, with a favorable performance of financial markets and what appears to be an inflection point for economic activity. In this context, he/she considered that the room for maneuver to continue with monetary easing has diminished given the higher risk that inflation may not converge to its target during the time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well as the greater sensitivity that capital flows to fixed income assets in Mexico have shown relative to other emerging economies. This, despite maintaining a less relaxed absolute and relative monetary policy stance. He/she mentioned the need to follow a strategy that allows for an adjustment of monetary policy as more information becomes available, and that the message must be that the Central Bank does not find the trajectory nor the levels of inflation that are being observed acceptable, in order to foster a convergence of inflation expectations to levels consistent with the 3% target. The majority of members argued that other measures to accompany the extraordinary measures adopted by the Central Bank, such as guarantee programs, are necessary in order for these to work better. One member mentioned the need to maintain the availability of financing for firms and households, and that Banco de México has adjusted the announced measures and facilities accordingly. Another member pointed out that Banco de México has adopted a series of measures aimed at providing liquidity and intended to avoid a contraction of credit, and highlighted the guarantee programs implemented by development banks. He/she indicated that commercial banks must also do their part in order for the facilities announced by the Central Bank to fully achieve their objectives. He/she added that the soundness of the recovery will depend significantly on what commercial banks do or stop doing and highlighted that they must be part of the solution and not part of the problem. One member added the need to intensify the implementation and efficacy of Banco de México’s additional measures. He/she pointed out that the improved functioning of these facilities must be guaranteed, by increasing liquidity and providing more credit at a lower cost. A more relaxed monetary policy will make the implementation of these measures more effective and also reduce the financial burden of firms. Another member stated that the weakness of bank credit highlights the need for complementing monetary policy actions as well as the measures to provide financing implemented by Banco de México with credit guarantees for priority sectors. He/she also pointed out that although the financial system overall maintains a sound position, it is necessary to ensure that financial authorities are able respond adequately to the potential challenges faced. Taking into account the referred risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets, major challenges arise for monetary policy and for the economy in general. Based on the foreseen scenarios, and considering the room for maneuvering that on balance these provide to monetary policy, with the presence of all its members, on this occasion, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 4.5%. One member voted for lowering the target to 4.75%. Looking ahead, the available room for maneuver will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on the outlook for inflation and its expectations, including the effects that the pandemic might have on both factors. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information and considering the large impact on productive activity as well as the evolution of the financial shock that we are currently facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Gerardo EsquivelHernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 4.5%. Irene Espinosa-Cantellano voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by Starting in March, we announced measures to provide liquidity and, complementary to these, we also increased the pace of monetary policy loosening to face the shocks generated by the pandemic. Since then, financial markets have evolved favorably and economic activity appears to have crossed an inflection point. Inflation, however, continues to persist at levels above the target, it remains to the upside, it has recently exceeded its forecasts, and its expectations have increased. This behavior, in the midst of the most severe recession historically, suggests the need to reconsider the disinflationary influence attributed to the cyclical component of economic activity. In addition, despite the relative monetary policy stance, foreign investors’ capital outflows stand out when compared with other emerging economies. This suggests a lesser room for monetary policy loosening. Consequently, we must adjust the pace to strengthen the convergence of inflation and its expectations to the 3% target.