All members pointed out that the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent its spread have affected world economic activity considerably. Most members indicated that in the last weeks the virus has spread rapidly, and one member noted that some countries appear to have managed to contain the pandemic. Another member stated that open economies that are integrated into global value chains and with a high exposure to services provided person-to-person are more affected by the production shutdowns stemming from the isolation measures. On the demand side, he/she considered that households’ and firms’ spending and income are being very affected. He/she added that numerous firms are facing a highly uncertain environment regarding the demand for their goods and services. He/she mentioned that production constraints and impacts on demand will lead to a significant fall in employment, aggravating the economic contraction. All members pointed out that the complex worldwide economic situation has led to significant revisions of economic expectations, productive activity in the first half of 2020. Most members stated that declines in economic activity of the magnitude that is anticipated, have not been seen since the Great Depression. One member pointed out that it is estimated that the impact will be larger in advanced economies, which would intensify the world demand shock. He/she added that among emerging economies, Latin American economies would be affected the most as a result of lower commodity prices, a large informal sector, and fragile fiscal positions. Some members emphasized that, although a significant recovery is expected in 2021, this is subject to considerable risks, including: i) the uncertainty regarding the timing, conditions and the pace of the economy’s reopening; ii) the possibility of a reemergence of epidemiological outbreaks in the absence of a vaccine or effective treatment; iii) a greater caution to resume activities, and iv) that the damage to the production apparatus and the supply chains turns out to be difficult to revert, especially if the financial systems are considerably affected. All members noted that the outlook for the world Most members mentioned that the impact to economic activity has propitiated a sharp fall in commodity prices, especially of crude oil. Most members added that, given the lower demand and a practically nil storage capacity, even negative figures were registered in the futures’ contracts to be settled next month. One member specified that this occurred despite the agreements achieved recently among the main oil producers. Another member mentioned that inflation pressures are contained in most countries, and underlined that inflation expectations implied by market instruments for the main economies remain below those registered at the beginning of the year. members stated that several central banks of advanced and emerging economies lowered their economies register close to zero or even negative interest rates. One member added that said measures seek to influence not only the risk-free rate, but also the risk premia faced by firms, lowering the cost of credit and thus generating confidence. He/she highlighted that central banks in emerging economies are expected to continue easing their monetary policy stances, reaching close to zero or negative real interest rates. Most members pointed out that several central banks have also implemented extraordinary measures to foster the well-functioning of their financial systems. Most members emphasized the measures to stabilize foreign exchange markets, the asset purchase programs, and the actions to strengthen both the liquidity facilities available for financial intermediaries and the channels of credit provision. One member highlighted that the US Federal Reserve included corporate debt with a wide range of credit ratings in its asset purchase program. Most members stated that several countries have implemented fiscal measures to mitigate the households’ and firms’ income. One member mentioned that the adoption of said measures also seeks to prevent a risk aversion spiral in financial markets. Some members highlighted that the support to households and firms has reached significant amounts as a share of GDP in the main advanced economies. One member indicated that said measures in advanced economies will be mainly financed with public debt. Most members emphasized that the adverse environment has generated an increase in risk aversion, worsening global financial conditions and leading to a recomposition of investors’ portfolios towards lower-risk assets. Most members pointed out that stock markets in affected by the realignment of portfolios towards safe haven assets. However, most members acknowledged that during the last month there was a slight improvement in international financial markets following the announcement of monetary, fiscal and financial support measures, although some mentioned that a fragile and volatile environment persists. One member pointed out that there are considerable potential pressures on global financial markets in addition to those stemming from the current situation, such as the reemergence and escalation of trade, political and geopolitical tensions. Most members stressed that in this context emerging economies have registered significant capital outflows. Most members mentioned that this has led to a depreciation of their currencies and to volatility in their foreign exchange markets, as well as to pressures on stock indices and interest rates. Some members mentioned that capital outflows this year have accumulated the highest amount on record. One member added that this was exacerbated by the fall in commodity prices and in other sources of external revenue, such as those related to tourism and remittances. Another member mentioned that inflation pressures derived from the exchange rate adjustment are contained in most of these countries. He/she stated that most central banks in emerging economies have lowered their interest rates significantly so far this year. He/she also noted that expectations for the policy rate average in these economies for the end of 2020 are below 3.5%, which implies that emerging economies are adopting accommodative monetary policy stances with close to zero or even negative real interest rates. Most members agreed that the pandemic is an unprecedented shock. One member stated that the macroeconomic outlook has changed radically since the last monetary policy decision. Another member pointed out that this is due to the supply and demand shocks caused by social distancing and the economic lockdown. One member mentioned that Mexico currently has over 8 thousand confirmed COVID-19 cases and around 700 deaths, and that the peak of infections is expected to be reached in the next weeks. Another member stated that the absence of a treatment, the rapid spread of the outbreak, and the fatality of the pandemic have serious human and economic implications. As for domestic economic activity, most members stated that supply has been affected by interruptions in the production of goods and services, as well as by the closure of businesses. Meanwhile, demand has been affected by lower consumption, as a result of a decline in individuals’ incomes and of fewer spending opportunities, as well as by lower investment and lower external demand, partly due to the deceleration of the US economy. Some members noted the effect of the fall in crude oil prices. Most members mentioned that the impact of the shock can already be observed in a number of variables, such as: i) consumer and business purchasing managers’ indices; v) vehicle sales; vi) air and land transportation, and vii) hotel occupancy and tourist flow. One member added that economic activity had already been exhibiting a persistent weakness, as shown by spending and production indicators for the first quarter of the year. With respect to the labor market, most members highlighted the deterioration observed in the employment figures reported by the IMSS. Some members highlighted that, in March, formal employment registered the greatest monthly decline on record. One member pointed out that, during that month’s contraction, the losses in the services and construction sectors and in the manufacturing industry stand out. Another member added that, between March 13 and April 6, 347 thousand formal jobs were lost, more than the total amount of jobs created in 2019. He/she considered that at such rate by the end of April approximately 700 thousand jobs would be lost, as compared to the 2009 crisis, when around 600 thousand jobs were lost over a 12-month period. In this context, one member mentioned that the main danger we face is a loss of employments in the short term that will not be able to be recovered in the medium term, sentencing a share of the population to a situation of structural poverty. All members pointed out that, in view of the impact of the pandemic, Mexican economic activity is anticipated to contract significantly acknowledging that the magnitude and duration of the pandemic’s effects are still unknown, and that available information is still limited. One member stated that various indicators allow to foresee a severe weakening of the services sector. He/she added that automotive production contracted over 24% in annual terms in March, which signals an important deterioration of manufacturing activity. He/she specified that this scenario could deteriorate as a consequence of the extension of the social distancing measures. In this context, he/she mentioned that some specialists anticipate a contraction of up to 34% in annualized terms in the second quarter. One member emphasized that concerns over the severity of the economic contraction grow week after week and are reflected in the continuous downward revisions to forecasts, including those of multilateral organizations. Another member pointed out, in order to provide a sense of the size of the adjustment in the economic projections, that at the moment of the March monetary policy decision the median forecast of the survey conducted by a commercial bank anticipated GDP growth for 2020 and for 2021 of 0.7 and 1.6%, respectively, while currently these figures are at -5 and 1.8%, respectively, and that additional downward adjustments are being observed at the margin. One member highlighted that the forecast range for 2020 and for 2021 is atypically wide, lying between -9 and -3.9% and between 0.4 and 5.5%. Some members stated that a recession is expected with a significant impact on the labor market and on production. One member noted that, unlike the 2019 stagnation, when the greatest impact came from international trade and from manufacturing activity, on this occasion the most significant contraction is anticipated to take place in the non-manufacturing sector, especially in services and commerce, which will have more severe repercussions on employment and occupation. Another member considered that due to a lower external demand, a lower income of the population, the loss of confidence, and the risk for investment associated with the deterioration of economic conditions, the impact on demand will be deeper and longer than that on supply, which he/she mentioned would be transitory. One member noted that in 2020 the Mexican economy may register its greatest contraction since the Great Depression. All members agreed that the balance of risks to growth is significantly biased to the downside. Most members stated that this balance is characterized by high uncertainty, given that the duration and depth of the pandemic are uncertain. In this respect, one member mentioned that this recession will considerably affect the labor market, production and practically all sectors of the economy. Another member mentioned the following among the main risks: i) that the impact on production is prolonged; ii) lower incomes and a greater impact on employment, and iii) a sharp contagion phase that would significantly affect all sectors of economic activity and the income of both private and public sectors, leading to a deterioration of credit risk, which could lead to financial and solvency problems. One member added that the effects of the pandemic could worsen if the economic policies aimed at mitigating them are insufficient. Some members mentioned that there is uncertainty about the strength of the recovery, once it begins. One member mentioned that if the expectation that the US economy will recover relatively fast in 2021 materializes, it should contribute to strengthen Mexico’s economic activity, although that would depend on the degree to which the initial economic weakness affects productive capacity and the financial system. He/she emphasized that the latter highlights the importance of implementing measures in different spheres aimed at supporting them. He/she warned that available evidence is insufficient to assess with adequate confidence margins the future trajectory of domestic production activity. Most members agreed that slack conditions are widening considerably and that the effects of the pandemic will significantly widen the negative output gap. One member estimated that this gap will be much wider during the present and the following year as compared to what was contemplated a few weeks ago. Another member considered that this will imply lower inflationary pressures. All members highlighted the recent decline in headline inflation, stressing that it was largely due to a reduction in its non-core component. One member noted that deflation was observed in March with respect to February, a phenomenon that had not been observed in such a period in Mexico’s recent history. Most members considered that the decline in non-core inflation was mainly due to the fall in energy prices. Some members mentioned that agricultural and livestock product prices increased. However, one member considered that these increases will be transitory because this type of shocks fade after a few months, and because said products currently experience a greater retail demand as a result of the social isolation measures. As for core inflation, most members stated that it decreased slightly in March. One member pointed out that the monthly change in this component was lower than the average change in recent years, although another one highlighted that the rates of growth of prices in certain items remain above 4.5%. With regards to inflation expectations, one member noted that these have still not changed considerably as a result of the pandemic. He/she stated that expectations drawn from surveys remain anchored at levels close to 3.5%, both for different definitions and different terms. Some members indicated that medium-term expectations continue above target. Meanwhile, one member mentioned that breakeven inflation has decreased. Most members mentioned that headline inflation is likely to decline in the short term. Said members mentioned that this decrease will basically stem from the lower gasoline prices. Some members noted that it will also result from a lower core inflation. One member pointed out that the latter could partly result from the effect of the pandemic on items such as tourism services. Another member stated that annual inflation is foreseen to decrease once more and lie below the target at the end of April. One member noted that during the next months it will remain close to or even below the target. Some members mentioned that, although different factors can affect headline inflation at different moments, it is expected to converge to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. As for the risks to inflation, most members argued that these are associated to the effects of the pandemic on the economy and that inflation would be subject to both upward and downward pressures. First, they highlighted the downward pressures caused by the widening of the negative output gap and, in the short term, by lower energy prices. One member stated that the fall in these prices tends to have lasting direct and indirect effects on inflation. Another member asserted that social distancing is already disrupting the provision of certain services, and that their price variations could decrease. Second, most members mentioned the upward pressures stemming from the peso exchange rate depreciation, which will depend on its magnitude and persistence. Some members mentioned that in the short term the supply shocks derived from the impact on the supply chains and, in general, from production disruptions, would exercise upward pressures on inflation. One member estimated that these likely upward pressures have been more than offset by the above referred downward pressures. Another member expressed that the upward adjustment in the peso exchange rate will have a relatively limited impact on inflation, considering what multiple studies suggest. He/she considered that, in such a complex situation as the current one, upward risks to inflation should not be overestimated, in particular, those associated to the exchange rate. Most members indicated that uncertainty as to the balance of risks for inflation has increased significantly. Some of them pointed out that an uncertain environment for inflation prevails especially in the long term. One member noted that the uncertainty is associated to: i) possible changes in consumption patterns and their effects on price formation; ii) the magnitude and duration of shocks; iii) the persistence of adverse conditions in the financial markets; iv) the effects of disruptions in global value chains and a possible shortage of certain goods, and v) possible second round effects in case the exchange rate depreciation is perceived to be permanent. Another member stated that, although he/she agrees that the net effect of the recent shocks on inflation is uncertain, given the scale of the expected fall in output, the probability that the demand shock will prevail has increased, although in an environment characterized by significant risks. One member considered that the balance of risks for inflation in Mexico is clearly biased to the downside. Another member specified that this balance is biased to the downside in the short term. He/she underlined that uncertainty prevails in the medium and long terms as a result of the following: i) the price index loses relevance given that there is a sector of the economy that is unable to consume freely; ii) it is unknown what the price dynamics will be once the lockdown measures are raised; iii) a significant percentage of the decline in inflation is due to the non-core component, which could revert, and iv) medium-term inflation expectations remain above the target. He/she mentioned as an additional factor the loss of efficiency in measuring inflation and other economic indicators, due to data collection problems generated by the social distancing measures. He/she pointed out that although remote methods to conduct surveys are being proposed, this methodological change implies a lower quality of information and of assessment of the current juncture. Most members highlighted the deterioration of domestic financial markets generated by the shocks associated with the pandemic, while they acknowledged that a slight improvement has been recently observed, although risks to their performance continue. Some members pointed out that markets continue to exhibit a significant degree of volatility. All members underlined the depreciation of the peso exchange rate. Some members stated that, among emerging economy currencies, the Mexican peso is one of those with the greatest cumulative depreciation in the year. One member pointed out that, since Banco de México’s past monetary policy decision, the peso exchange rate reached a new historical high of 25.77 Mexican pesos per dollar. He/she also mentioned that trading spreads in the foreign exchange market widened to unprecedented levels. He/she stated that in the above described environment there has been a transition from a long to a short position in short-term foreign exchange instruments denominated in Mexican pesos. Another member considered that, although the depreciation of the Mexican peso exchange rate is partly explained by factors that have affected emerging economies in general, the presence of idiosyncratic factors is clear, as evidenced by the recent downgrade in the sovereign and in Pemex’s credit ratings. One member stated that the depreciation of the peso exchange rate has taken place despite the high interest rate spread with respect to the US Federal Reserve. As to fixed income markets, the majority of members mentioned that, after having increased securities have decreased, although they still remain volatile. One member pointed out that the slope of the yield curve increased, as term premia continue to reflect concerns about factors related to domestic policies. Some members highlighted that significant outflows of foreign capital were observed. One member specified that, during March, an outflow of 6 billion US dollars was observed, a figure never observed before for a single month. Most members noted that risk premia increased considerably. One member highlighted that those for 5-year credit default swaps (CDS) registered the largest increase in the year among the main emerging economies. Another member stated that these instruments halted their upward trend after Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision. environment the domestic economy is facing resulting from the pandemic and the lower oil prices is worsened by idiosyncratic factors. In this context, most members highlighted the recent downgrade of the sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating by three agencies. The majority of members pointed out that one of them lowered the sovereign debt rating to one level above losing the investment grade and that two of them placed Pemex’s debt rating below investment grade. In this regard, one member noted that such adjustments responded to concerns regarding: i) the fall in oil prices; ii) the fragility of public finances; iii) Pemex’s financial sustainability, and iv) the weakening of institutions due to domestic policy. He/she added that although the market had already discounted these adjustments, additional sales of such assets by investors can be expected, leading to a greater tightening of Pemex and the country’s financing conditions, which could hinder economic recovery once the health emergency is over. Another member mentioned that the fall in oil prices has resulted in a reduction of Pemex’s revenues and profitability, as well as in a higher risk premia on its bonds. The majority of members highlighted the importance of fiscal measures under the current situation, although they pointed out that fiscal sustainability must not be jeopardized. In this regard, one member mentioned that there is a reduced margin due to the fragility of both public finances and Pemex, as reflected by the credit rating downgrades observed in the last few days. Another member pointed out that fiscal measures that address the effects of the sanitary emergency and support micro, small-, and medium-size firms and the lowest income households are imperative. He/she added that, for this purpose, a reassessment of the priorities is necessary as well as the implementation of schemes that allow for a greater participation of the private sector in public investment projects with high social and economic returns. One member considered that currently there is a limited margin to negotiate additional debt issuances. He/she mentioned that there is room for flexibility in monetary policy and thus reduce the government’s financial cost. He/she mentioned that, only in 2019, the interest, commissions and expenses on the public sector’s debt amounted to 900 billion pesos, that is, nearly 4% of GDP. He/she concluded that reductions in the monetary policy rate might also contribute to the health of public finances by liberating space to increase public debt and therefore stimulate the economy. In light of an adverse situation as the currently faced, most members highlighted the importance fundamentals and adopting actions that promote a better adjustment of financial markets and of the economy overall. Similarly they noted that in this environment, it is essential to generate public policies that guarantee certainty for private investment. In this regard, said members expressed their concerns about the deterioration of the rule of law and the persistent insecurity, which leads to an unfavorable environment for investment. Some members noted that the external shocks worsened the problems that were already underway, which were mainly the result of the lack of confidence stemming from public policy decisions, of the deterioration of the rule of law, the institutional framework and public security. One member mentioned that March was the most violent of the last There is no productive apparatus that can withstand insecurity conditions of such magnitude; it is an imperative agenda that must be addressed in order to reactivate the economy. In this regard, he/she mentioned that no fiscal or monetary policy measure will be able to render the expected benefits if there is no confidence to invest. Another member considered that all of the above factors, along with the perception of insufficient fiscal efforts to face the external shocks, have contributed to undermine the environment for private investment and have increased doubts regarding the country’s growth potential over the next years and its implications for public finances. He/she highlighted that this situation is further worsened by concerns over the uncertain outlook for Pemex and the possible depletion of resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP) in the near future, raising investors’ doubts about the viability of maintaining the investment grade status for sovereign debt. He/she stated that a deep reorientation of the economic strategy is fundamental to overcome the current crisis and strengthen the country’s growth outlook in the long term. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic’s expected impact on inflation, economic activity and financial conditions, all members agreed on lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6%. Similarly, they agreed on implementing additional measures to foster an orderly behavior of financial markets, strengthen the channels of credit provision in the economy, and provide liquidity for the sound development of the financial system. Most members pointed out the importance of providing a timely One member stated that the trade-offs associated with the inflation outlook should be assessed in an environment that, although being uncertain as to the magnitude and persistence of the shocks it is subject to, it will clearly register a significant economic contraction. Another member pointed out that, considering the balance of factors affecting inflation and, in particular, the higher probability that the demand-related shock on inflation will prevail over others that operate in the opposite direction, a lower policy rate is consistent with the convergence of inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. He/she also considered that the proposed reduction will allow for an adequate balance between the margins that have become available for monetary policy and the risks that continue to be observed. One member added the importance of communicating clearly that given the observed inflation the main purpose of lowering the policy rate is to support the functioning of financial markets in face of the uncertainty and volatility generated by the pandemic, and that its main objective is other than to foster consumption and investment. Another member pointed out that, in an environment where slack conditions are widening, the expected rate of return on capital is lower, and, to avoid distortions in the credit market, it is convenient that the rate at which investment projects are financed is adjusted downwards, which calls for easing monetary policy. He/she noted that the above would improve financial conditions, which is a necessary although not sufficient condition to reactivate credit. He/she also stated that even though the relative monetary policy stance is only slightly restrictive, despite the high interest rate spread with the United States, the absolute policy stance is above the shortterm neutral rate, when it should already be below it. Some members considered that the upward adjustment in country risk indicators shows that the relative monetary policy stance does not have an ample margin, as often believed. One member added that the increase in capital outflows also suggests that said margin is not ample. Another member added that monetary conditions in several economies have eased considerably, and thus the relative monetary policy stance remains wide vis-àvis other economies, including those emerging economies that have a higher credit risk than Mexico’s. Nevertheless, he/she mentioned that, in light of the magnitude of the shock on economic activity and the increase in risk aversion, interest rate spreads have not been determinant in the portfolio adjustments observed. He/she highlighted that even the currencies and instruments with more liquid and deeper markets may have registered higher capital outflows. However, the same member emphasized that, as risk appetite normalizes, interest rate spreads may be more relevant. One member pointed out that at this moment domestic financial markets are being mostly affected by investors’ concerns regarding the weak performance of real economic activity, and to a lesser extent by interest rate spreads. He/she stated that so far this year the Mexican peso has been one of the currencies with the worst performance despite the high interest rate spread between Mexico and the US Federal Reserve. He/she added that the foreign exchange depreciation in economies with low interest rate spreads has been smaller than in economies with high interest rate spreads. He/she argued that this could be reflecting investors’ expectations about the accommodative monetary policy in the former economies allowing them to have a faster recovery and a lower contraction of real economic activity. He/she pointed out that an argument in favor of maintaining a high interest rate spread is to note that the volatility-adjusted spread has decreased. Nevertheless, he/she added that considering that exchange rate volatility might be partly the result of the high interest rates and their impact on economic activity, the recent behavior of the foreign exchange spread calls precisely for the opposite action, i.e., to promote an even greater reduction of interest rate spreads. In the same regard, he/she mentioned that the higher risk premia observed does not limit the margin for lowering the monetary policy rate and rather constitutes an additional reason for continuing to do so, as a substantial reduction would allow to offset the effect of the higher risk premia by maintaining or even lowering the cost of credit to firms. He/she added that in light of the capital outflows registered over the last weeks, concerns about monetary policy easing likely propitiating a significant depreciation of the peso exchange rate must be ruled out. He/she stated that other Latin American economies have significantly lowered their interest rate spreads, without this having implied greater depreciations than the Mexican peso’s. He/she also noted that the decision to lower the monetary policy rate by 50 basis points in March had positive effects on financial markets. Said member mentioned that interest rates of government securities decreased for all terms. He/she stated that when a monetary policy easing is perceived as a risk for inflation, long-term interest rates tend to increase reflecting the upward adjustment in inflation expectations. For this reason, he/she argued that the recent behavior of interest rates reflects that the market is not anticipating inflationary pressures associated with a less restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she pointed out that there is a wide room to continue lowering the policy rate, favoring financial markets and without generating inflationary pressures. Most members agreed that monetary policy by itself will not be able to solve the difficulties generated by the shocks that are affecting the economy. One member argued that the credit channel is ineffective to reactivate the economy. He/she highlighted that Banco de México is most willing to contribute to face this pandemic, within the limits allowed by its institutional framework, without undermining its primary objective or independence, and maintaining its credibility. Another member added that, although the measures of monetary policy easing are essential in the current context, overcoming the crisis requires adequate public health and fiscal actions. He/she added that monetary policy can only contribute to long-term economic growth by generating the conditions for macroeconomic stability. He/she noted that its impact on economic activity is modest even throughout the cycle, due to the characteristics of the Mexican financial system. He/she also emphasized that, when facing shocks like the current one, monetary policy has limitations to mitigate the fluctuations of economic activity. He/she stated that a set of policies aimed at fostering both an adequate environment for private investment and productivity growth are needed to boost economic growth. One member considered wrong to believe that low interest rates cannot contribute to the economic recovery. He/she added that the cost and access to credit for micro, small- and medium-size firms, which are those that generate most of the jobs and which will be the most affected by the pandemic, would be highly favored by a significant reduction in interest rates. He/she argued that fiscal policy could also contribute to this; however, if the government's borrowing costs remain high, the room for implementing a fiscal stimulus would be limited. He/she considered that high interest rates affect the health of public finances by increasing their financial cost. However, he/she mentioned that there is room for flexibility in monetary policy and thus to reduce the government's financial cost. The majority of members pointed out that the outlook for monetary policy remains complex. The majority highlighted the combination of a sharp contraction of economic activity, both upward and downward pressures on inflation, and volatility in financial markets. One member highlighted the importance of identifying the different dilemmas that monetary policy faces, of monitoring the scenarios that materialize, and defining the most convenient monetary policy adjustments. Some members underlined the importance of having more timely data to monitor which scenarios will materialize. Most members pointed out the importance of Banco de México acting with prudence. One member indicated that some risks associated with public finances and Pemex’s financial situation have materialized and thus that it is necessary to act with caution. Another member mentioned that given the expected trends, there are conditions to consider a further monetary policy easing, even in the short term. However, due to the risks for inflation and the high volatility in the financial markets, it will be necessary to proceed with caution. One member indicated that several risk factors prevail that could have negative consequences on the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to the inflation target. He/she stated that given the economic emergency and the current level of inflation, the emphasis must be set upon providing the necessary liquidity and prevent any affectations to financial stability. Another member mentioned that, under the present situation, the most prudent monetary policy is to substantially lower the policy rate, so that the real interest rate is below its neutral level as soon as possible, without discarding the possibility of moving towards a real rate close to zero or even negative. He/she added that not doing the above or postponing it for too long would be an unwise decision, as it would affect the Mexican economy at a time of economic crisis, would deteriorate financial markets, and would jeopardize price stability. All members acknowledged that the global and changed considerably over the last weeks, and that in order to respond promptly it was necessary to make a monetary policy decision out of the programmed schedule and accompany it with additional measures to foster an orderly behavior of financial markets, strengthen the channels of credit provision, and provide liquidity for the sound development of the financial system. One member argued that given the emergency, multiple economic agents, firms and households, must rely on financing sources to be able to offset the reduction in their income as a result of the social distance measures. The fall in income together with greater risk aversion, can result in a segmented financial market in which only lower-risk and large-sized issuers have access to financing. He/she highlighted that, under the current environment, the proper functioning of credit channels indeed becomes more necessary. He/she added that in a context of mandatory shutdowns in the production lines of goods and services, the reduction of interest rates may have a lesser effect on aggregate demand in the short term. In this context, he/she added that in order to strengthen the financial system and provide greater liquidity to the payment systems, it is necessary to: i) improve the functioning of financial markets, strengthening their price discovery process in a wide range of assets; ii) provide sufficient liquidity and prevent its segmentation, in order to foster the sound development of the financial system, and iii) strengthen the channels of credit provision, in order for financing to reach a wide number of creditors. In particular, through measures that i) grant more liquidity to the daily funding market at the opening of markets and to expand the collateral eligible for financing facilities; ii) expand the terms and types of instruments with which banks can carry out repo agreements with Banco de México, in order to provide more liquidity and strengthen the secondary market of said securities, as well as to carry out operations aimed at promoting a better functioning of the government securities’ yield curve, and iii) provide resources to banks so that they can grant credit to micro, small- and medium-size firms, as well as to households affected by the pandemic. Another member underlined that by enabling the financial system to fulfil its role in mobilizing loanable funds, these measures will help the economy to absorb the real shock of the pandemic in an orderly manner. One member highlighted that such measures are necessary given the volatility registered by domestic financial markets. In this regard, he/she mentioned that these actions would help to improve trading conditions in the fixed income market, which have deteriorated significantly despite the generalized decreases in the yields on government securities. The same member pointed out that in light of a crisis like the current one, the central bank must act on several fronts to contribute to preserve financial stability conditions and incentivize the expansion of banking credit which, besides alleviating the impact of the pandemic, support the strengthening of confidence. Another member stated that prior to the measures announced in this monetary policy decision, other actions had already been taken such as reducing the monetary regulation deposit and making some credit facilities more flexible, in addition to increasing financing in foreign currency by taking advantage of the credit swap line with the US Federal Reserve. He/she mentioned that some of the actions of the new package aim at expanding the collateral eligible for accessing liquidity facilities and for widening the coverage to development banks. He/she also pointed out that the package includes measures to strengthen the credit channels and the programs carried out jointly with the Ministry of Finance to ensure the proper functioning of the bond market, in order to improve the banking sector’s positioning given the large amount of capital outflows. He/she stated that in accordance with the Foreign Exchange Commission, the package incorporates foreign exchange hedges with non-domiciled counterparties. Said member stated that the Banking Liquidity Regulation Committee has implemented, among other measures, countercyclical macroprudential policies by temporarily loosening minimum liquidity requirements. He/she argued that, with these actions, financial institutions will be able to ensure a better balance given the disruptions in their financial positions, especially if the higher number of nonperforming loans affects their liquidity. He/she added that the complex situation demands implementing decisive actions, many of which are unprecedented. He/she stated that, despite these measures, the fall in economic activity is so deep and complicated that it may reveal or exacerbate existing structural flaws. Thus, this extraordinary situation requires acting more boldly and far beyond the traditional schemes. Considering the risks resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic for inflation, economic activity and financial markets, major challenges arise for monetary policy and for the economy in general. In light of the foreseen implications, and with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 6%. The Governing Board also decided to implement additional measures to foster an orderly behavior of financial markets, strengthen the credit channels and provide liquidity for the sound development of the financial system. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to