Most members mentioned that global economic activity has been recovering. Some noted that it still remains at levels below those prior to the pandemic and that the recovery has been heterogeneous among countries and sectors. One member pointed out that in the short term the reopening of activities led to an increase in production and, in the medium term, the recovery is associated to the evolution of aggregate demand. He/she stated that differences in economic recovery among countries are due to: (i) the rate of COVID-19 infections and the measures adopted to contain it; (ii) the relative importance of the most affected services; the informal sector; (iv) the strength of the macroeconomy and of the financial system, and (v) the magnitude of employment and income support programs. In this regard, he/she noted that economies with significant relief measures have shown a greater-than-expected recovery. In this respect, some members mentioned that consumption and investment have recovered in certain advanced economies. One of them added that the latest indicators, such as the purchasing managers' indexes, are in expansionary territory and trending upwards. In this context, some members pointed out that global growth forecasts for 2020 have been adjusted upwards. The majority of members highlighted the resurgence of COVID-19 infections in several countries, mainly European, and the reestablishment of measures to contain it in these countries. One member pointed out that, as a result, the recovery is losing strength, as suggested by the latest data. Another member stated that while the new measures are less strict than those adopted at the beginning of the pandemic, their effects are foreseen to hinder the economic recovery. In this context, most members highlighted the risks to global economic growth associated with the pandemic, especially those related to the dynamics of infections and the establishment of additional social distancing measures. Some members considered that such measures may be less disruptive, as more information is available about which are the most effective public health actions. Nevertheless, some highlighted the risk that distancing measures could be maintained for an extended period and that their effect may be substantial. Most members also considered the risk that fiscal stimuli could prove insufficient to support the recovery. One member added the unsustainability of public and corporate debt, the potential post-electoral tensions in the United States, and the lack of definition of the terms by which the United Kingdom may leave the European Union. Some members expressed that the balance of risks for global growth is negative. Most members mentioned that inflation in advanced economies remains below their central banks’ targets. One member stated that these institutions expect the above to continue for a prolonged period. Some members highlighted that a recomposition of relative prices, with increases in those of certain merchandises and reductions in those of services, has been observed. One member added that energy prices exerted a downward impact on inflation at the beginning of the pandemic, but that this impact has recently moderated. He/she noted that in the United States inflation of food products has increased, which has been largely offset by decreased pressures in services prices. He/she added that in the euro area the increase in food prices has been smaller, which, together with the weakness in services prices, has led headline and core inflation to levels close to zero. Most members underlined that in a large number of emerging economies inflation rates have decreased, and one member noted that they are below their targets. In contrast, some members pointed out that in Mexico inflation has increased. One member mentioned that this is partly due to the fact that the weight factors used in Mexico give more importance to those components that have had larger increases. Another member pointed out that in some emerging economies inflation was subject to upward pressures due to exchange rate depreciations and increases in energy and food prices. Most members mentioned that the central banks of advanced economies reiterated that they will maintain accommodative monetary policy stances for an extended period. They highlighted the Federal Reserve's decision to maintain its range for the federal funds rate at 0%-0.25% until its inflation and employment targets are met. One member stated that given its new monetary policy strategy, it would take longer than before for this central bank to raise its interest rate. Another member added that both private sector forecasters and market variables suggest that the federal funds rate will remain unchanged during 2020 and 2021. Most members highlighted the possibility that central banks of advanced economies increase their monetary stimuli. One member mentioned that the Federal Reserve is assessing the possibility of extending the terms of its lending facilities. Another member added that the Bank of Canada will focus its asset purchases on longer-term bonds, with the aim of having a more direct influence in the rates relevant for households’ and firms’ financing. One member stated that fiscal authorities in some advanced economies have also announced extensions to their relief programs. Another member noted that Federal Reserve board members pointed out that it may be necessary to increase the fiscal stimulus. One member noted that the margin available to implement macroeconomic and financial policies to stimulate the economy could be exhausted. He/she explained that this possibility is low for major advanced economies, particularly regarding monetary policy, while in emerging economies both upward inflationary pressures resulting from exchange rate effects or supply shocks, as well as doubts about the sustainability of their public finances, could lead to a premature withdrawal of stimuli. The majority of members noted that global financial markets exhibited volatility, although it has decreased recently due to the results of the US election and favorable news about the development of a vaccine. One member expressed that markets were closely attentive to the US electoral process, the extension of the relief measures, the tax policy outlook and the type of leadership in that country. Some members emphasized the better performance of US stock markets and the narrow adjustments of interest rates. However, one member added that in view of the deterioration of growth expectations, the prices of commodities, particularly of crude oil, suffered declines, although most recently there was a moderation of these declines. Another member added that the performance of financial markets is expected to continue improving and the gaps of economic activity to continue narrowing by the end of the year. Some members stated that emerging economies’ financial markets exhibited a positive behavior. They noted that inflows to fixed-income and equity instruments continued, although one member added that inflows to equity instruments registered only small changes. Another member noted that the currencies of emerging economies appreciated, their stock markets registered gains, their risk premia decreased and their interest rates exhibited mixed, albeit narrow, adjustments. Most members considered that international financial markets are subject to risks, with those already mentioned for global activity standing out. One member added idiosyncratic risks, especially in emerging economies. He/she added that if they were to materialize, there would be potentially disorderly adjustments resulting from abrupt changes in market sentiment. He/she noted that this would particularly affect emerging economies, as capital flows to these countries and their asset prices have still not returned to their prepandemic levels. All members pointed out that timely information suggests that, after a deep contraction in the second quarter, economic activity showed a recovery in the third one. Most members highlighted that the GDP flash estimate points to a seasonally adjusted growth rate of 12% during the third quarter relative to the previous one, driven by external demand and the reopening of activities. Some members noted that economic activity remains below pre-pandemic levels. One member noted that between January and September same period of 2019, while another member emphasized that it decreased 8.6% at an annual rate during the third quarter of 2020. He/she added that in monthly terms, the greatest contraction was observed in April and to a lesser extent in May, while in June and July there was a significant recovery that moderated in August and that is expected to remain moderate in September. On the supply side, most members highlighted the heterogeneity in the recovery of different sectors. Some members pointed out that the industrial sector, driven by manufacturing, has shown the best performance, while services continue to show weakness. One member outlined that industrial production fell at an annual rate of 29.4% in May and of 7.5% in September. He/she added that, in contrast, accommodation and food; transportation, information, and arts, entertainment and recreation services contracted at an annual rate of 53.4, 20.8 and 21.8% in August, respectively. Another member mentioned that tourism faces the most complex situation and that tourist sector businessmen estimate that the recovery could be achieved only until 2022. On the demand side, all members underlined that external demand has shown greater dynamism. The majority of members highlighted that in September exports reached levels close to those observed before the pandemic. Some members highlighted the trade balance surplus. Most members noted that consumption, investment and imports continue showing a lackluster performance. One member emphasized the weakness in the consumption of services and of durable goods. Another member stated that private consumption in August was 13.08% lower than in the previous year. He/she added that non-oil imports of consumer goods registered an annual contraction of remittances, which are a determinant of consumption, have continued to grow. He/she pointed out that in August investment registered an annual contraction of 16.64% as a result of the impact of the pandemic and an environment that is not conducive to investment. Most members noted that the labor market has started to recover, although it continues to show a considerable deterioration. They highlighted the reduction in the labor participation rate and increases in unemployment and underemployment. One member pointed out that in September, the labor participation rate was below underemployment rate was above 15%. He/she added that is outside of the labor force but available for work remains above 10%, as compared to 6% before the pandemic. Another member pointed out that while unemployment did not increase as much as in other crises, it continues to be disguised by the number of people that have left the labor market. One member pointed out that by the end of the year the extended unemployment rate could be close to One member noted that formal and informal employment decreased by 12.5 million persons between February and April. He/she stated that it has gradually recovered since those months and that in September it was 4.6 million below the level registered in February. Another member mentioned that, despite this improvement, the decline is considerable with respect to what was observed prior to the pandemic. As for the creation of IMSS-insured jobs, one member mentioned that, after registering negative growth rates between March and July, positive ones were observed in August and September, which were close to their historical averages. Another member stated that the recovery in employment is explained almost entirely by the increase in informality. Some members agreed that the adjustment in the labor market has affected women to a greater extent, with one member adding that this also applies to young people. Most members noted that the economic recovery will be gradual and prolonged. One member mentioned that, given the weakness of some aggregate demand components, it is foreseeable that the recovery will begin to slow down once the effects of the reopening of activities fade. Another member pointed out that the recovery will be difficult and thus could be extended until mid-2024. Some members noted that growth expectations for 2020 were revised slightly upwards. One member added that this was due to a stronger than expected rebound in the third quarter. He/she explained that according to the most recent surveys of private sector forecasters, growth expectations for 2020 changed from -9.8 to -9.3%, while they remained at GDP flash estimate for the third quarter points to a trajectory of economic activity during 2020 close to the less pessimistic scenario published in the Quarterly Report April-June 2020. One member added that he/she expects a GDP fall of 9.0% in In view of the economic contraction and the expected recovery scenarios, most members emphasized that wide slack conditions are foreseen in the horizon in which monetary policy operates. One member specified that, although the output gap will remain negative, the anticipated trajectory of economic activity implies a lower level of slack throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Another member argued that, based on the GDP flash estimate for the third quarter, the negative output gap has started to decrease, although it still exhibits wide slack. He/she added that, in light of the current magnitude of the gap, in optimistic growth scenarios. He/she considered that it is difficult to estimate the output gap in the two-year horizon in which monetary policy has an effect, given the environment of uncertainty and the possibility that the potential growth of the economy is below the estimated figure. He/she indicated that it has most probably been affected by both weak investment and the absence of sufficient efforts to boost productivity since before the emergence of the pandemic, along with the effects of the latter on both physical and human capital stocks and on total factor productivity. Most members mentioned that an environment of uncertainty and downside risks to economic activity persists, especially risks related to a new outbreak of the pandemic. Some members warned about the possibility of new distancing measures being implemented. One member referred to states of Mexico that have once again adopted stricter lockdown measures —similarly to what has been observed in some European countries— and that consequently the economic outlook depends significantly on the virus’ trajectory. He/she stated that a resurgence of the virus could not only delay the economic recovery even more, which implies collateral damage to employment, but that additionally the pandemic represents a sizeable risk for the productive outlook in the medium term, which could cause structural damage to the economy. Another member pointed out the uncertain economic environment for 2020 and 2021. He/she stated that, despite promising news on the possibility of having a vaccine, there is still no certainty over when the vaccine or an effective treatment to the virus would be available, or over how long it would take to produce and distribute said vaccine, once it is available, in order for a relevant economic impact to be observed. Among risks for growth, some members highlighted the impact on public finances and its possible consequences on the conditions of access to financial markets. They indicated that other external risks of an economic, political and geopolitical nature should be added to the above. One of them added those of idiosyncratic nature that the country faces. Another member highlighted episodes of risk aversion, trade tensions, and solvency problems of households and businesses. Most members mentioned that annual headline inflation increased between September and October and that it is above the 3% target. One member underlined that inflation in October was at its highest level in 17 months and that its evolution has exceeded Banco de México’s projections. Most members considered that inflation has continued to be affected by the pandemic, which has implied supply and demand shocks, as well as an exchange rate depreciation, which has led to changes in relative prices. Some members noted on the one hand the logistical and supplyrelated problems, and on the other the reallocation of consumers’ spending. One member stated that increases in prices caused by the closure of establishments and by logistical problems are beyond the traditional domain of monetary policy. Another member pointed out that the decline in aggregate demand and the fall in energy prices have favored price reductions. One member mentioned that the decline in demand has still not been reflected thoroughly on inflation. Regarding core inflation, most members highlighted the increase in the annual rate of change of merchandise prices, especially food merchandise, and reductions in that of services prices. One indicated that the decline in the prices of services has not compensated the price increases in those of merchandise, mainly food merchandise that are still at levels near 7%. Another member considered worrisome that in October, this component was practically at the upper limit of the variability interval of the inflation target for the third consecutive month. One member underlined that core inflation slightly decelerated during the second fortnight of October, showing an increase of only 7 basis points with respect to the previous fortnight. He/she mentioned that processed food prices, which had increased considerably in March and April, showed signs of stabilizing, even registering a slight deflation during the second fortnight of October with respect to the previous fortnight. Some highlighted that in October the annual change of services prices was 2.4%. One member pointed out that the lower annual rate of change in services prices reflects a lower demand generated by the social distancing measures. Another member mentioned that in the short term the negative output gap’s influence on inflation has been insufficient, given that fundamental core inflation has not decreased significantly. Most members expressed that non-core inflation increased, highlighting the rise in the annual rate of change of fruit and vegetable prices. One member noted that agricultural and livestock products’ prices unexpectedly rose at a faster rate in October, which explains why inflation was above the variability interval during said month. Another member pointed out that the less favorable dynamics in energy prices also drove non-core inflation upwards. Most members considered that there are signs of stabilization in some components of inflation. One member pointed out that this is due to the recent evolution of food merchandise, services and energy prices. Another member stated that the pressures on prices associated with value chain disruptions, input costs, energy prices and the exchange rate are starting to be contained. For this reason, an important decline in annual headline inflation is anticipated for November with respect to October. He/she added that distortions caused by the lockdown have made the reading of inflation difficult given that CPI’s fixed weights have become obsolete. He/she mentioned that the consumption pattern has changed, as the purchase of foods has increased and spending on transportation, apparel, recreation and tourism has decreased. In turn, the prices of the former group have increased more, while those of the latter group have increased less or even decreased, and thus households’ cost of living has increased more than is indicated by inflation. He/she considered that this goes beyond monetary policy’s usual domain. Some members stated that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2020 increased, while medium- and long-term expectations remained stable at levels above 3%. One member added that expectations for the end of 2021 rose as well. Another member noted that the latter still exceed the central bank’s projections by a relatively ample margin. One member noted that analysts will likely adjust their inflation expectations downwards for the end of the year, given that the impact on certain prices apparently has started to recede. Another member specified that private sector forecasters’ inflation expectations for the end of 2021 are at 3.5% and for the next 12 months have remained stable and below the level registered at the beginning of the pandemic. He/she added that expectations implicit in market instruments are at 3.2% for the average of one to five years. He/she considered that all of the above implies that inflation expectations have not been contaminated significantly by the recently observed inflation levels. Meanwhile, one member added that the 10-year inflation risk premium implicit in market instruments is still increasing. Most members considered that the recent behavior of headline and core inflation implies a slight increase in the foreseen trajectories within forecast horizon, although those for the next 12 to 24 months are anticipated to be around 3%. One member noted that this scenario considers a gradual fading of supply-related pressures and greater effects of economic slack on headline and core inflation within the forecast horizon. Some members pointed out that the convergence of inflation to the 3% target during the second half of feasible scenario. One member stated that headline and core inflation will probably remain relatively high over the next months and that it will be until mid-2021 when they will decrease considerably, as a result of both the direct and indirect impact of the fading of the base effect generated by the fall in oil prices during the second quarter of 2020. Another member underlined that despite a more appreciated exchange rate and the lower gasoline prices, expectations for headline and core inflation were adjusted to the upside throughout the forecast horizon, delaying the convergence to the target from the fourth quarter of 2021 to the first quarter of 2022. He/she pointed out that the higher prices of merchandise and agricultural and livestock products contributed to the above. Meanwhile, some members considered that inflation lies on the foreseen path to reach the target, although a transitory increase is expected during the second quarter of 2021. One member pointed out that this rebound in inflation is associated with a low comparison base. He/she mentioned that the decreasing trajectory is based on the expected or observed evolution of different determinants, highlighting that: i) energy prices remain relatively stable; ii) the exchange rate has appreciated significantly for seven consecutive months, thus reverting a sizeable fraction of the initial shock of the pandemic, and iii) the economy continues operating with a large amount of slack. Another member indicated that, despite current pressures, inflation is expected to decrease significantly during the second quarter of 2021 and the target is expected to be attained by the end of that year. He/she highlighted that there are signs of a moderation in the growth of prices that had increased the most. As for downward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the economic slack. One member added the possibility of lower inflationary pressures at a global level and a new outbreak of the virus lowering the demand for goods and services. Another member considered that, in general, inflation pressures observed so far are transitory and/or associated with supply-related factors. One member noted that the recent appreciation of the Mexican peso suggests lower pressures on prices in the following months. He/she added that the current nil fiscal pressure on inflation is positive. He/she mentioned that no new taxes or extraordinary increases in government-authorized prices have been registered, especially in energy prices, and thus non-core inflation could have a downward influence on inflation. Among upward risks, some members highlighted possible episodes of exchange rate depreciation. One member considered the behavior of the exchange rate as one of the main risks to inflation in the following months, as would be expected of such a liquid emerging economy currency as the Mexican peso. He/she added that the outcome of the US presidential elections and the recent news on the development of a vaccine have attenuated the considerable risks faced by inflation, although they have not eradicated them. Some members added that upwards pressures caused by the pandemic might continue. One member added the implications of a complex international context and domestic factors, such as the situation of public finances, the minimum wage increase for 2021, and the electoral process in Mexico in the following year. He/she considered that the wide output gap will prevail over the previous ones, but that the most recent forecasts suggest that the convergence of inflation to the target will take longer than foreseen. Another member underlined the risk of volatility in the financial markets, although he/she stated that it seems to be limited. Some members pointed out the persistence of core inflation at high levels. One member added that this phenomenon, observed since 2018, has worsened as a result of the pandemic through the food merchandise component, without the wide slack conditions having offset the upward pressures. He/she considered that the balance of risks to inflation has deteriorated. Another member noted that the balance of risks associated to the new foreseen trajectory for inflation is uncertain. Most members noted that financial markets exhibited a favorable behavior. One member stated that significant fluctuations were observed, caused mainly by the US elections and by the expectations about the availability of a vaccine against COVID-19. Most members highlighted that, in said context, the Mexican peso exhibited volatility and an appreciation. One member added that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market have recently improved. Another member mentioned that the Mexican peso has been one of the emergingeconomy currencies that has appreciated the most and added that, at the end of October, the negative balance of the net foreign-exchange position declined, reaching its lowest level since March. Most members pointed out that interest rates exhibited mixed and narrow adjustments. One member mentioned that short-term government bond rates registered marginal adjustments, while longterm ones increased. Another member underlined that the latter registered fluctuations. Some members underlined the decline in sovereign risk and the increase in the stock market. One member indicated that outflows in government securities were registered, although smaller than those observed in March and April. Some members mentioned that risks to financial markets persist and that new volatility episodes that could exert pressure on the exchange rate cannot be ruled out. One member highlighted the risks associated with the weakening of public finances, Pemex’s fragile situation, uncertainty about domestic policies, and possible non-compliance with the USMCA, as well as the 2021 electoral process. Another member stated that the decline in risk aversion depends on the world economic recovery, the possible economic stimuli, and the development of the vaccine. He/she pointed out that delays on these fronts would raise risk premia and financial volatility, and would exert pressure on the exchange rate. One member highlighted the challenges that are confronted given a large economic contraction, lower public revenues, spending pressures, as well as a deterioration of the terms of trade and lower revenues from abroad which has affected sovereign credit ratings and their perspectives. Moreover, public sector borrowing requirements have increased recently, in an environment in which uncertainty persists regarding domestic and external financing sources. Another member pointed out that from 2019 to 2020 the Public Sector Borrowing Requirements are projected to increase from 2.3 to 4.7% and that their historical balance will increase from 44.8 to 54.9% as a percentage of GDP. He/she mentioned that the fiscal balance could deteriorate further due to additional spending pressures generated by the lengthening of the pandemic. One member noted that the outlook for public finances for 2021 is complicated given the possibility of tax and oil revenues being lower than projected. He/she added that the latter, in an environment of depletion of resources from the stabilization funds and an unfavorable growth outlook, is one of the main risks for the sovereign rating and the economy, both in context, he/she emphasized the need for a fiscal reform. Another member stated that the risks associated with the outlook for public finances should not be overstated. He/she considered that a manageable deficit, even with small deviations with respect to the projections for 2021, and low public debt are consistent with macroeconomic balance. He/she stated that while assumptions of the economic package for 2021 may be optimistic, it is possible to keep the fiscal accounts in order. One member argued that considering the magnitude of the economic shock, public finances have performed relatively well. He/she added that the strong appreciation of the exchange rate from March to date has its origin in that the macroeconomic fundamentals of the country have remained solid, among which the observed commitment to fiscal discipline must be included. Some members expressed concern about Pemex’s situation. They added that this constitutes a risk for the sovereign rating and highlighted the possibility that the state company may require additional fiscal support, which could affect public finances. One member noted that in the event of a downgrade in the sovereign and/or Pemex’s ratings, the fiscal balance could deteriorate further. Another member stated that the possibility of an additional downgrade in Pemex’s rating has already been incorporated by the markets, so this event must be properly assessed. Most members stated that the impact of the pandemic continued affecting the financing of firms. One member noted that financing conditions remain tight, although they have improved compared to those observed during the beginning of the health crisis. Another member pointed out that domestic and external financing sources continued to increase during the third quarter. Nevertheless, most members highlighted the contraction in bank credit. Some members mentioned that this has mainly affected small- and medium-sized enterprises. One member pointed out that in September credit to these firms registered an annual contraction of -6.3%. He/she added that credit from commercial banks to firms and households remains weak, without clear signs of improvement. He/she stated that this situation is gravely affecting households. He/she mentioned that financing through credit cards declined at an annual rate of -11.5% and that other types of credit, such as payroll, personal and auto loans have also been declining. Some members pointed out that the credit contraction is due to low demand. One member mentioned the lack of firms’ confidence, legal uncertainty, and an adverse environment for investment. He/she stated that financial institutions have a perception of higher credit risk. Another member added that this is also due to banks’ tighter conditions and the absence of sufficient government guarantees. One member stated that the contraction is associated with supply factors and relatively high active rates. He/she emphasized the tightening of credit conditions for all sectors, which registered the most serious deterioration on record in the second quarter of 2020. He/she argued that this deterioration is largely explained by the reduction in credit lines offered. Some members noted that this decrease in bank credit is not due to a liquidity problem, considering the liquidity available to banks and the actions taken by the Central Bank in this matter. Some members argued that it is imperative for commercial banks and the government to stimulate credit through guarantee programs. One member noted that the availability of credit depends not only on central bank actions, but on the alternatives offered by banks. He/she stated that it is imperative for commercial banks to also do their part in the process of economic reactivation, and pointed out that the argument about an insufficient demand for credit is not credible. Another member mentioned that the economic recovery will be more difficult without an adequate expansion of bank credit. One member pointed out that although banks have solid capital and liquidity levels, the deterioration in their loan portfolio is still latent. He/she argued that the National Banking and Securities Commission encourage financial intermediaries to restructure credits of solvent clients that have liquidity problems and seek to minimize delinquency rates. He/she stated that the CNBV should expand even more, although prudently, the existing facilities so that institutions have additional reserves, increase their regulatory capital, and reduce their capital requirements due to credit risk. Another member highlighted that in view of the expiration of the special accounting criteria, it is important to monitor the stress indicators in the financial system. Taking into account the effects on inflation, economic activity and financial markets, as well as the projections for inflation and the convenience of consolidating a downward path for headline and core inflation towards the 3% target, the majority of members agreed to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%. One member voted for lowering the policy rate to a level of 4.00%. All members agreed that the decision to keep the reference rate unchanged constitutes a pause, in order to confirm a trajectory for inflation that converges to the target. Some members mentioned that this pause should not be considered as the end of the monetary relaxation cycle. Looking ahead, all pointed out that monetary policy decisions will depend on the information available, particularly on the evolution of the One member stated that monetary policy faces, on the one hand, major supply and demand shocks that affect economic activity and inflation and, on the other hand, uncertainty in global financial markets and fragility in risk appetite and capital flows. He/she added that in order to have an orderly adjustment of the national economy and maintain low and stable inflation, financial markets must function properly. He/she noted that the effects of monetary policy throughout the yield curve must be identified, since the components of aggregate demand respond to the different segments of the curve. He/she mentioned that in view of the economic contraction and its effects on inflation, it is desirable that the entire curve presents an orderly and sustainable downward adjustment. He/she added that medium and longterm interest rates include risk premia associated with various factors and that monetary policy should seek to ensure that the medium- and long-term inflationary risk premia are low and contained. He/she considered necessary for inflation expectations to be kept around their target in a sustained manner, which reduces inflationary risk premia throughout the yield curve. He/she stated that this is important when evaluating monetary policy responses among emerging economies, since they generally need to complement their domestic savings with external sources of financing, and that their risk premia are relevant for this purpose. In this regard, he/she mentioned that a solid and resilient macroeconomic framework is required, capable of withstanding adverse scenarios and allowing for lower financing costs along the yield curve. He/she also emphasized that in light of the effects of the pandemic, the yield curve in Mexico has adjusted downwards in an orderly and sustained manner. He/she pointed out that when comparing the behavior of said curve among emerging economies, it stands out that short and long term interest rates in Mexico have decreased considerably. He/she pointed out that while short-term rates are lower in other emerging economies, in some of them longterm rates have decreased less or even increased. He/she noted that the challenge of maintaining low and stable risk premia has been complicated by the pandemic. He/she considered that given the challenges and disjunctives that monetary policy has confronted, in an environment in which headline and core inflation have been subject to pressures, despite the substantial weakness of economic activity, a pause would grant space to confirm the downward trajectory of headline and core inflation to the 3% target. Another member argued that monetary policy faces a complex scenario due to conflicting effects: the largest fall in GDP in ninety years contrasts with rising inflation that exceeds forecasts and inflation expectations above the target. He/she added the presence of various risks that could pressure the exchange rate and impose greater stress on the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that in light of the complex environment, it is time to make a pause in the cycle of monetary easing and that this is a consistent, prudent and cautious decision given the significant global and domestic uncertainty. He/she considered that such decision will reinforce the credibility about the central banks’ commitment to its primary mandate and will send an unequivocal message of prudence. The same member pointed out that currently the exante real interest rate is at an accommodative level and that the interest rate spread with respect to the Federal Reserve has reached a level below the one recorded during the 2009 crisis. The aforementioned in spite of greater domestic risks stemming from a more deteriorated fiscal position. Regarding the possibility that a cut to the policy rate is relevant for the reactivation of credit, he/she emphasized that recent data suggests that the interest rate channel has little influence on financing. He/she argued that actions in the sphere of monetary policy have been comprehensive and timely, but the impact on investment, credit and consumption has been limited, since these rely more on confidence and legal certainty. He/she added that this argument is reinforced when considering that the relevant interest rates for investment and consumption of durable goods are the medium and long term ones, which are currently at levels lower than during the recession of high sensitivity of capital flows in Mexico, it is imperative to maintain a cautious monitoring and to calibrate monetary policy, in order to avoid increasing the country's financial vulnerabilities, in an uncertain international environment and with a high country risk. Finally, he/she considered that the monetary policy statement must communicate that the decision seeks to guarantee the downward path of inflation to the target in the horizon in which monetary policy operates and that the prudent and responsible implementation of monetary policy is the best way to ratify the Central Bank’s commitment to price stability. One member argued that the monetary policy implemented in recent months has made a significant reduction in the reference rate compatible with an approach based on prudence. He/she noted that a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations has been avoided despite the shocks faced; the interest rate spread comparable with other emerging economies has been narrowed or inverted without exerting excessive pressures on the exchange rate, and long-term interest rates have remained at levels below those observed in several economies with lower reference rates. He/she mentioned that despite these efforts and the sharp economic contraction, mainly as a result of the shocks stemming from the pandemic, the inflationary situation remains difficult. He/she emphasized that in addition to inflation being above target, consideration must be given to the prolonged period in which core inflation has remained high, the persistence of short- and longterm expectations above the target, the risks to inflation in the coming months, as well as the fact that in the face of inflation data frequently exceeding forecasts during the year, the possibility of inflation converging to the target within the previously forecasted period seems to fade. He/she mentioned that many analysts anticipate that inflation for 2021 and in the long term will be above the target while also expecting that there will be cuts to the policy rate, which suggests doubts about the credibility of the commitment of the Central Bank to the target. He/she stated that, for all the above reasons, it is necessary to continue acting with prudence, which implies keeping the reference rate unchanged. He/she indicated that this represents the scenario to which information derived from market-based instruments assigns the highest probability. Finally, he/she considered that the duration of this pause will depend on the behavior of inflation and its expectations and forecasts, and that in an environment of so much uncertainty, flexibility in the implementation of monetary policy will be needed in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target. Another member argued that, from different perspectives, monetary easing is still insufficient and that a pause should in no way be interpreted as the end of the easing cycle. He/she noted that the exante real interest rate is still high in relation to that observed during the 2009 crisis, when the slack was lower than the current one and inflation expectations were higher. He/she added that said rate is also high in relation to that observed in the rest of the emerging economies. He/she mentioned that while in most economies real rates close to zero or negative were reached several months ago, in Mexico they are still in positive territory. He/she noted that monetary policy still has room to contribute to improve financing conditions without jeopardizing other aspects of the economy. He/she highlighted that interest rates faced by firms tend to decrease with monetary policy easing. He/she argued that the demand components typically associated with credit, such as investment, purchases of durable goods and purchases with credit cards, are those that have exhibited the weakest recovery. He/she emphasized that monetary easing should continue when inflationary pressures begin to ease and as long as the negative output gap continues. Otherwise, there may be costly implications during the recovery process and permanent effects on production and social welfare levels. One member argued that an even lower rate is needed to help the recovery process. He/she added that inflation lies on the foreseen trajectory and that the output gap will remain very negative for a long period, which gives room to continue with the current cycle of easing as most countries have done. He/she noted that the ex-ante real interest rate is still positive and that there is a margin before reaching a level of zero or negative. He/she noted that, given the difficulty of implementing a greater fiscal stimulus, a more expansionary monetary policy is needed and that it should be signaled that it will remain so for a long time. He/she also emphasized that the monetary stimulus must continue to be complemented with measures to increase liquidity, to address the functioning of the payments system, and to strengthen the financing channels for micro-, smalland medium-sized firms. With regards to the absolute policy stance, he/she noted that low economic activity and reduced risk aversion open space for further easing, although the temporary increase in inflation could reduce this margin for a few months. He/she argued that, in relative terms, the global monetary easing and the lower risk aversion allow for maintaining an accommodative policy stance. He/she stated that the end point of the easing cycle is uncertain, as it depends on inflation remaining on the expected path towards the target, the output gap being negative and the recovery continuing. He/she underlined that if on this occasion the monetary policy decision is not to modify the target rate, this has to be considered as a pause and not as the end point of the expansionary cycle, in order to leave the door open to a more expansionary stance as has been recommended by some international financial authorities. He/she noted that Mexico's inflationary gap is positive, in contrast to the negative gaps in most emerging economies, so future decisions should incorporate the evolution of economic indicators. In addition, he/she pointed out that caution should be maintained in order to avoid affecting exchange rate stability and the financial system. The risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets pose major challenges for monetary policy and for the economy in general. Considering the mentioned forecasts for inflation and the convenience of consolidating a downward path for headline and core inflation towards the 3% target, with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%. One member voted for lowering the policy rate to a level of 4.00%. This pause provides the necessary room to confirm that the trajectory of inflation converges to the target. Looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on headline and core inflation, on their foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on their expectations. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions regarding both monetary and fiscal policies will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%. Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted for lowering the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by My vote is for lowering the policy rate by 25 basis points to 4.0% and continue the downward cycle as far as possible. The main problem we face is the significant fall in economic activity, its impact on the labor market and expectations of a weak, difficult and prolonged recovery. Given the magnitude of the economic collapse, we should not overreact to inflation being temporarily one tenth of a percentage point above the variability range of its target. Given the difficulty in implementing greater fiscal stimuli, more is required from monetary policy; an even lower policy rate is needed to aid in the recovery process. If not addressed appropriately, the economy might suffer practically irreversible structural damages. The greatest possible support is therefore required, shifting from a current slightly expansionary monetary policy stance to a highly accommodative stance, and communicating that it will remain as such for a long period. Not even a pause in the policy stance is acceptable when a sensitive decline in inflation is expected in November as a result of the fall in energy and in fruit and vegetable prices, and of the discounts in many goods during the _Buen Fin_ sale.