All members pointed out that the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent its spread have affected world economic activity considerably. In this context, some members noted that the confidence of economic agents decreased. One member argued that the disruption of global production chains and the fall in consumption and investment contributed to the above. Another member mentioned that production shutdowns have a larger effect on economies that are more open and integrated to global value chains, because the different phases of the pandemic hinder synchronized production, as well as tourismdependent regions. He/she mentioned that economies’ external demand has been affected by such situation, while domestic demand has been affected by lower households and firms’ income which, in addition to the lockdown measures, has reduced spending. He/she added that all of the above is leading to a significant fall in employment, which will widen the economic contraction. Most members pointed out that available information for the first quarter started to show evidence of an economic impact of large magnitude. Some members highlighted the strong contraction of economic activity in the euro area and the United States. One member underlined that the most worrisome indicator is the US unemployment rate, which exceeded 14% in April. He/she explained that although China’s industrial production decreased in February, it recovered slightly in March. Most members noted that the environment described above has led to downward revisions to economic expectations —unprecedented in the last decades— which include a strong contraction in 2020. Some members pointed out that the most significant global GDP contraction of this episode is expected for the second quarter of the year. Some members mentioned that drops in GDP not seen since the Great Depression are anticipated. One member highlighted the large magnitude of the revisions and the abrupt nature of the economic impact. Most members underlined that a recovery is expected during the second half of 2020, which would extend to next year. However, most members emphasized that this is subject to considerable risks, such as: i) the uncertainty on the duration and severity of the effects of the lockdown measures, ii) the time needed to normalize productive activities, and iii) the possibility of new COVID-19 outbreaks. Some members mentioned additional risks, such as the resurfacing of tensions between China and the United States, as well as others of political and geopolitical nature. One member highlighted the danger of a double dip recession. In this context, most members pointed out that the balance of risks for the global economic outlook remains Most members mentioned that the impact on economic activity has resulted in a sharp fall in commodity prices, especially of crude oil. One member added that the latter registered historically low prices. Most members pointed out that worldwide inflation continued to decline significantly, to levels below the central banks’ targets. One member stated that inflation expectations have decreased. Another member noted that although inflation continues to register positive figures, the possibility of additional declines, and even of episodes of deflation, represent risk factors for the recovery of the world economy. All members stated that in light of the described environment, several central banks lowered their interest rates significantly. One member pointed out that most advanced economies have nominal interest rates around 0% or negative, and that emerging economies overall set them near or below observed inflation, thus leading to real rates close to rate below or equal to 3%, five have rates between 3 and 5%, while Mexico, Russia and Turkey have rates above 5%. However, he/she stated that expected inflation for the end of the year in Russia and Turkey is high, while in Mexico it is already below 3%. For this reason, he/she mentioned that the real interest rate in Mexico is currently the highest among the group of seventeen emerging countries analyzed. He/she added that, for emerging economies, average expectations for policy rates for the end of Most members pointed out that numerous central banks have also implemented other extraordinary measures to foster the well- functioning of their financial systems. One member highlighted that practically all central banks have emphasized in their statements the need to intensify the monetary stimulus to speed up the economic recovery process. Another member added that these measures’ intent is for households and firms to be able to face their temporarily lower incomes as a result of the pandemic, as well as to avoid a credit contraction. As for the referred measures, one member underlined the risk that certain vulnerabilities that could jeopardize financial stability may arise or increase, as well as the challenges that could stem from certain legal difficulties in some regions. Most members stated that numerous countries have implemented fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the adverse effects of the pandemic. Some members noted that such stimuli have been greater than those implemented during the global financial crisis. One member specified that various authorities have approved direct relief measures and credit-guarantee programs. Another member stressed that there is the risk that these measures are insufficient to avoid a deeper and longer than expected recession. Most members mentioned that this adverse environment has led to a greater risk aversion, a deterioration of global financial conditions, and to a recomposition of investors’ portfolios pointed out that as compared to the beginning of the year, stock markets of advanced economies have fallen considerably. One member noted that there were outflows from equity markets and high-risk corporate debt in the aforementioned economies. Another member added that these economies’ currencies depreciated against the US dollar and that the spreads between corporate and sovereign bonds remain at high levels. Most members highlighted that this environment has also led to unprecedented capital outflows from emerging economies, especially of fixed- income instruments. Most members added that these economies registered a depreciation of their currencies and volatility in their foreign exchange markets. One member explained that falls in commodity prices and other sources of external income intensified capital outflows. He/she argued that, in this context, rating agencies have downgraded several sovereign and corporate credit ratings, thus contributing to reinforce the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion. As for inflationary pressures stemming from foreign exchange adjustments, another member mentioned that these are contained in most economies, as suggested by the reduction in breakeven inflation. Most members acknowledged that the actions adopted by advanced economies to provide liquidity and restore financing, as well as the reopening in some countries, have contributed to a more stable behavior of international financial markets in the last weeks. One member noted that although risk aversion decreased, it still remains at high levels. Another member stated that financial markets remain volatile. Most members mentioned that global financial conditions will remain dependent on the outlook for the effects of the pandemic. The majority of members highlighted the risks of a more pronounced slowdown and a resurfacing of trade, political, and geopolitical tensions. One member added that it is possible that the recomposition of investors’ portfolios towards safehaven assets will continue and that bouts of extreme financial volatility in emerging economies will take place. Another member considered that the balance for financial risks is biased to the downside. All members pointed out that timely information shows that during the first quarter of the year associated with the pandemic. Most members noted that the economy was already weak prior to the pandemic. Most members mentioned that, according to its flash estimate for the first quarter of the year, GDP fell 1.55% vis-à-vis the previous quarter, the largest fall since the 2008- 2009 financial crisis. Some members mentioned that this contraction reflects the impact of the lockdown measures, the deceleration of external demand, and the disruption in value chains. One member considered that the effects of the lockdown and the subsequent fall in employment have not been fully reflected yet. He/she added that indicators based on information drawn from the payments system anticipate monthly falls of -4.5 and -9.5% for March and April, respectively. measures have affected aggregate demand and that various indicators point to a contraction of consumption and investment in March and April. Most members added that exports, including the automotive ones, decreased, while imports maintained their negative trend. Some members highlighted the contraction of imports of final goods and of machinery and equipment. From the supply side, most members mentioned that several indicators suggest a contraction of services and of the industrial sector. Some members stressed that business opinion surveys of various sectors, as well as the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) of the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, have decreased to the lowest levels since records exist. One member highlighted that indicators of tourism and recreation services show that these sectors are being the ones most affected by the lockdown measures. Another member added that in the first quarter the industrial sector contracted and that manufacturing production decreased, while primary activities increased. The majority of members stated that, although the magnitude and duration of the effects of the pandemic are still unknown, these are expected to intensify during the second quarter. One member pointed out that some rebound is expected starting in the third quarter, given the announcement that activities will resume, although the extent of said recovery is uncertain. Another member added that these effects are expected to persist during the second half of the year. Most members mentioned that the labor market has been affected by the effects of the health crisis. Most members highlighted that 555,000 formal IMSS-insured jobs were lost in April. One member noted that in the year ending that month, disproportionally affected those workers that are paid up to two minimum wages, thus increasing the social cost of this health crisis. In addition, he/she highlighted the considerable increase of the underemployment rate. Another member added that a reduction of 130,000 jobs had already been observed in March. He/she added that the unemployment rate already reached 4.15% and that a significant increase in withdrawals of funds from individual retirement accounts for unemployment reasons was observed. One member underlined that between March 13 and April 30 over 750,000 formal jobs were lost, which indicates that, in less than two months, more formal jobs were lost than in twelve months during the worst part of the 2008-2009 crisis. He/she also mentioned that a significant loss of informal jobs should also be added. Another member stated that a fall of more than one million formal jobs is foreseen for this year. Some members mentioned that measurement challenges of labor indicators are anticipated, given that the National Institute for Statistics, Geography, and Information restrictions to conduct household surveys under the present juncture. Most members pointed out that growth forecasts for 2020 continue to be revised downward. Some members mentioned that the consensus of private sector forecasters went from -6.7 to -7.5%, anticipating a moderate recovery in 2021. One member mentioned an expectations survey conducted among economists, in which the median is at -8.0% with a mode of -9.0%, and that other information sources are anticipating a double-digit contraction. He/she considered that micro, small-, and medium-sized firms will be the most affected and that the informal sector will be impacted in terms of income and labor opportunities, adding that greater levels of poverty are foreseen in all its dimensions. He/she pointed out that, although this is a worldwide trend, Mexico is considered to be one of the countries that will be affected the most. Another member explained that contention measures and uncertainty about the pandemic will continue to impact the consumption of services. He/she added that the lower employment and its effects on the wage bill will provide less support to consumption. He/she also stated that investment is expected to continue deteriorating. Most members agreed that the balance of risks for growth is significantly biased to the downside and considered that it is subject to uncertainty, given that the duration and depth of the effects of the pandemic are unknown. Some members pointed out that mitigation measures and consumer confidence will depend on the development of a vaccine and an effective treatment. Said members highlighted the following risks: i) a prolonged impact on production due to the suspension of economic activities and the lack of supplies; ii) an increase in contagions or a second pandemic wave, which would lead to financial and solvency problems, and iii) lower households’ and firms’ incomes and a negative impact on employment. One member mentioned a possible permanent damage to the productive apparatus and to employment. Some members considered that the absence of a comprehensive support approach, particularly given the modest fiscal response, can lead to a slower recovery. One member added the absence of adequate incentives for private investment, a situation that has intensified recently due to the adjustments in the regulatory framework for the private sector’s participation in the electric sector. Another member emphasized that this is worsened by the environment of legal uncertainty for private investment. In this context, most members pointed out that slack conditions widened considerably and that they are expected to continue doing so. One member mentioned that the negative output gap is expected to reach levels not recorded since the All members mentioned that headline inflation decreased, stressing that in April it stood at 2.15%. Most members pointed out that this was due to the decline of non-core inflation, as a result of a lower annual change of energy prices, Most members mentioned that core inflation members underlined the increase in the rates of change of food merchandise prices. The majority of members pointed out that this is due to both demand- and supply-related factors. Some members considered that core inflation continues to show a resistance to decline. One member considered that, although in aggregate terms annual non-food merchandise and services inflation is below 3%, core inflation is subject to generalized pressures. He/she stated that the trimmed mean indicator for this variable exhibits readings that are almost identical to those of the untrimmed variable. Likewise, he/she highlighted that in the case of services, after excluding the housing, education, tourism and telecommunication components, the growth rate of prices of the corresponding indicator is above 4%. Another member stressed that the core component registered its lowest level in 12 months and that most components declined considerably, showing lower persistence than the one observed last year. He/she underlined that services registered 2.84%, a level not seen since that the depreciation of the peso exchange rate has not affected the prices of non-food merchandise significantly, despite the fact that a significant share of them is imported. He/she added that housing prices registered an annual inflation of below 3%. He/she also pointed out that only two components of core inflation, education services and food merchandise prices, registered an annual inflation above that figure. Nevertheless, he/she underlined that in education services a slight decline with respect to previous months can be observed, while food merchandises are undergoing a peculiar and possibly transitory increase in their demand. In addition, production of some of these goods has been limited due to the lockdown measures, exerting upward pressures in their prices. One member stressed that, according to academic studies, the lockdown leads to radical changes in consumption patterns and that the disruption in some value chains reflects extreme changes within the price index, as shown by the increase in the subindex of food merchandise and the significant fall in tourism services prices. Most members pointed out that short-term headline inflation expectations have decreased. Some members stated that, for the end of 2020, these are slightly below 3%. One member added that core inflation expectations also declined. Most members mentioned that medium- and long-term remained relatively stable, although above the 3% target. One member pointed out that these are within the variability interval and that they are expected to remain there. Another member indicated that the inflation risk premium implied in market instruments has declined. One member stated that there are marked contrasts for the different terms of this indicator, which highlights that it has limitations in assessing inflation expectations under circumstances like the current ones in financial markets, which are characterized by low liquidity levels and a deterioration of trading conditions overall. Most members highlighted that inflation is anticipated to converge to Banco de México’s target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Some members considered that inflation will be below the target by the end of the year. One member estimated that it will remain below 3% for the remainder of 2020. He/she indicated that this is supported in part by the prospects that energy prices will remain relatively low, due to a weak global demand for commodities. He/she pointed out that the increase in agricultural and livestock product prices observed in previous months has already started to reverse, and noted that prices of food products would decrease once the lockdown measures are lifted. Another member indicated that inflation is expected to increase in the following months and that it could attain levels above Banco de México’s target in the second half of the year. He/she mentioned that the recovery of energy prices will exert upward pressures on the non-core component. He/she added that core inflation would be affected by an exchange rate that is more depreciated than was foreseen, and by supply shocks. Nevertheless, he/she stressed that given the significant contraction of demand in 2020, of a recovery that is foreseen to be moderate in 2021, and of consequent expectations of a wide negative output gap for both years, it is reasonable to anticipate that headline inflation will converge to its target in 2021, in an environment of both upward and downward pressures and of high uncertainty. As to risks for inflation, most members mentioned downward pressures stemming from the considerable widening of the negative output gap and from the fall in energy prices. One member pointed out that social distancing is disrupting the provision of certain services, the price variation of which may decrease. Another member added the declines in agricultural and livestock prices and problems in measuring inflation, due to the change in the representative consumption basket during the pandemic. Among upward risks, most members emphasized the possibility of a greater or more persistent depreciation of the exchange rate and possible disruptions in production chains and in the distribution of certain goods and services. Some members highlighted the pressures on food merchandise prices. In particular, one of them emphasized that these pressures may be of such magnitude that they may exceed the effects of the economic slackness on prices. He/she added the base effect of non-core inflation due to the low levels that have been recently observed, a reversal in energy prices, and a greater pressure on agricultural and livestock product prices. Another member stated that although it has been argued that the exchange rate depreciation is an upward risk, it has not materialized in Mexico or in other emerging economies yet, in which inflation has declined. He/she added that although it has been argued that there could be cost pressures stemming from higher intermediate input prices, the IMF reported that annual inflation of commodities reached -31% in April, which represents an important deflationary force. One member pointed out that the effects of the lockdown on consumption patterns and on value chains, as well as the difficulties in collecting price data, make the reading of the price index more complicated, and that certain upward and downward pressures should therefore be analyzed carefully. In this context, most members considered that the balance of risks for inflation remains uncertain. One member noted that this derives from the following: i) possible changes in consumption patterns and their effects on the price formation process, ii) the magnitude and duration of the fall in aggregate demand, iii) the disruption in global value chains and a possible shortage of certain goods, iv) the persistence of adverse conditions in financial markets that cause disorderly adjustments, and v) possible second-order effects if the exchange rate depreciation is perceived to be permanent. Another member stated that uncertainty over the referred balance of risks is high, considering that the significant contraction in demand will exert downward pressures on inflation, while supply shocks and the exchange rate depreciation could pressure it upwards. He/she pointed out that the outcome will depend on the intensity of each of the abovementioned pressures, as well as on the interaction among them. Meanwhile, one member considered that the magnitude of the economic contraction and the consequent widening of the negative output gap ought to have a greater impact than the exchange rate on the price setting process. In this situation, he/she considered that both upward and downward risks for inflation are well-balanced. Another member considered that inflation data of April, in particular the evolution of the core inflation components and the fall in non-core inflation, suggest that downward pressures on inflation are prevailing over upward ones. Most members highlighted that unprecedented capital outflows have been registered and that foreign investors have reduced their government bond holdings by over MXN 250 billion. One member indicated that this was caused not only by the global environment, but also by idiosyncratic factors. Another member pointed out that since the previous monetary policy decision, capital outflows have continued, although at a slower pace. One member considered that the recomposition of investors’ portfolios has contributed to generate tight financial conditions. Another member highlighted that the stock of foreign investment holdings in government bonds still represents close to USD 90 billion. Most members stated that over the last weeks the performance of Mexican financial markets has improved. Nevertheless, the majority of members mentioned that deteriorated trading conditions persist. Some members indicated that debt and foreign exchange markets continue to show reduced depth and a shortage of liquidity. One member added that this has distorted interest rates in certain nodes of the yield curve. Some members mentioned that sovereign risk has adjusted slightly to the downside, although one member considered that concerns over different risk factors remain high. On the other hand, some members underlined that the stock market index increased nearly 6% in the last month. One member pointed out that marginal inflows by foreign investors to the stock market were observed. Another member mentioned that said market and credit default swaps (CDS) continue to show a significant deterioration with respect to the levels observed at the beginning of the year. Most members mentioned that lower interest rates of government securities for all terms were observed. Most members specified that said reductions were influenced by the actions implemented by Banco de México. One member highlighted that during the last month interest rates decreased by over 100 basis points in some nodes of the yield curve. Another member pointed out that factors of concern, a steep yield curve, and the liquidation of positions, persist. As for the exchange rate, all members mentioned the significant depreciation observed this year. Most members underlined that it remains high, although some of them indicated that it has recently traded in a narrower range. One member pointed out that in the last few months the exchange rate has traded in a wide range and that trading spreads and intraday volatility have remained high, with unfavorable levels of liquidity and depth. In addition, he/she pointed out that in the derivatives market, a net short position in short-term instruments is maintained. He/she highlighted that the Mexican peso remains among the emerging market currencies with the highest annual depreciation. He/she added that said deterioration is similar to that observed in the 2008-2009 financial crisis and more pronounced than during the Taper Tantrum and the stated that financial conditions will continue to be subject to the outlook for the effects of the pandemic. Most members pointed out that this negative environment contributed to the downgrade of sovereign and Pemex’s credit ratings. Some members noted that two rating agencies maintained a negative outlook for Mexico. One member mentioned that they warned about further adjustments in the near future and that some market participants debate over when the sovereign will lose its investment grade rating. As to Pemex, some members expressed that it was affected by the fall in oil prices. One member mentioned that in the first quarter of the year it registered an historic loss of MXN 562 billion, and that it requires a high capitalization. He/she stated that although the exchange rate depreciation had the greatest impact on the company, its structural issues have gained relevance in the context of low oil prices, the confirmation of its loss of investment grade, and low margin for maneuver in public finances. Another member stated that the International Monetary Fund had noted that one of the main risks is the need for additional financial support for Pemex. One member pointed out that if its business model is not reformulated, Pemex will continue to draw resources from the public treasury. Most members mentioned that in view of the anticipated deficit increase and the fall in GDP, public debt is expected to increase as a fraction of GDP. One member added that this indicator will also increase due to the exchange rate depreciation. Another member mentioned that a shortfall of public revenue is foreseen for this year. He/she noted that even taking into consideration the use of resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP), the oil hedge revenues, and a lower programmable spending, the primary deficit would amount to 0.8% of GDP. He/she mentioned that in the medium term revenue collection will depend on the recovery of public and private investment to levels above the low values registered in recent years. He/she added that the referred credit rating revisions have contributed to a greater tightening of financial conditions for both the government and Mexican firms. In this regard, he/she emphasized that recently government bonds have been issued in US dollars with an additional premia, and at a higher cost than the issuances in January. He/she added that the shortage of new issuance and of refinancing operations by the corporate sector reflects tight financial conditions and investors’ risk aversion towards Mexican issuers. In view of the current situation, most members highlighted the importance of fiscal support sustainability of public finances. In this regard, some considered that measures to support the productive apparatus and to mitigate the effects of the pandemic have been insufficient. Most members acknowledged that there is little room for maneuver due to the sovereign debt mentioned that the economic contraction and the higher deficit expected for this year limit the room for maneuver even more. One member considered that there is limited space to issue additional debt and to implement a countercyclical fiscal policy. Nevertheless, he/she noted that additional reductions in the interest rate could contribute, although to a limited extent, to reduce the financial cost of the government and to free up space for fiscal stimulus. Meanwhile, another member considered that Mexico still has good access to international markets and that the current space should be utilized. Given the limited fiscal space, most members considered that efforts should be directed to a reallocation of the budget according to efficiency reallocation should be directed towards spending with an effect on the labor market in the short term. Another member stated that there are some margins for maneuver, such as the reallocation of public spending from controversial large-scale projects to priorities arisen as a result of the pandemic. In light of an adverse juncture, most members highlighted the need to generate public policies that provide certainty to private investment, along with the importance of maintaining solid macroeconomic fundamentals. One member stated that the latter contributes to an orderly adjustment of Mexican financial markets and of the economy as a whole. He/she mentioned the need for a strategy to mitigate the negative shocks, which at the same time maintains low and stable inflation as well as a solid and well-capitalized financial system. Some members expressed their concerns about the uncertain environment for investment. In particular, they mentioned the recent modifications in the rules for private sector participation in electricity generation using renewable sources. One pointed out that this measure affects the process of competition and free market participation. He/she added that these actions come in addition to others that modified contracts’ legal conditions after investments had been made, such as the cancellation of Mexico City’s New International Airport (NAIM, for its acronym in Spanish), the Federal Electricity Commission’s (CFE, for its acronym in Spanish) litigation over gas pipelines, the cancellation of the green-energy certificate system, and the suspension of the construction works for a new brewery plant. Another member considered that the health crisis, together with idiosyncratic factors, can reduce Mexico’s potential growth to levels not seen in many years, which would imply high economic and social costs. Therefore, this calls for strengthening communication and collaboration links with the private sector in order to create an environment conducive to investment. He/she added that to overcome the challenges originated by the crisis and to foster economic growth in the long run, a balanced policy approach is required. He/she emphasized that this is important given the deterioration of economic fundamentals in Mexico. Taking into account the foreseen impacts on inflation, economic activity and financial markets resulting from COVID-19 and considering the room for maneuver that on balance these grant to monetary policy, all members agreed to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest Most members pointed out that some emerging economies that have lowered their policy rates rapidly, have suffered a depreciation of their currencies, even despite having intervened in their foreign exchange markets. One member added that in some of these economies long-term interest rates also increased, in a context in which they are decreasing in most other economies. He/she emphasized that the adoption in Mexico of a more aggressive monetary policy approach aimed at stimulating the recovery would imply incurring in high risks in exchange for a modest impact on economic activity for well-known and substantiated reasons. Another member considered that although calls for implementing more aggressive actions to ease monetary policy have emerged, following a gradual strategy is essential in view of the environment of high uncertainty and the relevance recently gained by idiosyncratic factors, which represent risks for financial and macroeconomic stability. Some members considered that the present context grants a margin for lowering the policy rate further. Some members added that lower interest rates will contribute to a more effective functioning of Banco de México’s previously announced facilities to foster credit provision. One member argued that in view of an unprecedented recession, an inflation near the lower range of the variability interval, and in the verge of undergoing a massive unemployment crisis, it is important to continue easing monetary policy. He/she pointed out that given the relative and absolute monetary policy stances, there is room for a significant easing of monetary policy and that the low levels of inflation provide a margin for such an adjustment. He/she added that although uncertainty about its expected path persists, this factor should not be over-dimensioned and should be given less emphasis given the plummeting of economic activity and the loss of millions of jobs, about which there already is certainty. He/she added that at the global level monetary policy is very lax, which contributes to compensate for the increases in risk premia. Another member stated that the interest rate must be taken to more accessible levels in a relatively close horizon. He/she added that the cost and access to credit for micro, small-, and medium-sized firms —which are the ones that generate most of the jobs— are seriously affected during economic crises. He/she mentioned that if the effect of monetary policy on credit was limited, it would be necessary to resort to more drastic interest rate adjustments. He/she mentioned that the reductions to the policy rate that have already been implemented and which have decreased the interest rate spread with respect to the US Federal Reserve, have not led to a disorderly increase of the Mexican peso exchange rate, which means that there are other more important factors behind the behavior of said variable. He/she added that the target rate has been lowered at the same time that inflation expectations have declined. He/she stated that all of the above seems to indicate that looking ahead there is ample space to continue lowering the policy rate without generating inflationary pressures or jeopardizing the attainment of the inflation target. One member argued that the monetary policy decision must not only assess the dilemmas associated with the outlook for inflation in an environment characterized by a significant economic contraction, but also consider those associated with the financial shock in terms of both its global and idiosyncratic components. In particular, he/she mentioned that for a relatively small and open emerging economy, the process for determining the monetary policy stance should consider both the economy’s cyclical position and its influence on inflation, as well as the financial conditions that are being faced and its role in macroeconomic stability, including maintaining low and stable inflation. In particular, he/she highlighted: i) that it must be ensured that the yield curve adjusts in an orderly manner, without affecting long-term interest rates and maintaining inflationary risk premia at low levels; ii) that some of the effects of the lockdown and of the suspension of economic activities need to be considered, given that in the current environment the reduction of interest rates might have a lower or lagged effect on aggregate demand in the very short term, since the traditional channels of households and firms’ spending are not operating normally, and iii) that although in the steepest phase of the financial and risk aversion-related shock, interest rate spreads were not relevant in the portfolio adjustments that took place, in the following phases they could gain more relevance. He/she stated that there are elements of stability in domestic financial markets, and for the financial system as a whole, that must be considered in order not to induce or worsen an adjustment of portfolios. He/she mentioned that this is relevant for Mexico, as it stands out among emerging economies for having financial markets that are highly integrated to international ones and for having a fully convertible currency, where 80% of the volume is traded among non-residents. Considering all of the above, he/she stated that it is necessary to identify the different challenges and dilemmas that monetary policy faces, assess the scenarios that materialize, and based on these elements define the most convenient adjustments to the monetary policy stance. Another member considered that in the presence of a global shock and a substantial increase in risk aversion, the signals stemming from certain points of reference that are usually important for monetary policy implementation are now less obvious, which underlines the need for a cautious approach. In this regard, he/she highlighted less clarity regarding the impact of the interest rate spread with other economies. He/she argued that, similarly, in addition to the difficulties that are usually involved in estimating the neutral interest rate, it is likely that its use in the assessment of the monetary policy stance is limited in the current juncture. He/she emphasized that there is a greater than usual degree of uncertainty as to its magnitude and to the direction of the short-term deviations it may be showing versus its long-term level. The above, due to the lack of clarity regarding the relative importance of opposing effects on the neutral rate stemming from the various factors that are currently affecting the economy, among them the high level of uncertainty and the tightening of external financial conditions, which are probably combined with a lower potential growth. Most members stated that the outlook for monetary policy continues to be uncertain and complex. One member considered that the degree of uncertainty regarding the evolution of the main macroeconomic aggregates, of financial markets and the external environment, and thus of inflation, is unusually high. He/she mentioned that, under these conditions, it is necessary to act with prudence and take advantage of the margins to reduce the interest rate to the extent that the trajectory of inflation allows it. Another member pointed out that although tensions in domestic financial markets have moderated, several warning indicators persist. He/she mentioned that the historical capital outflows as well as the increase in sovereign risk and the depreciation of the Mexican peso, are evidence of lower appetite for domestic assets. Regarding future monetary policy decisions, one member pointed out that it is necessary to send a signal that monetary policy will continue easing depending on how the crisis evolves and of the possible deterioration of the economic and financial conditions. He/she mentioned that the speed at which the policy rate is lowered depends on: i) maintaining inflation at low levels and within the target; ii) the economic outlook, particularly, the effects of the pandemic; iii) the volatility of financial markets; iv) the risk that a very rapid reduction in interest rates leads to greater capital outflows, and v) idiosyncratic shocks such as a possible fiscal imbalance, a greater deterioration of credit ratings, increases in risk premia or other negative shocks to business confidence and governance. He/she added that decisive policy rate adjustments are needed in order to situate the monetary policy stance in a lax position and continually assess the possibility of making additional adjustments, even in unscheduled meetings. He/she added that monitoring the current situation constantly will allow for prompt and effective action. Another member considered that although he/she agrees that the evolution of the inflation determinants should allow for a further easing of monetary policy in the near future, in his/her opinion providing a more precise guide on the future path of monetary policy is complicated and even unwise in a context of such high uncertainty. One member was of the opinion that under the current juncture, the most prudent monetary policy would be to significantly lower the policy rate so that the real interest rate lays below its neutral rate as soon as possible, without ruling out the possibility of transitioning to a real interest rate close to cero or even negative. He/she added that not doing the aforementioned or postponing it for too long would be an unwise decision, as it would affect the domestic economy in a moment of crisis, it would harm financial markets and jeopardize price stability. Most members mentioned the relevance of implementing of the measures aimed at fostering an orderly behavior of financial markets, strengthening the credit channels, and providing liquidity in order to continue enabling the sound development of the financial system. Some members added that said measures also aim at preventing disruptions in the payments system. One member added that they are intended to allow firms and households to have access to the financing they need in the face of a temporary reduction in their income. He/she mentioned that the announced measures amount to MXN 800 billion, equivalent to measures need to be reinforced in three ways: i) by clearly communicating their scope and that they are being set within the limits imposed by the law; ii) by instrumenting them rapidly and effectively, and iii) by assessing their effects so that, if necessary, their duration and amount are increased in all extension and intensity, or even some additional measures are designed. He/she emphasized that immediate measures such as regulatory improvements, the easing of rules and regulations and a better governance do not have an impact on the fiscal deficit, but they do have an impact on the incentives for firms’ to resort to the financial system in search for increased credit to maintain their working capital. He/she pointed out that in addition to the latter, Banco de México, within its capacity and legal powers, must continue collaborating with the public and private sectors for the sake of the economic recovery. However, the financial sector must also be very proactive so that these resources are channeled easily to firms. In this regard, Banco de México must coordinate itself closely with the private and public sectors so that the implemented policies are more effective. He/she indicated that it is of utmost importance to respond to the economic emergency within the powers of the Central Bank and to its maximum capacity to support the population and the economy. He/she mentioned that this requires acting decisively within the margin that its primary mandate allows it, by communicating the need to adopt a more accommodative policy stance considering the lag with which monetary policy operates. He/she added that the present crisis requires thinking innovatively and acting boldly. He/she considered that for this reason it is important to send a message of unity and commitment to solve the crisis. One member considered that, to allow that the facilities announced by Banco de Mexico foster credit provision in a more effective manner, it is necessary to move towards interest rates that are below their neutral level, in a relatively short horizon. He/she argued that, otherwise, the coverage of these measures will be rather limited. Taking into account the referred risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets, major challenges arise for monetary policy and for the economy in general. Considering the room for maneuvering that on balance monetary policy has as a result of these implications, and with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 5.5%. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information and considering the large impact on productive activity as well as the evolution of the financial shock that we are currently facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.5%.