All members pointed out that the world economy and its growth outlook deteriorated rapidly and significantly as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. Most members agreed that the isolation measures adopted have contributed to the halt in economic activity, to supply chain disruptions, and to a decline of global demand. Some members mentioned that the pandemic has strongly affected the public health systems and social dynamics. Some argued that the possibility of a global recession in 2020 has increased, while one pointed out that, in general, a recovery is expected for next year. One member considered that, given the magnitude of the shock and the impact that has already been reflected in some economic indicators, a significant contraction is foreseeable during the first quarter of 2020, which could continue into the next quarter. Another member considered that the length and depth of the recession would depend on the duration of the suspension of activities. One member mentioned that the variation in the magnitude of the revisions to growth forecasts reflects the uncertainty regarding the intensity, duration and consequences of the impact. Among the risks to world economic activity, most members highlighted a greater-than-expected spread of COVID-19. One member underlined that, given the severity of the pandemic, it constitutes an unprecedented global risk factor. In particular, he/she emphasized the complexity of handling it, its rapid spread and the fatalities it can lead to. Some members mentioned the escalation of trade tensions along with political and geopolitical tensions as additional risks. One mentioned the US electoral process. Some members pointed out that the balance of risks for the world economy is significantly biased to the downside. All members mentioned that the prices of commodities, especially of crude oil, have plummeted. Most members underlined that this is due to the observed and anticipated reduction in demand and to disputes among the main oil producers. One member stated that headline and core inflation in advanced economies are expected to decline, due to the economic weakness and to the lower prices of primary goods. He/she mentioned that inflation in emerging economies could benefit from these factors, although it could also be affected to the upside by the depreciation of their exchange rates. Given the described environment, all members mentioned that different central banks in advanced and emerging economies lowered their interest rates, in some cases ahead of schedule. Most members mentioned that the US Federal Reserve held two unscheduled meetings, in which it cut the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points, down to a range of 0-0.25%. Such members pointed out that, globally, other extraordinary monetary measures have also been implemented to mitigate the effects of the expected fall in domestic and external demand, and to guarantee the well-functioning of financial measures to provide liquidity and incentivize credit, as well as the purchase programs of the following assets: i) government bonds; ii) bonds; iv) non-financial firms’ commercial papers; v) equity funds, and vi) real estate investment funds. Some members added that the US Federal Reserve established new liquidity swap lines with other central banks. One mentioned the decrease in the minimum reserve requirements for banks implemented by the US Federal Reserve. Another member mentioned that some central banks in emerging economies have taken measures to contain the depreciation pressures or to improve foreign exchange market trading conditions. Most members pointed out that the governments expansionary fiscal policies aimed at reducing the impact of the pandemic, in order to support households and businesses. However, one member pointed out that the announced measures have failed to alleviate the nervousness among investors, which makes it essential to have firm and integral policies, capable of coordinating both fiscal and monetary efforts that guarantee income and employment in strategic sectors, and that are perceived as sufficient to reverse the shock on economic activity. In this context, all members highlighted the significant deterioration of international financial markets, underlining the greater volatility and risk aversion. Some members indicated that the above is due to the uncertainty regarding the length of the pandemic and the extent of its effects. Most members added that it is also the result of the fall in oil prices. Some members mentioned that the deterioration of international markets is comparable to that observed during the 2009 global financial crisis. One member pointed out that this negative performance is expected to continue during the following months and underlined the high levels of the VIX index. Most members noted that stock negatively affected. One member stated that in advanced economies considerable outflows from stock markets towards fixed income instruments have been observed. Most members pointed out that emerging economies have also been affected, and emphasized the capital outflows that have exerted pressure on the exchange rates, interest rates and stock markets. Such members also noted that country risk indicators have deteriorated. One member highlighted that lower crude oil prices are a risk factor, given that all oil and gas companies are facing additional falls in the value of their assets, equity and debt securities. Another one stated that the balance of risks for financial markets is significantly biased to the downside. Most members mentioned that timely information released prior to the pandemic-related events shows that domestic economic activity has remained weak. On the production side, one member noted that the deceleration of industrial activity, particularly of manufacturing, as well as the weakness of services, which registered a higher number of subsectors with annual contractions, persisted. As for domestic demand, he/she mentioned that all components remain weak, especially investment, and, more recently, consumption. He/she pointed out that regarding external demand, automotive exports increased at the beginning of the year, while the remaining sectors exhibited weakness. Most members pointed out that technical shutdowns began to be observed across different sectors in March due to the shortage of inputs. Such members also noted that a significant impact on domestic demand is anticipated, in particular, on consumption and investment. Some members underlined the impact on domestic demand of the social distancing measures and the fear of contagion among the population. One member highlighted that, so far, economic activity and inflation indicators are still not reflecting the impact of the shocks caused by the pandemic and by the lower oil prices. He/she indicated that said shocks would materialize in a situation characterized by an inflation rate and its short- and long-term expectations above target, as well as by a weak economy. Most members mentioned that the disruption in global supply chains and the restriction of flows of individuals and international goods will strongly affect tourism and services in general. Some members added that households will face a contraction in their income and will have fewer spending opportunities. One member noted that, based on the experience of the A (H1-N1) epidemic in 2009, indeed, the strongest impact might be perceived in certain segments of the services sector, such as education, restaurants, tourism, and transport. He/she added that businesses will face significant challenges such as lower revenues and high uncertainty regarding the demand for their goods and services, which can generate solvency and unemployment problems. Some members mentioned that the manufacturing export sectors will also be affected. One member highlighted the possible impact of the global pandemic on Mexico’s external demand. Another one noted that additional technical shutdowns can occur due to the lack of inputs. Most members noted that the impact of the pandemic on economic activity, in a context of a greater weakness of the global economy, leads to a deterioration of the growth outlook. Such members stated that, although it is not possible to accurately estimate the magnitude of the impact on economic activity, an economic contraction is foreseen for 2020. One member pointed out that this would result from a combination of different shocks, from both the supply and demand sides. Some members noted that their length and depth would depend on the duration of the suspension of activities. One member added that, based on data provided by the authorities, the impact of COVID-19 is expected to worsen during the second quarter and to extend for a yet undetermined period. He/she mentioned that analysts and international organizations’ expectations for economic activity in 2020 and 2021 have been revised downwards. Some members specified that for 2020 these lie at a range of between -1% and slightly above -5%. One member noted that most estimates lie between -2 and -4%. Another member mentioned that estimates are still characterized by high uncertainty and a downward bias. Most members considered that the balance of risks for growth is strongly biased to the downside. Some members signaled the risk of a greater contagion of COVID-19. One member mentioned the possibility of a more prolonged impact on world economic activity. Meanwhile, some members stated that there are a number of risks for local financial markets, which could negatively impact domestic economic activity. One member specified that a pronounced epidemic phase would significantly affect the income of both the private and public sectors, and would contribute to a deterioration of credit risk, which could lead to financial and solvency problems. He/she added that the shock of oil prices is particularly negative for economies with an important hydrocarbon sector, such as the Mexican one, which will make the adjustment of the economy more complex. Finally, he/she acknowledged that domestic factors that affect both confidence and the economic outlook persist. As for the labor market, one member pointed out that the trend of lower job creation has prevailed. He/she added that, in the current context, employment is foreseen to be considerably affected. Some members considered that economic slack has increased. In view of the deteriorated growth outlook, most members mentioned that an even greater- than-anticipated widening of slack conditions is Most members mentioned that, between January and February, headline inflation increased, mainly due to a rebound in the non-core component. One member indicated that the latter was due to the comparison base effect and to pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices. Another member stated that the increase in the non-core index was anticipated, given expectations that the fall in agricultural and livestock product prices observed in 2019 would revert. As to the core component, some members highlighted that it has shown persistence. One member argued that this confirms that, despite the greater slack, other factors, such as wage increases, have prevented it from decreasing. Meanwhile, another member pointed out that this component remained on a slightly declining trend. He/she added that food merchandise inflation decreased after the increase observed in January, as a result of an adjustment to the Excise Tax (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish), and that services inflation continued to decline. Some members indicated that although inflation is expected to continue its trend to Banco de México’s target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates, it could be slower and is subject to important risks, both to the upside and to the downside. One member stated that, in view of the deterioration of global and domestic conditions, inflation forecasts are subject to high uncertainty. Another member considered that the combination of supply and demand shocks, as well as higher uncertainty, will probably result in upward pressures on inflation in 2020. As for inflation risks, most members mentioned that the expected widening of the negative output gap and the fall in international energy prices could imply downward inflation pressures. Nonetheless, such members considered that this could be offset by the upward pressure the peso exchange rate depreciation might exert on prices. One member argued that, even if the depreciation persists, it would occur in a context of economic contraction. He/she mentioned that the pass-through to prices will depend on the persistence of the exchange rate adjustment and on the economy’s cyclical position. Among upward risks for inflation, some members mentioned the pressures stemming from the disruption of global value chains and from the shortage of certain goods as a result of the suspension of activities. One member mentioned that a key price in the future developments of inflation is gasoline prices. He/she indicated that the international reference has declined by a greater percentage than the exchange rate depreciation, and thus the price of gasoline in Mexican pesos should decrease. He/she stated that this has already started to take place in different parts of the country. He/she added that, given its contribution to headline inflation and its role in the determination of other prices, the fall in energy prices would become an important downward bias for inflation. In this context, some members considered that the uncertainty over the balance of risks for inflation has intensified. One member highlighted that, given the complex environment, both upward and downward risks have increased. Another member stated that there is uncertainty over the magnitude and the duration of different supply and demand shocks, as well as over the persistence of adverse conditions in financial markets, and therefore their effect on inflation in the short, medium and long terms is uncertain. One member considered that the balance of risks is biased to the upside. Another one mentioned that it is slightly biased to the downside due to the following: i) the shock on agricultural and livestock product prices usually fades in a few months; ii) the fall in energy prices; and iii) although the peso exchange rate has depreciated, commodity prices and the fall in aggregate demand will end up exerting a greater influence on inflation. In an environment of greater risk aversion worldwide, most members highlighted that domestic financial markets exhibited a negative performance. Some members underlined the deterioration of trading conditions in these markets. In this context, all members noted that the peso exchange rate depreciated significantly. One member mentioned that this is explained by several factors, such as the greater risk aversion and the fall in oil prices, which also affected the exchange rate of other oil-exporting countries’ currencies. Some members added that this depreciation was greater than that observed in most emerging economies and one member added that the depreciation of the peso exchange rate vis-à-vis other emerging currencies reflects idiosyncratic factors, such as the concerns regarding Pemex and public finances, as well as the respective credit ratings, and that other risks such as those stemming from the US elections persist. The majority of members pointed out that interest significantly for all terms. One member added that over the last weeks, outflows by foreign investors have increased importantly. Some members highlighted that the stock market fell considerably. Most members noted that risk premia increased sharply. One member stated that the dramatic fall in oil prices contributed to such an increase, and thus Pemex continues to be a significant risk factor for public finances and raises an alarm regarding the possibility of a downgrade to the sovereign’s credit rating in the near future. The majority explained that, although interest rate spreads between Mexico and the United States widened, after adjusting for FX volatility, they have in fact been Most members mentioned the possibility of implementing fiscal measures to address the needs of the health sector and support the population, firms and sectors that are most affected. Some members stated that, given the constraints that public finances face, the above is subject to a reallocation of public spending that carefully considers the priorities to allocate resources to. Some members argued that an option for the government is to use the sources of extraordinary revenues at its disposal, which would enable it to meet the public balance target. One member added the possibility of postponing the primary surplus target at least for this year and stated that both options would imply a greater debt-to-GDP ratio. He/she emphasized that fiscal policy faces the dilemma between acting or not and the need to meet its fiscal targets or not. Another member noted that, in response to the contingency, increased spending would exert greater pressure on public finances, which already are in a vulnerable situation, and thus the possibility of a countercyclical fiscal support package should necessarily be accompanied by a reassessment of priorities that allows for an efficient allocation of available resources immediately to the needs of the health sector, and, at a later stage, to the reactivation of economic activity in the strategic sectors affected, firms, and families, as well as to a vigorous public investment. The majority of members warned that both the fall in oil prices and the lower economic growth increase fiscal accounts’ vulnerability. In this context, they highlighted the importance of maintaining the sustainability of public finances. One member added that this would be achieved with measures that boost economic growth. Most members pointed out that the already weak financial situation of Pemex became more complex due to the fall in oil prices. One member noted that an assessment of its current projects and a greater financial support by the federal government cannot be ruled out. Another member mentioned that, in light of the current juncture, Pemex’s business plan should be re-assessed. The majority emphasized that the situation of Pemex is a risk factor for public finances, underlining the possibility of a downgrading of both the sovereign and the State-owned company’s credit rating. One member stated that yield spreads on Pemex bonds have already increased considerably. Finally, some members pointed out that solving Pemex’s problems should be given special attention at this moment. Given an adverse juncture as the current one, the majority of members highlighted the importance fundamentals and adopting actions that foster a better adjustment of financial markets and of the economy overall. Similarly, they pointed out that, in an environment as the one described above, it is even more relevant to generate public policies that provide certainty to private investment. In this regard, some members warned that it is important to avoid changing the rules for already made investments. They expressed concern about the impact on investment confidence of the scheduled public consultation to authorize the operations of a brewery, whose construction is already 80% completed. Such members added that, if the project is cancelled, the negative effect on the business climate would be even greater. One member added that the controversies in 2019 regarding gas pipeline contracts awarded to the private sector increased the negative sentiment among investors. He/she argued that no monetary or fiscal measure would have the expected benefits if there is no confidence to invest. Some members noted the concerns of the private sector regarding the prevailing challenges in terms of legal certainty, insecurity, and public policies’ clarity. As for growth in the medium and long term, one member argued that: i) strengthening the rule of law; ii) increasing economic productivity; and, iii) promoting actions that improve confidence and investment expectations are essential. Given the foreseen impact of the shocks stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, most members decided to move forward the date of the monetary policy announcement from March 26 to 20 and lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.5%, as well as to adopt other measures to provide liquidity and improve the functioning of domestic financial markets. One member voted for lowering the target to 6.75%. One member added that all available tools to fulfill the constitutional mandate of preserving the peso’s purchasing power and ensuring the well-functioning of financial markets and payment systems must be used. The majority of members pointed out that, considering the risks implied by the COVID-19 monetary policy. In this regard, they highlighted that the economic outlook has deteriorated significantly, while the peso exchange rate has depreciated considerably, in an environment where risk premia and volatility in financial markets have increased. One member stated that, in light of the complex environment, the monetary policy decision must assess the trade-offs associated with the inflation outlook in an environment in which, despite the uncertainty as to the extent and persistence of the shocks it is subject to, it is highly likely that a significant economic contraction and recession occurs. He/she added that the above takes place in a context where the monetary conditions in the major economies have eased considerably, and such economies have adopted a broad range of stimuli to revert the deterioration of their financing conditions. He/she also noted that the situation of the current monetary policy stance should also be considered, as such stance, despite having faced other shocks and their inflationary effects over the last years, and albeit being already in a downward adjustment process, is still at relatively high levels, in an economy that, in face of the COVID-19 pandemic, will suffer a very sizable impact that will lead it to a significant recession. He/she mentioned that, additionally, the financial shock also associated with the pandemic may imply upward risks for the price formation process due to the pressures associated with the depreciation of the peso exchange rate. In this regard, he/she highlighted that its pass-through to prices will depend on the persistence of the foreign exchange adjustment and on the economy’s cyclical position, which is already characterized by a negative output gap that will widen considerably due to the pandemic shock. Most members considered that, in light of the higher risk premia, the relative monetary policy stance may not have such an ample margin as may be perceived. One member argued that, despite the greater volatility and higher risk premia, the relative monetary policy stance still has certain room for maneuver; however, he/she acknowledged that the absolute monetary policy stance is close to the neutral rate. Some members highlighted that the Mexican peso has a high level of sensitivity due to its use as a hedge currency and, therefore, it should be taken into account that lowering short-term interest rates in Mexico reduces the cost of this type of transactions. One member pointed out that given an environment of foreign exchange instability, a greater interest rate spread is needed, which implies acting with extreme caution. One member pointed out that a standard argument in favor of high interest rates is that they are a protective mechanism against risks, which allows for a better behavior of the exchange rate and that, ultimately, contributes to macroeconomic stability. However, he/she noted that those countries with greater interest rate spreads vis-à-vis the United States were those that recently suffered the most severe exchange rate depreciations, which is evidence against the above mentioned standard argument. He/she considered that some reasons explaining the above are i) that the high interest rates attract speculative capital that, in episodes of risk aversion, is the first to exit a market and at a speed that is usually greater than that at which it entered, so a gradual process of exchange appreciation could be followed by a sudden depreciation; ii) that maintaining a high real interest rate for a prolonged period erodes the macroeconomic foundations of the country, by decreasing consumption, investment and growth, and also affects public finances, which eventually impacts sovereign risk premia. He/she added that the lack of growth affects corporate earnings, which eventually affects equity markets. He/she noted that it should not be surprising that when the global economic outlook deteriorates, the most affected currencies are the ones of those economies that maintained very restrictive monetary policies, affecting the already deteriorated economic outlook. He/she stated that the economy is at a juncture where there are very worrying signs of a deterioration of economic activity, along with a stable, or even positive, outlook for inflation. He/she considered that, although the primary objective of Banco de México is to ensure the convergence of inflation to its target, this must occur with the lowest possible costs for the economy. He/she argued that continuing to maintain an overly restrictive monetary policy stance is very costly and risks the attainment of the inflation target itself. He/she noted that, given the economic outlook, and the downward risks to inflation, the Central Bank is responsible for minimizing the costs of monetary policy on the economy, and should therefore seek to move as soon as possible towards a neutral or even slightly accommodative policy stance. He/she noted that policy rates in some Latin American economies are at historically low levels. policy’s ability to mitigate the fall in economic activity that might be observed is limited. One member argued that this is because, in Mexico, the credit channel of the monetary policy transmission mechanism is less effective due to the low level of financial inclusion and in the presence of supply shocks. Nevertheless, he/she stated that the reduction of the policy rate sends an important signal of commitment with the economic challenge that is being confronted. Another one mentioned that in light of the effect of real shocks, such as those stemming from COVID-19, the scope of action of monetary policy is centered on the policy rate and on fostering an orderly functioning of financial markets; however, it cannot by itself offset the real effects of the observed shocks. One pointed out that it is widely accepted that, in Mexico, the effect of interest rates on economic activity throughout the cycle is modest. He/she also underlined that most analysts consider that although central bank actions can reduce financial tensions, it is very unlikely that monetary policy has a relevant impact on the real sector’s cyclical trajectory to confront shocks such as the one stemming from COVID-19. He/she stated that in the present juncture it is difficult to foresee a relevant response from consumers and firms to interest rate adjustments. He/she argued that in this type of cases the implementation of measures well targeted to the most affected sectors is more effective. Most members highlighted that the policy that is the most effective in responding to the current highlighted the importance of taking measures targeted directly to the fundamental causes of the crisis, that is, the public health problem. He/she indicated that it is difficult to expect a significant reduction in market uncertainty so long as important progress in that direction is not perceived. He/she pointed out that, simultaneously, other measures must be implemented that allow the productive sector and the financial system to avoid being severely damaged, which would allow for a fast recovery once the shock fades away. This member pointed out that the magnitude and nature of the financial crisis requires actions in different fronts and that monetary policy is only an instrument, and not the most important one. He/she added that actions to strengthen confidence in the authorities’ capacity to overcome the current situation would increase monetary policy’s margin of maneuver. Some members emphasized the importance of Banco de México acting with prudence and caution. One member considered fundamental for the monetary policy statement to mention that the Central Institute will follow closely the evolution of the present juncture and, within its sphere of competence, will take actions so that the economy adjusts in an orderly way to the current conditions. Another member argued that the nature of the shocks stemming from the pandemic and the lower oil prices has relevant differences for the case of Mexico, as compared to those observed in advanced economies, which have very low inflation levels, and in most emerging economies, which have inflation levels below their respective targets. In this context, he/she mentioned that concerns for inflationary pressures are lower, or even non-existent, in these economies. In contrast, he/she noted that Mexico’s monetary policy had already been facing a very complex situation due to a stagnant or slightly contracting economic activity being observed simultaneously with a relatively high inflation rate, and a situation of high uncertainty. He/she pointed out that, with the recent shocks, the degree of complexity has increased in all of these fronts. He/she added that, in circumstances of high uncertainty, it is preferable to err on the side of prudence. He/she mentioned that a downward correction to the policy rate is less problematic than an upward one, and that under the current conditions, the potential costs of excessively decreasing interest rates are greater than those of temporarily deferring their reduction. However, he/she acknowledged that the Central Bank must take advantage of the space that becomes available to further ease monetary policy, for instance, in light of clearer evidence that the demand shock will prevail over the other shocks, and that this is consistent with the convergence of inflation to the target during the period of influence of monetary policy. He/she added that the monetary authority must be ready to act in the way and direction so required, considering that the circumstances might change rapidly in any direction. One member argued that when assessing the magnitude and speed of a downward adjustment to the policy rate that must be undertaken in the current contingency, three limiting factors must be taken into account: i) Mexico is a small and open economy that is facing an external shock and the margin offered by the world’s lax external monetary policy is uncertain considering global risk premia and the sharp depreciation of the peso exchange rate; ii) monetary policy may have moderate effects given the sharp decline of economic activity under the current juncture; and iii) medium-term considerations of guaranteeing the convergence to the inflation target, given a balance of risks for inflation to the upside. Delving into said limiting factors, he/she pointed out that the Mexican economy currently faces an aggregate shock that has generated a reallocation of flows towards lower risk assets and currencies, and therefore an excessive reduction of the policy rate could exacerbate this phenomenon. He/she mentioned that the IMF recommends lowering interest rates to the extent possible and emphasizing forward guidance on the expected pattern of monetary policy. He/she underlined that, for emerging economies, this institution also recommends a balance between fostering growth and the evident need for liquidity to face external pressures. He/she added that this is the case of the Mexican economy, which by being linked to external markets, is more susceptible to adjustments in risk aversion. He/she underlined that the recent increases in this indicator have contributed to the significant depreciation of the peso exchange rate. In this regard, such member warned that even when econometric estimates suggest that the exchange rate pass-through to inflation is very low, the current levels of the peso exchange rate could affect inflation expectations. He/she also included the worsening of public finances as an additional risk factor that must be considered. He/she elaborated on the fact that medium-term considerations together with a balance of risks for inflation to the upside prescribe some degree of prudence in the path towards a lax policy stance. Such member mentioned that it is necessary to have a medium-term strategy that considers both a balance of risks for inflation to the upside and the postponing of the convergence to the target, as it already occurred and was mentioned in the Quarterly Report October-December 2019. He/she pointed out that the unanchoring of inflation expectations must be avoided. In this regard, he/she considered that an excessive easing would send a wrong signal for the formation of inflation expectations, and might compromise the convergence of inflation to the target. Nevertheless, he/she also mentioned that the emergency situation that is being faced with the current pandemic suggest putting less emphasis in meeting the point inflation target in the short run. Considering these limiting factors, this member indicated that the situation of crisis and emergency suggests that a significant reduction in the policy rate would be desirable. Nevertheless, in the proposal for the adjustment of the policy rate, he/she considered attaining a greater consensus in order to send a much clearer signal. He/she pointed out that a greater deterioration of financial markets will be considered in order to assess the need for implementing additional measures if required. He/she considered that in the present context of fragility and uncertainty, now more than ever Banco de México needs to remain vigilant to the current events and take into account relevant information for its decision making. Regarding the possible measures to supply Mexican peso and US dollar liquidity, all members agreed that these would contribute to improve liquidity conditions and to the well- functioning of domestic financial markets. Given the very significant and erratic adjustments in asset prices, one member highlighted the need for improving market trading conditions and fostering a better price discovery process. Another member stated that given the worsening of financial markets and the risks associated for the instrumentation of monetary policy and financial stability, Banco de México needs to act promptly, and underlined the following actions: i) lowering the target rate; ii) complementary measures to improve liquidity conditions, allowing financial institutions to offset the external pressures and prevent disequilibria in their balances or involuntary increases in their risk exposures; iii) additional measures to foster an adequate functioning of financial markets, and iv) moving the monetary policy decision forward as much as possible with the implicit message of urgency and of emergency in response the crisis induced by the coronavirus. He/she mentioned that by guaranteeing liquidity in financial markets, the aim is to support aggregate demand determinants as well as consumers and firms’ confidence. Thus, with these measures, a healthy behavior of the financial system is fostered. One member stated that now is the time to consider asset purchase programs like those adopted by other central banks. He/she mentioned that the latter makes sense given that part of the instability is due to the fall in oil prices originated by the combination of supply and demand shocks, where at least one of them is transitory. He/she added that the loss of value of some critical assets and the corresponding destruction of collateral must be avoided. He/she also mentioned that, under the current conditions, the measures to provide liquidity contribute to make more effective the transmission of monetary policy easing to the real economy. Most members stated that actions to improve the well-functioning of markets had already been adopted in previous days. In particular, they pointed out that on March 9[th], the Foreign Exchange Commission increased the size of its foreign exchange peso hedge program and auctions were carried out on March 12[th] and 18[th]. One member mentioned that these measures were taken to improve trading and liquidity conditions in the foreign exchange market and not based on the level of the peso exchange rate. Some members added that on March 19[th], Banco de México announced the establishment of currency swap lines with the US Federal Reserve for up to 60 billion US dollars, for at least 6 months. One member stated that these swap lines are mutual and temporary mechanisms similar to those agreed between the US Federal Reserve and other central banks, including Banco de México, in 2008. He/she highlighted some of the benefits of the proposed measures: i) US dollar auctions contribute to a better functioning of the foreign exchange rate market, preventing possible distortions in US dollar financing, using the currency swap line agreed with the Federal Reserve; ii) the reduction in the cost of collateralized financing of more than twice the funding rate to one slightly above the funding rate, increases the peso-financing alternatives for the banking system; iii) the reduction of the monetary regulation deposit increases the availability of resources for commercial and development banks to address the additional financing requirements of households and firms; moreover, it offers important benefits by being implemented directly and implying a reduction of Central Bank liabilities rather than an increase in its lending; iv) the strengthening of the market makers program, which is a program sponsored by the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit and in which Banco de México participates as a financial agent, may offer market makers new alternatives to better manage their holdings of securities as well as additional incentives to purchase securities, thus improving operations in the government securities market and the conditions to buy/sell securities. Considering the risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets implied by the COVID-19 pandemic, significant challenges arise for monetary policy and for the economy in general. In light of the foreseen implications, with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and in adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a successful adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.5%. Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 6.75%. The COVID-19 pandemic, together with the fall in international oil prices, have increased the already complex challenges of monetary policy by exerting pressures in opposite directions for inflation and by raising uncertainty, as reflected in the latter’s case by the peso exchange rate having undergone the greatest depreciation among emerging market currencies since mid-February. This situation, along with other domestic and external challenges, demand that monetary policy be implemented prudently, and taking into consideration that the impact of the interest rate on economic activity, modest for Mexico according to numerous calculations, is even more limited in the presence of shocks such as the one currently faced. With a diffuse scenario for inflation and a high level of nervousness in financial markets, I believe that lowering the policy rate by 25 basis points is preferable. In a rapidly changing environment, monetary policy must adjust at the time and in the magnitude required, and the Central Bank must continue to foster orderly conditions in domestic financial markets and in the foreign exchange market. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind that, in order to overcome the crisis, public health and fiscal actions need to be taken.