Most members pointed out that the world economy continues to decelerate. In this respect, some members noted the weakness of industrial production and international trade. One member stated that the above stemmed from the impact of trade tensions on such variables and on investment and business confidence. As to economic activity in advanced economies, some members agreed that industrial production showed weakness. One member mentioned that growth and job creation in these economies were associated to the expansion of the services sector. Most members stated that labor markets in advanced economies continued Most members pointed out that a gradual recovery of the global economy is expected in 2020 and in 2021. One member added that this would be fundamentally driven by a rebound in emerging economies. Another member noted that, in a context of loser financial conditions, uncertainty continues to affect trade, industrial production, investment, and business confidence. He/she considered that, given the environment of uncertainty, a further easing of financial conditions has led to leveraging of households and businesses, rather than capital accumulation. He/she added that this could increase financial vulnerabilities and reduce the margin of maneuver for monetary policy. Most members indicated that some risks to the global economy have subsided, in light of: i) the US-China phase 1 trade agreement; ii) the agreement of withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union; and, iii) the USMCA ratification by the U.S. Nonetheless, they stressed that factors of uncertainty persist, such as the effects of the coronavirus outbreak. One member cautioned about its possible impact on global value chains. Another member specified that growth forecasts for 2020 for China and for the global economy already show downward revisions, although to a lower degree in the case of the global economy. He/she added that, in view of a lower demand by China and other economies, commodity prices, such as energy prices, have decreased, which could affect producing countries. Most geopolitical risks, such as i) the US electoral process; ii) conflicts in the Middle East; and, iii) the reemergence of tensions between the U.S. and other economies. One member mentioned the possibility of complications in the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union. Most members considered that the balance of risks for the world economy is still biased to the Most members noted that global inflation remains low. They stated that in advanced economies headline and core inflations remain below their respective central banks’ targets. One member noted that the global economic slowdown has contributed to the above. Another member added that this has taken place in a context in which labor market strengthening has implied moderate pressures on wages and prices. Another member mentioned that the lower energy prices could exert downward pressures on global inflation. Finally, one member considered that the balance of risks for global inflation is biased to the downside, although he/she mentioned that in some economies inflation pressures are starting to emerge, as a result of the higher food prices. Most members underlined that central banks in accommodative monetary stances. One member pointed out that in some cases the monetary stimulus was increased. Most members mentioned that in January the Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, and that it highlighted that such rate is at an adequate level to reach its objectives. Some members noted that analysts do not expect changes in the federal funds rate in 2020, although market expectations point to an additional easing. One member stated that markets do not anticipate increases in the target rate, as long as a sustained growth in inflation is not observed. Another one mentioned that Federal Open Market Committee members do not expect changes in the referred rate in 2020 and anticipate a members noted the possibility of central banks adopting more accommodative monetary policy stances in view of the risks associated with the In this context, most members emphasized that global financial conditions have continued to loosen. One added that this has also been due to the decline in some of the mentioned risks. Some members noted that globally, stock markets registered gains and interest rates exhibited decreases. One member highlighted that in the U.S. the yield curve has flattened, even showing an inversion in its shorter maturities, as a reflection of the risks for US economic activity. Most members indicated that the good performance of global markets has favored capital flows to emerging coronavirus outbreak have been observed. They also pointed out that there are factors that could contribute to episodes of risk aversion, such as those already mentioned for world economic All members agreed that economic activity in Mexico has remained stagnant for several quarters. Most members noted that the latest information as of the fourth quarter of 2019 whole. One member added that this is accounted for by: i) an unfavorable global context; ii) the beginning of a new administration; iii) some controversial public policy decisions that contributed to generate uncertainty; and, iv) a tight monetary policy for a relatively long period. Regarding this point, he/she mentioned that the high real interest rate in Mexico has negative implications for consumption and investment decisions. Most members highlighted the weakness in aggregate demand components, emphasizing mentioned that investment has been affected by the public budget underspending and the lack of both legal certainty and domestic and external certainty, which has had an impact on private investment. performance of investment in machinery and equipment in 2019, although one of them mentioned that recently it has slightly recovered. Another member mentioned that non-residential construction has trended downwards since early 2015 and added that consumption has slowed down since the beginning of the year. Most members stressed the slowdown of manufacturing exports in late 2019. One member added that these were affected by an automotive strike and by the industrial weakness in the U.S. On the supply side, most members stressed the negative performance of the industrial sector. One member pointed out that industrial activity closed the year below expectations. Some members highlighted the contraction in construction and mining, although one member noted that both have exhibited a slight upward trend after having deteriorated for several years. Finally, some members stressed the weakness of the services sector. Regarding the labor market, some members emphasized the decline in the rate of job creation. One member highlighted that as of January 2020 approximately half of formal jobs were created as compared to the same period of last year. Another member indicated that, although the unemployment rate reached a historic minimum in December 2019, it is necessary to take into account the higher number of withdrawals of funds from Afore Pension Funds Manager accounts due to unemployment, the higher underemployment rate, and that other indicators of formal job creation are at levels similar to those observed in mid-2008, which shows the weakness of the labor market and the deterioration of the quality of employment. He/she indicated that the impact of the economy’s weakness on the labor market will certainly be exacerbated in the next months. Some members stated that the costs for employment originated by wage increases not associated with productivity growth should be considered. One member pointed out that the experience with minimum wage adjustments and the evolution of employment in the Northern border free zone and adjacent municipalities is revealing in such regard. Most members agreed that stagnation of conditions have continued to widen. One member noted that exogenous cost pressures, such as those related to wages, could hamper the recovery of production and the narrowing of the negative output gap. Most members mentioned that, based on the most recent information, GDP growth in 2020 is expected to be lower than the figure released in the Quarterly Report July – September 2019. One member added that GDP growth is also expected to be lower in 2021. Another one added that such forecasts are in line with the adjustments made by international organizations and analysts. Some members stated that the economic expansion in announcement of the energy sector investment plan, the dissipation of transitory shocks that affected exports and manufacturing production, as well as a more efficient public spending, after the first year of the administration. Nevertheless, they considered that there are few elements that anticipate a significant improvement of investment. One member added that budget spending on fixed investment will remain at low levels and could even be lower than those programmed. As for consumption, some members mentioned that it is likely to recover. One member added that this would be supported by the expected growth in the wage bill and in remittances. Another member considered that, in his/her opinion, consumption is expected to lose dynamism. Most members considered that the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside. Some members mentioned that this situation has worsened in light of the above mentioned global risks. Most members added that economic activity is subject to both external and domestic risks. In the external environment, in addition to the described global risks, some members stated that considerable challenges are foreseen regarding the USMCA implementation, given that the increase in investment and the reconfiguration of value chains will take time. One member noted that world trade and the integration of global value chains still face considerable risks in the medium term. Another member highlighted the potential negative impact of the deceleration of the US economy, and, particularly, of the stagnation of industrial production foreseen in that country, on Mexican exports. In the domestic environment, most members noted that the persistence of an environment of uncertainty regarding public policies could continue affecting business confidence and investment. In this regard, one member mentioned that, in the event of a deterioration of the sovereign or Pemex’s debt rating, this would decrease the availability of loanable funds for investment. Finally, another member added further reductions in public revenue as an additional risk. With respect to upward risks for growth, one member mentioned that economic activity could benefit from a more favorable global context. Another member underlined that investment could be boosted by the entry into force of the USMCA, which could contribute to reverse its decreasing trend and consolidate North America’s integration. Meanwhile, some members considered that the positive impact of the USMCA on investment will be hardly sufficient to boost it, due to the uncertainty over several policies. One member pointed out that the above is based on the remarks by specialists and business agents drawn from different surveys. All members mentioned that in early 2020 annual headline inflation increased, although some of them highlighted that at the end of 2019 it stood below 3%. Most members underlined that the recent increase was mainly associated with the rise in the non-core component. One member pointed out that the later was due, among other factors, to comparison base effects and to pressures on certain agricultural product prices. Another member highlighted that the monthly inflation rates of December and January were lower than the average of previous years and lower than those anticipated by the market. Most members stated that core inflation was affected by the increase in the prices subject to the special tax on production and services (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish) and that it continues to show resistance to decline. The majority considered that its behavior is also due to the evolution of wages. Some members pointed out that data confirms that the subindexes that are more labor intensive and more related to wages, have had the highest increases. Most members noted that core inflation does not appear to have been too sensitive to slack conditions. Some members mentioned that, in the absence of pressures stemming from demand, from the peso exchange rate, or from indirect effects from the non-core component, it can be argued that one of the main factors explaining the behavior of core inflation is the evolution of wages. One member stated that certain inertia in price setting may be added to the above. Another member highlighted that the prices of food merchandises and of their related services are the ones with the highest increases. One member considered that the rise in the core component mainly concentrated in food merchandises affected by the IEPS increase, while non-food merchandise and services price inflation continued to decrease. He/she underlined the reduction observed in inflation of services prices observed from April to January, and in particular of the prices of services other than education and housing, which are the most likely to be related with wage dynamics. Most members noted that short-, medium-, and long-term headline inflation expectations have remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above 3%, while core inflation expectations for the same terms were revised upwards. One member highlighted that the breakeven inflation and inflationary risk premium implied in fixed income instruments has continued to decrease. The majority of members mentioned that in light of the recent behavior of the factors affecting the foreseen path of inflation, headline and core inflation are expected to be moderately above the forecasts published in the latest Quarterly Report. Some members pointed out that this adjustment will possibly complicate inflation from attaining the 3% target at the end of the year. Some members stated that the foreseen path still considers that inflation will converge to the target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, although some members noted that a temporary rebound is expected. One member explained that this is due to a comparison base effect and that such increase is expected to reverse considerably in April. Another member noted that in the following quarters the level of core inflation will largely depend on the interaction between, on the one hand, the greater economic slack and the lower prices of energy goods and, on the other, the effects of the minimum wage increase, which may generate cost pressures that affect employment and prices. He/she stated that, although the final result is difficult to anticipate since it is unusual for the economy to face labor cost pressures during the lower part of the business cycle, a slight upward revision in core inflation is expected. Regarding upside risks to the foreseen trajectory for inflation, most members mentioned core possibility that wage increases affect prices. One member emphasized that minimum wage increases may maintain or intensify the core component’s persistence. Another member highlighted the minimum wage increases accumulated in the last two years and the mean salaries for IMSS-contribution purposes in 2019. He/she argued that such increases will possibly continue in 2020 and that therefore they should not be considered as a transitory shock but rather as one that will be present in the medium term. He/she stated that it is not clear if wage increases may greatly affect inflation, however, it cannot be concluded either that they will have no impact at all. The same member noted that empirical evidence on this regard should be considered. Most members added as upside risks a possible exchange rate adjustment, as well as greater-than-expected increases in agricultural and livestock prices. Some members mentioned the possibility of non-core inflation reversing to levels greater than anticipated due to the high variability of this subindex. One member added that, although the gasoline pricing policy favors lower levels and volatility, not all energy good prices are being controlled. In addition, the majority mentioned the risk of a deterioration of public finances. Finally, one member pointed out that the rebound observed in January, which is considered transitory, will probably occur again in February and has the risk of generating inertia on inflation for the rest of the year. Another member stated that inflation risks have decreased. He/she noted that the above described benign global conditions have had a favorable impact on the peso exchange rate and that the recent decrease in commodity prices has a favorable impact on production costs. As for downside risks for inflation, most members mentioned: i) a further appreciation of the peso exchange rate in response to greater risk appetite; ii) lower international prices of energy goods due to the coronavirus outbreak; and, iii) greater economic slack. One member also added the benign behavior of producer prices. In this context, some members pointed out that uncertainty continues as to the balance of risks for the foreseen path of inflation. Others stated that it remains biased upwards and one member highlighted that risks for inflation have decreased. performance of domestic financial markets. They mentioned that such performance was due to a favorable environment in international financial markets. Some members added that Banco de Mexico’s monetary policy stance also contributed to the good performance of domestic markets. The majority pointed out that yields on government securities decreased for all terms. One member highlighted that the greater reductions were in the longer terms. Another member underlined that both nominal and real interest rates have fallen. He/she stated that the components of nominal long-term interest rates show that, in the last months, shortterm interest rate expectations and term premia have decreased. One member highlighted that the 10-year rate is currently 200 basis point below the level observed towards the end of 2018. Most members mentioned that the peso appreciated, showing a better performance than the currencies of other emerging economies. One member noted that the stock market improved marginally. Some members emphasized that sovereign risk premia decreased. One member argued that the sound macroeconomic and monetary policy stance has been key in reducing such premia. Another member mentioned that sovereign credit default swaps (CDS) are at nearly half the level observed at the end of 2018. In this regard, another member noted that they are still traded above those of comparable economies and incorporate a sovereign rating downgrade. The majority of members considered that external performance of domestic markets persist. One member expressed that the most important risks stem from a possible downgrade of Mexico’s sovereign debt and/or Pemex’s debt rating, of the evolution of public finances, and of the US presidential elections. maintained and that, to strengthen the country's macroeconomic framework and growth capacity, in addition to a prudent monetary policy, public finances must be consolidated in a sustainable way. The majority added that measures that generate confidence and certainty are essential. One member added that a healthy and wellcapitalized financial system must be maintained, in addition to reducing both Mexico’s sovereign and Pemex’s credit risk. He/she also noted that strengthening the rule of law and increasing productivity by adopting new technologies and enhancing human capital is also fundamental. Another member stated that, if the deterioration in physical capital formation continues, and given the lack of a more productive human capital stock, there is a risk of undermining the foundations of mediumand long-term growth, thus affecting potential growth. Some members added that, based on the opinion of business agents and analysts, among the obstacles to economic activity are those related to governance problems (public insecurity, political instability, impunity and corruption) and uncertain domestic economic conditions. Regarding Pemex’s situation, one member pointed out that, although a slight rebound in oil production has been observed, the target for 2020 appears optimistic given that investment is lagging behind. He/she noted that the fulfillment of the approved balance for 2019 was not the result of a structural improvement, but rather of the increase in supplier financing, of lower oil derivatives imports, and of a fall in physical investment. Another member stated that the loss of Pemex’s investment grade may generate financial volatility, although he/she mentioned that markets to a large extent have already discounted the risk of a downgrading of its credit rating. Thus, some members argued that questions regarding Pemex’s medium-term financial viability have not disappeared. They explained that additional funding by the federal government will probably be required. One member mentioned that this year the resulting challenges for public finances are exacerbated in the face of an outlook for economic growth and oil income being lower than previously foreseen. He/she indicated that although in 2020 this situation may be addressed with the use resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in Spanish), the vulnerability of the public finances would increase in the coming years given the longterm challenges Pemex faces and the probable exhaustion of federal government reserve funds. He/she emphasized the need for implementing actions that allow Pemex to overcome its structural problems as soon as possible. Some members mentioned that the risks for both Mexico’s sovereign and Pemex’s credit ratings have decreased. One member highlighted the reduction of the state ownedcompany’s interest rate and its CDS. He/she noted that the recent bond repurchase and refinancing operations were successful, which shows that there is a greater appetite for Pemex’s bonds, in line with its improved financial situation. As for public finances, one member highlighted the primary surplus achieved and the stabilization of the public debt as a share of GDP, after having increased between 2008 and 2016. He/she noted that the lax fiscal behavior in those years led to macroeconomic imbalances that affected the exchange rate and inflation. He/she pointed out that, although debt decreased to around 46% of GDP in 2017, this was artificially achieved by the transfer of Banco de México’s surplus in 2016 and 2017. He/she stated that the behavior of public finances in 2019 sends a message of credibility and commitment to fiscal discipline. Another member mentioned that in 2019 revenues closed below those programmed and that the fiscal balance target was achieved with the use of FEIP resources and that without the use of those resources the primary balance would have been continue in 2020 since, according to the consensus of private sector forecasters, economic growth will be half the programmed. He/she warned that, if this scenario materializes, additional resources from the FEIP would be withdrawn. He/she argued that using these resources without implementing measures that permanently increase income aggravates the vulnerability of public finances. He/she added that, if there were significant rises in the international reference prices for gasoline, this may have a high fiscal cost. Regarding Banco de México’s monetary policy unanimously to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7%. Among the elements considered in this decision, the following stand out: the levels attained by headline inflation, its outlook within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, the greater economic slack, and the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves. As additional factors in making the decision one member added: i) the decline of inflation risks; ii) the environment of low international interest rates; iii) the favorable performance of domestic markets; and, iv) the peso exchange rate’s strength given external shocks. Another member added the lower credit risk premia and the improvement in the country-risk perception, as well as the stability of public finances and the lower uncertainty regarding international trade. He/she argued that, although some latent risks remain, monetary policy has room to maneuver. Some members considered that given the economic environment, the current monetary policy continues being very restrictive. One member specified that Mexico’s real interest rate is the highest among a large group of economies, including those that have a credit rating lower than Mexico’s. He/she argued that a very restrictive monetary policy for an extended period can jeopardize macroeconomic and financial stability, and affect consumption and investment. He/she mentioned that the analysis by a brokerage estimated a cost associated with the restrictive monetary policy of 0.7% of GDP in 2019 and of 1% in 2020. The same member noted that by affecting growth, it also has effects on the performance of both firms and the stock market, as well as on public finances, by increasing the financial cost of debt and lowering tax collection. The same member added that this makes domestic financial markets less attractive and affects risk premia and the exchange rate. For this reason, he/she considered that insofar as the inflation rate close to the target is consolidated, it will be necessary for monetary policy to transition towards a stance closer to neutral. Another member pointed out that the target rate in early 2019 was very restrictive, 3.4% in real terms, and with a spread of 575 basis points against that of the United States. He/she highlighted that, despite the interest rate cuts, an absolute easing was not achieved given that the real rate closed the year at 4.4%. As to the relative monetary policy stance, he/she noted that the spread against the United States decreased only by 25 basis points towards the end of the year, remaining as one of the highest spreads. He/she pointed out that it turns out to be even higher when considering the lower exchange risk, the greater risk appetite, and that no changes are expected in the accommodative monetary policies worldwide. He/she stated that, as to the absolute policy stance, economic slack demands a lower rate of return on capital, and that for such reason there must be consistency with the neutral rate. In sum, he/she considered that both stances point to the need for a greater rate easing in order to attain the primary objective at the lowest possible cost. stagnation responds to multiple factors. The majority also mentioned that using monetary policy to reactivate the economy would have modest benefits and could imply a high risk. One member indicated that monetary policy has been criticized as causing to a large extent the stagnation. He/she considered that, nevertheless, its impact has been marginal. The same member pointed out that at this point it is important to acknowledge the limits and scope of monetary policy. He/she stated that, on the one hand, an overly restrictive policy may affect investment and consumption but it is not the main factor behind their loss of dynamism. The same member added that, on the other hand, the monetary policy implemented has yielded significant benefits in terms of financial and exchange rate stability and ensuring the purchasing power of wages. Another member mentioned that recent research suggests that given the high share of informality in the economy and the low credit penetration, the impact of the interest rate and credit channels to stimulate economic activity is limited, while the expectations channel is the predominant one to control inflation. He/she added that although a more significant monetary policy easing could improve the fiscal balance, it would not correct the structural problems of public finances. He/she also pointed out that the lack of dynamism of investment is due to the lack of certainty on public policies and concerns about domestic factors, such as governance, rule of law, and corruption, which remain as the major obstacles for private investment. In this regard, another member mentioned the importance of maintaining an environment of greater certainty, arguing that the central bank can contribute to that by ensuring macroeconomic and financial stability. One member mentioned that, given the development of core inflation, the challenge is for wage increases not to affect inflation and nullify the improvements in purchasing power attained. He/she estimated that inflationary pressures from the supply side are difficult to control with monetary policy, even more when they are the result of a medium-term policy, such as the wage policy. He/she pointed out that a wage policy is successful when it is able to permanently increase the purchasing power and generate better-paid jobs. He/she argued that caution and prudence must be applied in order to assess the best time to modify the rate of easing, taking into account that the goal is to contribute to improve the purchasing power of wages. Such member considered that although there are elements that suggest lowering the policy rate, given the persistence of core inflation and the permanent shock of wages, the balance of risks is uncertain in the short and medium terms. Most members pointed out the challenges faced by monetary policy. Some indicated the difficulty in reconciling an ample economic slack with inflationary pressures and mentioned that there is the prospect of postponing the consolidation of inflation around the target. One member pointed out that headline and core inflation expectations are converging to at that level, while long-term core inflation expectations have increased. If the aforementioned prevails, it would be a factor of concern that could be considered as a second-round effect on prices. Thus, he/she argued that there are signs that core inflation expectations are un-anchoring, in addition to which an environment of high uncertainty prevails. He/she considered that in this context the challenges for monetary policy have been exacerbated, thus it must continue to be conducted prudently. He/she mentioned that despite the cautious approach that has been followed, the risks of second-round effects on prices have increased. He/she argued that the central bank must focus on attaining its target within the time frame of monetary policy influence. He/she added that, at the same time, it must be ensured that the convergence to the target takes place in an orderly manner, avoiding potential costs for economic activity. economic slack has widened more than expected, the challenges faced by the economy are not only those associated with its cyclical position. He/she mentioned that there are other challenges and risk factors, both domestic and external, which affect the economy, the price formation process, and inflation. Such member noted that although under an inflation targeting framework monetary policy must be such that headline and core inflation forecasts remain around their target within the forecast horizon, it must also consider other elements. Among these, he/she mentioned the external environment, the greater amount of economic slack and the need to foster adequate conditions in financial markets. In addition to the above, he/she highlighted that monetary policy decisions must also: i) allow for an orderly adjustment of the economy; ii) consider the behavior of domestic and external yield curves and the corresponding risk premia; iii) maintain interest in Mexico as an investment destination and generate confidence; iv) consider the effects of the relevant relative monetary conditions; and, v) ensure the yield curve incorporates interest rate expectations consistent with the central bank targets within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. He/she argued that the latter implies that the adjustment of the monetary policy stance: i) must be done gradually to maintain the needed flexibility to face a wide range of scenarios and allow the required adjustments to be done in an orderly way; ii) must take into account all information available; iii) must fully respond to all expected factors and features of the Mexican economy and in a wide range of scenarios; and, iv) must lead to an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. The majority of members highlighted the consistent with the evolution of both the balance of risks for inflation and the economic juncture. One member stated that a prudent and gradual approach must be taken given the environment of uncertainty. Another member pointed out that under such circumstances the future actions of the monetary policy must rely on the available information at the time of the policy decision since attempting to provide a more precise guideline in an uncertain environment, can affect the central bank’s credibility. One member added that the message that the monetary policy stance is consistent with the attainment of the inflation target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates must be maintained. Another member argued that the rate of the adjustment must be considered period by period, must rely on incoming information, and must maintain a trajectory of inflation converging to the target. He/she underlined that a further deterioration of the balance of risks could limit taking advantage of the margin of maneuver for the relative and absolute policy stances in the future. Such member added that since the rate of adjustment affects expectations, a prudent policy adds to a sounder anchoring and maintains the central bank’s credibility. He/she pointed out that the central bank must remain alert as to avoid being complacent with a relatively low inflation but which is above the target. Nevertheless, one member considered important that such guideline acknowledges the convenience of adjusting the monetary policy stance to a less restrictive one in a relatively short period, with such an adjustment being conditioned to the favorable evolution of the inflation outlook. He/she argued that based on available information, it is possible to envision a scenario in which the interest rate’s neutral zone is attained by the end of this year. He/she estimated that a scenario like the above would not jeopardize the outlook for inflation but it would improve the economic perspectives. With the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7%. To this end, the current levels of headline inflation, the inflation outlook within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, the greater amount of economic slack, and the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves, were considered. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions based on incoming data so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. To strengthen the macroeconomic framework and the country´s growth capacity, in addition to a prudent monetary policy, public finances must be consolidated in a sustainable way. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to a level of 7%.