All members mentioned that the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent its spread have affected world economic activity considerably. Some members added that these have had an important impact on employment. One member emphasized the repercussions on manufactures, on processes integrated into global value chains, and person-to-person services. He/she pointed out that the damage has been immediate and abrupt, both to supply and demand. Some members stated that sanitary measures have proven to be somewhat effective in reducing contagion, with differentiated results across jurisdictions. In this context, they noted that the main advanced economies started reopening their activities. One member stressed that Latin America has become the epicenter of the crisis, given that, among other factors, the high degree of informality and poverty hinder compliance of social distancing measures. Most members stated that the contraction of economic activity observed during the first quarter intensified during the second, although in May certain indicators for various economies exhibited some improvement. One member expressed that the deterioration during the second quarter is likely to be lower than previously anticipated. Another member argued that retail sales along with certain leading indicators in advanced economies, such as the purchasing managers’ and consumer confidence indexes, remain at levels much lower than those registered prior to the pandemic. All members pointed out that in this context multilateral organizations and analysts have once again revised their economic expectations for 2020 downwards. Some members mentioned that falls in world GDP of between 4.9 and 6% are anticipated. One member stated that it is reasonable to expect that the world’s economic recovery will be slower than previously estimated. Most members underlined that a recovery is expected during the second half of the year and in 2021, although said expectations are subject to a high degree of uncertainty. Among risks to mentioned a second outbreak of infections. Some members added the risk that fiscal relief measures are insufficient or are withdrawn prematurely. One member noted the significance of the latter risk for economies showing considerable levels of indebtedness. Some members mentioned the possibility of additional episodes of turmoil in international financial markets. Some members added the possibility of political and social instability associated with the deterioration of socioeconomic conditions. One member mentioned the resurgence of trade disputes and the presidential elections in the U.S. In this context, some members pointed out that the balance of risks for world economic growth remains biased to the downside. Some members mentioned that weak global demand has brought about contractions in commodity prices, especially of energy products. One member stated that this has affected public revenue and emerging economies’ terms of trade. Another member pointed out that although these prices are still at low levels as compared to the beginning of the year, their quotes have improved and market instruments suggest stability in the future. Most members mentioned that in advanced economies headline and core inflation are below their central bank’s targets. Some members stated that in most economies, including emerging ones, inflation has declined due to a lower demand for a wide range of goods and services. They pointed out that this occurred despite the supply constraints and the increases in the prices of food and medical services. One member added that a low inflation trajectory is anticipated at the global level, while another one added that in emerging economies expectations drawn from market instruments remain at low levels. In view of the described environment, most members highlighted that central banks in advanced and emerging economies have eased their monetary policy stances. The majority of schemes to promote the well-functioning of their financial systems. Likewise, most members expressed their readiness to maintain easing measures for as long as necessary or even to strengthen them. Some members stressed that the Federal Reserve projections estimate the federal funds target range to remain between 0 and 0.25% at least until 2022. One member added that said central bank announced the possibility of implementing a yield curve control scheme. Another member noted that in most emerging economies central banks have continued to ease their monetary stances and that real interest rates in these countries are currently close to 0% or are even at negative levels. Most members stated that various countries have adopted important fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the adverse effects on employment and on households’ and firms’ incomes. One member expressed that certain advanced economies, by having a reserve currency and well-developed institutions, have managed to promote a significant and broad range of relief measures for employment and guarantee programs for businesses and households. He/she added that in emerging economies a greater heterogeneity is observed regarding the amount and the type of implemented measures. All members highlighted that, since the last markets have exhibited a positive behavior, reflecting the effects of the fiscal, monetary and financial stimulus measures adopted by the advanced economies and the gradual reopening of their productive activities. Most members highlighted the lower risk aversion, the increase in stock market indexes, the appreciation of currencies against the US dollar, a certain reduction in government bond yields, and an increase in commodity prices. Some members recalled that initially the pandemic had propitiated an increase in risk aversion, a deterioration of financial conditions and a recomposition of investors’ portfolios. One member pointed out that, despite the recent improvement, different analysts have warned about a possible overvaluation of equity markets and that certain studies indicate an increase in the rate of default of high-yield bonds. Most members stated that financial markets in performance as well. However, the majority of members specified that equity markets continue registering outflows, which, according to one of them, denotes a persisting sentiment of risk aversion. Some mentioned that inflows in fixed-income instruments were observed. Nonetheless, one member considered that the demand for such instruments remains weak, as well as the fragility and the low depth in financial markets of emerging economies, which have been affected by the important economic contraction as well as by the fall in commodity prices and other revenues from abroad. He/she underlined that during this period of higher uncertainty, these economies registered exchange rate and interest rate pressures, increases in risk premia, falls in stock market indexes and capital outflows. He/she added that agencies have downgraded the credit ratings of multiple sovereign issuers and firms, exacerbating the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion. Another member mentioned that the fiscal front in emerging economies continues to be a risk factor, since a deterioration both in the balances as well as in the debt to GDP ratio is expected, due to the budgetary pressures arising from the stimulus programs and decreased economic activity. Most members mentioned that global financial conditions will remain subject to the evolution and the effects of the pandemic, and therefore the environment of uncertainty is expected to persist. One member noted that the dynamics of contagion associated with the pandemic can deteriorate and affect once again economic activity and markets, with the consequent impact on firms and households’ solvency as well as on the lesssound financial intermediaries. All members made reference to the severe deterioration of economic activity in Mexico. Most members pointed out that it contracted significantly during the first quarter of the year and that, according to available information, the impact of the pandemic intensified in April. Some members stated that an important fall is estimated for the second quarter. One member indicated that it would be deeper than expected since, because of the duration of the pandemic, the reopening of economic activities has been more gradual than anticipated. He/she considered that, although limited available information and high uncertainty make an accurate analysis of the recent performance of economic activity difficult, different indicators show a smaller contraction, or even a slight recovery, at the beginning of May, although starting from very low levels, mainly as a result of the gradual reopening of the economy. Most members pointed out that the lockdown measures have affected aggregate demand. One member stated that, at the end of the first quarter, consumption and investment contracted 1.2 and estimated to have continued declining as a result of uncertainty and the large loss of employment. indicators that fell in April, such as the National Association of Self-Service and Department Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in Spanish) consumption, showed certain improvement in May. One member added that during the latter month, spending on credit cards registered an annual fall of 34%. As for external demand, some members indicated that imports and exports decreased considerably in April. One member mentioned that automotive exports fell 79%. From the supply side, most members indicated that in April industrial production contracted 29.6% in annual terms, reflecting disruptions in global value chains and production shutdowns. Some members pointed out that manufacturing production and construction decreased 35 and 38% in annual terms, respectively, and highlighted the weakness of the services sector. One member underlined the contraction in entertainment, accommodation and food preparation services. emphasized the significant fall in employment figures. The majority of members pointed out that, according to INEGI data, considering both amounted to 12.5 million in April. One member indicated that over 10 million correspond to the informal sector and that most jobs lost had incomes of two minimum wages or less, which indicates that the most vulnerable sector of the population has been particularly affected. Some members pointed out that during the first five months of the year around one million IMSS-insured jobs were lost. One member added that withdrawals from personal Afore accounts due to unemployment reached historical maximum levels. Another member added that, according to INEGI’s Telephone Survey of Occupation and Employment, the national unemployment rate is currently at 4.7%. Most members highlighted the rise in the number of underemployed workers as well as in the population that is not economically active, but is available for work. One member expressed that the lower labor participation partially explains why the unemployment rate did not increase so much. Another member pointed out that, if individuals that are “available” for work are considered as part of the economically active population, the “concealed” unemployment rate would be 25.4% of the labor force. He/she added that if underemployed workers are included as well, the rate for the indicator known as the labor gap would reach 50.6%. One member underlined that the number of individuals either unemployed, available for work or underemployed, increased by over 20 million between March and April. Another member argued that, considering the number of businesses that have closed down permanently, based on the number of those that have withdrawn their registration at the IMSS, it can be concluded that a large part of the current unemployment is permanent, since these are not jobs that may be regained during the reactivation of the economy. reopening of certain economic sectors and regions in May and June will foster a slight recovery of economic activity, the impact has been considerable and uncertainty persists. The majority of members added that indicators of manufacturing orders and of business and consumer confidence are at low levels. One member indicated that implementation of the USMCA and the anticipated recovery of the US economy should support investment, but that this would hardly be sufficient to raise it to the required levels, given the perception by the corporate sector of an important worsening of the business climate. He/she asserted that in the next months investment is unlikely to support the economic recovery significantly. Another one mentioned that economic activity is expected to improve gradually during the second half of the year, as the pandemic is brought under control and the economy is reopened. All members underlined that the growth outlook has deteriorated. Most members indicated that for 2020 there are even projections of a two-digit contraction. Some members specified that the IMF has recently adjusted its forecast from -6.6 to -10.5%. One member added that the consensus of analysts’ forecasts has been adjusted from -7.5 to -8.3%. Another member mentioned that there is a broad dispersion in the projections, which reflects high uncertainty, and that downward revisions for upward adjustment in expectations for 2021, which point to a modest recovery. One member stated that a very deep recession is currently being observed, with a slow and complex “U”-shaped recovery, due to the severe deterioration of investment and consumption. He/she added that the possibility of a second COVID-19 outbreak, or that the sanitary and economic measures are simply insufficient, has increased the risk of a “W”-shaped economic recovery. Another member pointed out that the duration and depth of the economic contraction depends on the suspension of economic activities established by the authorities as well as on selfimposed restrictions by the productive agents, which, in turn, will depend on progress in the development of a therapy or a vaccine against the virus. Most members agreed that the balance of risks for growth remains significantly biased to the downside. The majority of members stressed the risk of a new COVID-19 outbreak. One member cautioned that it could lead to financial and solvency problems. Some members emphasized the risk that the health measures that have been adopted to contain the epidemic are not sufficient. One member indicated that a high rate of contagion has been observed in Mexico. Another member noted that the estimated date on which the health crisis will reach its peak in Mexico has been repeatedly delayed, which combined with the experience in other countries suggests that the risk of new outbreaks once the process of economic reopening deepens is high. On the other hand, some members mentioned the lack of a balanced policy approach, particularly on the fiscal front, to foster the economic recovery. implications to the productive apparatus can have a prolonged effect on employment and consumption levels. Most members agreed that economic slack has widened significantly. Some members added that the recent decline in growth forecasts allows to anticipate that the negative output gap will continue widening. One member emphasized that the output gap is at levels unseen since the 2008-2009 financial crisis. Most members mentioned that annual headline inflation rose from 2.15 to 3.17% between April and the first fortnight of June 2020 due to increases in both its non-core and core components. Most members agreed that the recent performance of inflation is associated with demand- and supply-related shocks derived from the pandemic. Some members stated that the weakness of domestic demand has been reflected in lower price variations of different goods and services. One member pointed out that for several months headline inflation has been close to its target, mainly as a result of fluctuations in the non-core component, since core inflation has not declined. Another member recalled that in May headline inflation remained below the target for the second consecutive month. One member pointed out that the referred shocks have led to a recomposition of relative prices, which has led to higher food prices to the detriment of the most vulnerable households, a phenomenon that is not adequately reflected in the CPI, considering the weights used in its measurement. Delving into the evolution of non-core inflation, most members emphasized that energy prices contracted in annual terms, although some members stated that these have increased recently. Most members noted the increase in fruit and vegetables prices. One member pointed out that such increase is due to a comparison base effect and to transitory factors. He/she considered that the effect of low energy products’ prices prevails over the rebound in fruit and vegetables prices. As to core inflation, most members highlighted the rise in food merchandise prices, due to possible supply problems and to a reallocation of household’s spending in light of the health emergency. Some members underlined that core inflation remains at high levels. One member considered that the persistence of this component, despite the economic contraction and the higher levels of economic slack, suggests that increases in some line items such as food merchandises, have outweighed the reductions observed in non-food merchandise and services prices. Another member pointed out that social distancing is interrupting the provision of several services, whose price variations are decreasing. One member noted that three of the five major core inflation components registered annual rates of change below 3% in the first fortnight of June: housing, non-food merchandises and services other than education and housing. He/she added that educational services prices registered an annual inflation above the inflation target, which is explained by the fact that said prices tend to be fixed in August, and that thus, it will not be until that month that an adjustment will be observed in said indicator. He/she considered that the only component with a really unfavorable behavior is that of food merchandises, which has increased due to a reallocation of household spending and to disruptions in the supply of certain goods. Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that at least part of these effects may possibly disappear once consumption and supply of said merchandises return to normal. Most members noted that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2020 remain at levels near the target, and those for the medium and long terms have remained relatively stable, although at levels above 3%. One member stated that headline inflation expectations for 2020 increased from 2.90 in April to 3.07% in May. Another member added that medium- and long-term core inflation expectations also lie close to 3.5%. He/she highlighted that it is surprising that core inflation expectations for the next five to eight years have increased to such level in the course of this year, which suggests the risk of them becoming unanchored. He/she noted that, although he/she does not agree with these projections, they reveal the uncertainty that prevails regarding the behavior of inflation and, particularly, the potential of new shocks on prices, as well as the risk of the peso exchange rate being subject to pressures, due to external or domestic factors. One member pointed out that inflation expectations drawn from both surveys and market instruments increased slightly after the publication of the latest monetary policy decision and the latest Quarterly Report. Thus, he/she argued that it is essential that the central bank communications do not validate a pessimistic outlook on the economy since this affects the perception of private agents. As to the expected trajectory for inflation, another member pointed out that the central bank baseline scenario expects that it will lay around the target within the horizon in which monetary policy operates. He/she added that, if the adequate performance of both global and domestic financial markets and of the peso exchange rate continues, it may contribute to a trajectory slightly below the one published in the latest Quarterly Report. One member stated that annual inflation would lie at levels close or even below the target for the remainder of 2020. He/she mentioned that the lower oil prices, the weakness of aggregate demand, a stable exchange rate, and a low pass-through would contribute to this. Similarly, another member mentioned that headline inflation shows an important decline since last year and shortterm inflation expectations lie at around 3% for the end of the year, mainly motivated by the widening of the output gap in negative territory. One member considered that it is not foreseeable that headline inflation will converge to the target during the rest of behavior of non-core inflation. He/she added that, in the absence of further shocks, core inflation should start to reflect in that span of time the impact of the wide negative output gap. He/she pointed out that it is reasonable to anticipate that headline inflation will converge to the target during the second half of 2021, although inflation expectations show that private sector forecasters are not incorporating such scenario. Regarding the risks for inflation, some members highlighted the downward pressures stemming from a greater than expected impact of the wider negative output gap and from downward inflationary pressures worldwide. As to upward risks, some members mentioned additional episodes of foreign exchange depreciation, as well as logistical and supply-related problems concerning certain goods and services. One member added the possibility of the increase in labor costs in previous months affecting inflation. He/she noted that although inflation remains at low levels, there are upward pressures on items that affect lower-income households. He/she also highlighted that uncertainty worsens due to measurement challenges stemming from the impact of the lockdown. He/she stated that difficulties in price collection may imply challenges to the comparability of indicators and lower information quality. Most members pointed out that the balance of risks for inflation remains uncertain. In this regard, one member noted that the supply and demand shocks faced are passed on to the price formation process through different channels that generate both upward and downward pressures; thus, the net effect is uncertain. Another member emphasized that the outlook for the global and domestic economy remains uncertain and subject to bouts of high volatility. In this regard, he/she considered that the balance of risks for inflation visà-vis the updated outlook remains uncertain. He/she mentioned that the final result of factors that could put downward or upward pressures on inflation will depend on the intensity of the effect of each of them, in an environment of deep economic weakness both globally and domestically. He/she added that, if the financial shock remains contained, the effects of the significant widening of the negative output gap could predominate in a longer-term horizon. Another member expressed his/her view that, in light of the uncertainty about the evolution of the pandemic and economic activity, and of pressures on prices in both directions, downward pressures prevail over upward pressures on inflation, and that it is very likely that they will continue to do so. Most members noted that, since the latest monetary policy decision, there has been an improvement in the performance of domestic financial markets. Some members highlighted that this was partly due to the measures adopted by Banco de México. One member mentioned that external factors, particularly a greater optimism about the performance of advanced economies due to the gradual resumption of productive activities, have also contributed importantly to said results. Most members pointed out that the peso exchange government securities, particularly for short members added that the sovereign risk continued to adjust downwards and that the stock market showed an improvement. Nevertheless, most members noted that risks persist and capital outflows have continued, although at a slower pace vis-à-vis what was observed some weeks ago. Some members pointed out that accumulated figures indicate outflows higher than USD 13 billion in fixed income. In this regard, one member underlined that total government securities held by non-residents currently amount to around USD 90 billion. Another member added that cumulative figures for the year show zero flow in the case of equity instruments. Some members warned that trading conditions remain deteriorated in the FX and fixed income markets. One member stated that the Mexican peso remains among the emerging economies’ currencies with the largest annual depreciation and that the balance of the net foreign exchange-rate position continued to widen negatively. He/she mentioned that the steepening of the yield curve suggests that there are still concerns about idiosyncratic factors. As to risks for domestic financial markets, some members highlighted the persisting challenges over the situation of Pemex and public finances, as well as the institutional weakening. Regarding external risks, one member mentioned that those stemming from the pandemic, the relationship between the United States, China and other countries, and the US presidential election stand out. Most members highlighted that, in this adverse environment, perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. One member added that the adverse shocks that the economy is facing must be mitigated to contain the impact on employment and to preserve productive capacity. The above within a framework that maintains the sustainability of public finances, a low and stable inflation, as well as a sound and well-capitalized financial system. Some members noted that in April budgetary revenues were below the programmed amount, and that even after considering the use of resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in Spanish) and other extraordinary revenues, public finances are expected to show a significant deterioration during the year. In particular, one member highlighted that the shortfall in oil revenues including oil hedges, and tax revenues excluding those from the excise tax (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish), would be between 2.2 and that such shortfall would be partially offset with the use of non-recurring revenues from the FEIP and with the recovery of financial assets from funds and trusts. Most members expressed concern on Pemex’s shortfall in public revenues may widen in the face of additional capitalization requirements by the stateowned company, due to its financial problems, the sharp fall in its sales and the continuation of nonprofitable projects, the financial burden and risk of which concentrate on the federal government. Another member highlighted that the need to design a long-term solution for Pemex’s problems has increased. He/she added that, in the absence of specific measures in said direction, as well as in general to permanently strengthen government revenues, it would not be convenient to seek greater support from fiscal policy to face the pandemic, taking into account the expected decline in the FEIP balances and the resulting increase in the vulnerability of public finances. Although he/she acknowledged that there is also the option of an important reallocation of public spending, he/she considered that no support for adjustments of such nature is perceived. As for sovereign credit rating revisions and possible additional downgradings, one member warned that these have resulted in tighter financial conditions for both government and firms. He/she stated that the recently observed corporate debt issuances continue to be insufficient to roll-over short-term debt that has being maturing during the year and that, for this reason, firms have resorted to commercial banks. He/she stated that even though credit channels continue to function in an orderly manner and do not show warning signs, the delinquency rates of consumption and corporate portfolios in the segment of small- and medium-sized firms (SMEs) have risen. He/she mentioned that according to the latest Financial Stability Report, at the beginning of the pandemic the banking system overall was in a solid position; however, some smaller banks could face problems. He/she added that without decisive fiscal supports, firms and households’ situation could rapidly deteriorate regardless of the availability of resources and the level of interest rates. When analyzing the longer-term macroeconomic situation, another member stated that the outlook for investment, which is fundamental for the potential growth of the economy, is worrisome. He/she warned that investment has been following a downward trend since mid-2018 and is currently at levels similar to those at the beginning of 2011. He/she mentioned that although the pandemic recently influenced this behavior, the main determinants have been the situation of public finances and an environment which is considered unfavorable for private investment by the business sector. He/she highlighted that, for the first time since 2011, Mexico is no longer part of the list of the main 25 foreign investment destinations in a survey conducted by a consulting firm. He/she underlined the business sector’s persisting concern for the country’s rule of law and insecurity situation, the deterioration of the institutional framework, and the orientation of some public policies, among other aspects. Taking into account the referred risks for markets, and based on the foreseen scenarios and on the room for maneuvering that on balance these provide to monetary policy, all members agreed to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a One member pointed out that monetary policy faces challenges in two dimensions: the deep economic contraction associated with the pandemic and its effects on inflation, and the impact of the financial shock of global risk aversion on the peso exchange rate and investment portfolios. The above considering that domestic financial markets are highly integrated to international markets, where the Mexican peso is one of the few emerging economies’ currencies that is fully convertible, with 80% of its volume traded among non-residents, which implies low operating costs for holding short- or long-term positions in pesos. He/she highlighted that, to the extent that the relative importance of global risk factors decreases, idiosyncratic elements such as the economic and financial soundness, the growth outlook, and remaining an attractive destination for investment, will gain relevance once again to avoid abrupt adjustments in portfolios. In this context, he/she argued that the monetary policy stance should consider both the economy’s cyclical position and its influence on inflation, as well as the financial conditions required for macroeconomic stability and an orderly adjustment in financial markets and in the financial system. He/she added that, considering that the financial and economic activity shocks operate at different horizons, it is important to mitigate the financial shock in the best possible way, in order to have greater room for maneuver to face the impact of the shock on economic activity. He/she stated that to the extent that an orderly adjustment of financial markets is achieved, it will be possible to maintain a domestic inflation process in line with the global trend towards lower inflation. As for the determinants of capital flows to emerging economies, some members pointed out that insofar as global risk aversion decreases, idiosyncratic factors may gain relevance. Some members argued that in this context the spread between domestic and external interest rates may gain greater importance in offsetting idiosyncratic risks and avoiding net capital outflows. One noted that there is recent evidence that this is already happening. Another member noted that a considerable number of emerging economies have reduced their interest rate spread more than Mexico, without jeopardizing their financial markets or inflation targets. He/she added that there is evidence showing that capital flows also depend on growth expectations, and therefore to the extent that a lower interest rate contributes to growth, it could contribute to maintain or attract greater capital flows. He/she stated that the increase in longterm asset holdings by the US Federal Reserve implies a _de facto decrease of its interest rate,_ meaning that it is not necessarily correct to measure the interest rate spread vis-à-vis the federal funds rate. In this regard, he/she argued that a less restrictive monetary policy could contribute to reduce the risk of a very deep economic fall, which would contribute to a better performance of financial markets. One member noted that several indicators show that, with the monetary policy decisions taken in the last months, the interest rate spread adjusted by exchange rate volatility vis-à-vis other emerging economies has narrowed considerably. He/she stated that this is important for an economy as open to capital flows as that of Mexico, and where its currency is frequently used to hedge risks in other emerging economies due to its high liquidity. He/she warned that this brings to the fore the limitations of making direct comparisons between interest rate levels in Mexico and other emerging economies. He/she also pointed out that, unlike Mexico, in most major emerging economies headline and core inflation are below their respective central banks’ targets. He/she also highlighted that, given the inflation levels and the high volatility of the peso exchange rate, the latter may have significant implications for the attainment of the inflation target in Mexico, despite its low pass-through. Most members considered that monetary policy should continue to incorporate all available environment of uncertainty. Some members stated that all challenges and dilemmas that monetary policy is facing must be identified and a wide range of scenarios must also be considered. One member argued that, in light of the downward revisions to economic growth for this year, the wider economic slack, the appreciation of the peso and the recent evolution of inflation, there is some room to continue easing monetary policy. He/she noted that the challenge is how to manage such room. In this regard, he/she emphasized that in face of the global and domestic uncertainty no scenario, neither benign nor of additional deterioration, can be ruled out; thus, monetary policy should be conducted with extreme caution, continuing with a gradual approach, monitoring the latest information to update forecasts and maintain room for maneuver to take the necessary actions in a timely and prudent manner. In this context, he/she added that it is essential to monitor the persisting risks, some of which have already started to materialize. Among the risks to be considered, in addition to the aforementioned, he/she highlighted: i) the volatility stemming from domestic or external factors that may affect the peso exchange rate and its impact on inflation forecasts; ii) the persistence of core inflation at high levels, despite the increased amount of economic slack and the uncertainty about the net effect of supply- and demand-related shocks, and iii) idiosyncratic risks, in particular, weak public finances for 2020 and 2021 and the vulnerable financial situation of Pemex, in a context in which the loss of the investment grade of the sovereign credit rating is not ruled out. Another member stated that, although there appears to be additional room to reduce the policy rate, it is to be expected that risks are also increasing and thus any adjustment in such direction should be based on that assumption. In this regard, he/she highlighted that in addition to the important tightening of interest rate spreads relative to other emerging economies, and the volatility to which the peso is subject, it is essential to consider that the balance of risks for inflation remains uncertain; that long-term inflation expectations continue above the target; that core inflation is not yielding; and that the possibility of an unanchoring of long-term expectations for this component has increased. One member argued that in terms of the absolute monetary policy stance, slack conditions offer room for further monetary easing. He/she stated that in the face of a crisis of unprecedented magnitude, a much laxer monetary policy stance would support the weak economic activity. He/she added that in terms of the relative policy stance, lower risk premia open up the possibility for a smaller spread. Nonetheless, he/she pointed that said room could face limitations in the future, since such premia could be underestimating global risks. He/she pointed out that possible medium-term negative effects on the macrofinancial framework, resulting from easing the monetary policy that is needed in the short term, should also be considered. He/she highlighted that a terminal rate will eventually be attained and an excessive reduction in the interest rate could discourage savings, domestic and foreign, which are scarce in the country. In particular, foreign capital has shown, even before the increase in risk aversion due to the pandemic, a decline in its enthusiasm for investing in this country. He/she underlined that an excessively low interest rate could affect bank savings, the exchange rate and could distort the prices of other financial assets, which in the medium term could have implications for financial stability. The same member stated that the adjustment of interest rates will depend on the evolution of risks and on the behavior of the economic cycle. He/she added that given the economic outlook, the lack of fiscal support and the fragile foundations for the decline in inflation, the strategy will be to consider daily incoming information as the best guide in the future. He/she stated that the scope of monetary policy and the room for maneuver must be taken into account to sensibly respond to the uncertainty. Among the referred scope, he/she mentioned the implementation of programs to provide liquidity, increase the flexibility of the regulatory framework, loosen prudential measures, and other tools to strengthen the functioning of the financial system. He/she considered that so far the response to uncertainty is to continue the process of monetary easing by lowering the reference rate in a fixed amount, at a constant speed, which markets can fully anticipate. Another member considered that in light of the significant economic contraction that is foreseen and the challenges that this implies, the central bank must act cautiously but firmly and use all the instruments at its disposal. This implies for the real interest rate to possibly be taken to levels close to zero or even negative before the end of the year, as long as the inflation rate remains close to target. He/she indicated that the central bank must be willing to act in case signs of a significant deterioration of economic-financial conditions arise, and that this includes taking actions in unscheduled dates. Most members considered important to continue implementing measures to strengthen the credit provision channels, provide liquidity and foster the well-functioning of the financial system. Some members considered that said measures could be more effective with a lower policy rate. One member stated that the policy rate has an impact on economic activity through various channels, including the credit channel. He/she added that in the current juncture, the availability of credit is crucial to prevent solvent firms from going bankrupt due to liquidity problems, and therefore the central bank measures to facilitate lending to small- and mediumsized firms are appropriate. However, he/she considered that if these are not accompanied by a sufficiently low interest rate, economic agents will not have incentives to acquire credit and their demand will remain limited. He/she mentioned the importance of avoiding that the Central Bank actions in one dimension (credit facilities) be limited by its actions in another dimension (interest rates). Another member added that the persistence of risk aversion and pressure in financial markets point to the need to ensure adequate liquidity levels in markets and lax monetary conditions. Some members pointed out the importance of Banco de México focusing on fulfilling its primary mandate. One member stated that monetary policy’s best contribution during the recovery phase is to fulfil this mandate and thus avoid households’ purchasing power from further deteriorating. He/she mentioned that the central bank needs to monitor the circumstances that reduce the purchasing power of low-income households and that worsen the severe loss of income of the unemployed population. Another member stated that monetary policy’s best contribution to strengthening public finances is to focus on fulfilling its mandate, as this leads to sustained reductions in interest rates along the yield curve and ultimately fosters economic growth. He/she argued that if the support to public finances were to be perceived as part of monetary policy’s reaction function, markets would rapidly consider it as a situation of fiscal dominance, which would affect the central bank’s credibility and the level of mediumand long-term interest rates, with substantial negative effects on the fiscal accounts and on the Mexican economy. One member pointed out that the central bank communications must highlight the need for maintaining inflation at low levels, especially in the items of greater relevance for the population, such as food merchandise, in order to prevent inflation expectations from becoming unanchored. Another member pointed out that the monetary policy statement must emphasize that, by taking into account new downward revisions to growth expectations, the policy decision is consistent with the convergence of inflation to the target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. He/she added that it must emphasize that Banco de México will remain attentive to incoming information to continue acting, as it has done so far, with timeliness and caution. Taking into account the referred risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets, major challenges arise for monetary policy and for the economy in general. Based on the foreseen scenarios, and considering the room for maneuvering that on balance these provide to monetary policy, with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 5%. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information and considering the large impact on productive activity as well as the evolution of the financial shock that we are currently facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions, regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 5%.