Since the second quarter this year, the U.S., the euro area, and China had all experienced economic slowdown. Global manufacturing expansion sputtered, business sentiment of major economies became more cautious about the economic outlook, and decreasing new orders and increasing inventories also pointed to weaker demand for goods consumption worldwide. Amid the global economic moderation and sluggish trade growth, supply chain bottlenecks had begun to ease and freight fees had dropped significantly from the peaks. However, the world continued to witness elevated inflation, many economies including the U.S. and Europe continued hiking policy rates and financial conditions were tight. It was projected that global economic growth would soften this year, with international institutions downgrading their forecasts for the world’s GDP growth rate in 2022 and expecting a further slowdown in 2023. Regarding commodity prices, oil prices had swung downwards since July 2022, against a background of the European Union allowing Russia to export its crude oil to economies outside the EU, OPEC+ agreeing to increase oil output, and a global economic moderation dampening demand for crude oil. International institutions forecasted this year’s oil prices would exceed the levels of last year then edge down next year. The Reuters/Jefferies CRB (RJ/CRB) Index, the global commodities benchmark, fell in recent months from a previous high and fluctuated within a narrow range. Surging energy and food prices have kept inflation in major economies at high levels this year so far. Nevertheless, given the monetary tightening actions by most major central banks and a recent decline in energy prices, the world would likely see next year’s inflation come down from previous highs. While the U.S., Europe and many other economies carried on with policy rate hikes to tame high inflation, Japan and China remained accommodative. In terms of international financial market trends since August 2022, as the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the European Central Bank (ECB) signaled for further tightening, the U.S. and German10-year government bond yields both rebounded. Major stock markets experienced turbulence in recent months in response to U.S. inflation data and Fed policy paths. The DXY index set a new record high in more than 20 years, leading major currencies to depreciate against the US dollar. Looking ahead, the global economy faces multiple downside risks, including the following: Aggressive tightening by major central banks including the Fed and the ECB, roiling global financial markets and depressing economic activity worldwide, heightening the risk of defaults by countries with high levels of external debt; the Russia-Ukraine war continuing on, taking a toll on the European economy amid the resulting energy crisis and hurting political and economic stability amid financial market turbulence; China’s “zero-COVID” policy posing a threat to the easing of global supply chain bottlenecks, and the real estate market pressures destabilizing global financial stability. In addition, geopolitical risks, extreme weather events, and pandemic waves also cast a long shadow over the global economic outlook. In recent months, the domestic economic expansion moderated, with both leading and coincident indicators for business outlook on a downtrend. Manufacturing and non- manufacturing sentiment for the outlook for the next six months also became cautious. In terms of external demand since July 2022, robust demand for integrated circuits and mineral products counteracted by global final demand losing steam led export growth to slow down year on year, registering 2% in August. Looking ahead, emerging technology applications and digital transformation would continue supporting demand and extend the gains in related supply chain exports. However, with major central banks tightening further and external demand cooling down, Taiwan could witness slowing growth momentum for its exports. Overall, the Bank projected exports to post solid growth this year and slower growth next year. In respect of domestic demand, private investment grew at a slower pace mainly because raw material shortfalls resulted in an extension of equipment delivery time, while labor shortage and inventory adjustments as well as a cautious economic outlook prompted some firms to postpone capital expenditure plans. The Bank expected private investment to still post steady growth this year and slower growth next year. In terms of private consumption, growth momentum strengthened, as an abated domestic pandemic and the government’s domestic tourism stimulus measures encouraged consumers to spend and travel. The Bank projected private consumption growth to be mild this year and to gather pace next year. With the pandemic’s impact diminishing at home, the number of employed persons increased by 0.29% year on year in July. The unemployment rate rose to 3.78% in July owing to seasonal factors, but the seasonally-adjusted figure was 3.68%, declining to the level before the domestic COVID-19 resurgence in April this year. This also showed that labor market conditions were picking up. Overall, while the previous pandemic impacts had eased, the global economy could increasingly face greater downside risks, and domestic firms were conservative about the economic outlook. In this view, the Bank revised the GDP growth rate forecasts to 3.51% this year and 2.90% next year. The growth projections by major institutions ranged between 2.60% and 3.81% for this year and between 1.90% and 3.41% for next year. Financial conditions Domestic long and short-term interest rates went upwards as the Bank’s hikes in policy rates and the reserve requirement ratios (RRRs) took effect in June and July, respectively. As for excess reserves, the total amount as held by all banks stood at a level over NT$60 billion in recent months. In July, short-term market rates and bank deposit rates both rose by more than 0.125 percentage points – the size of the June hike in policy rates, a testament of direct transmission from the policy rate hike to the market. Bank loans and investments had gradually slowed month by month to an annual growth rate of 6.55% in July, mainly because of an increase in government tax revenue, government repaying the borrowings, and banks scaling back investments owing to funding needs and foreign capital outflows. The annual growth rate edged up in August, though, buoyed by greater demand of government enterprises for funding. In terms of money supply, reflecting the slowdown in bank loans and investments and a year-on- year increase of foreign capital outflows, as well as the Bank’s hikes of policy rates and the RRRs, the M2 annual growth rate had trended downwards since May this year, with the pace of growth averaging 7.66% for the first eight months of the year. In the housing market, trading had moderated in the year so far. During the period of January to July, the total number of building ownership transfers nationwide decreased by 1.64% compared to the same period last year, while that number for the six Special Municipalities nudged up by 0.2% for the first eight months of year. Construction costs for newly-built homes continued climbing but at a slower pace. Prices of new housing units were trending up, reflecting the rise in national Urban Land Price Index (compiled by the Ministry of the Interior) in March 2022. The price indices for existing homes and new housing projects rose further by 14.77% and 34.72% in the second quarter of the year. Meanwhile, affected by the domestic pandemic resurgence and the Bank’s policy measures, recent sentiment-related data showed that builders and real estate businesses turned cautious about the housing market outlook, while banks became less optimistic about the outlook of residential housing in major cities. As of the end of July 2022, the annual growth rates of real estate lending, housing loans, and construction loans edged down to 9.46%, 8.64%, and 12.53%, respectively. Real estate loans as a share of total loans slightly shrank to 37.07% from the 37.16% registered at the end of last year. Meanwhile, the construction loan ratio of domestic banks was 27.05%, still below the 30% cap prescribed in Article 72-2 of the Banking Act.2 The ratio of non-performing housing loans extended by domestic banks remained low at 0.08%. Since the Bank deployed selective credit control measures by making four amendments to relevant regulations from December 2020 onwards, banks’ loan portfolio concentration in the real estate sector had kept steady, which was conducive to bank credit risk management. The Bank’s tightening stance since March 2022 was also According to Article 72-2 of the Banking Act, the total amount of loans extended for residential construction and construction for business purposes by a Commercial Bank shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the aggregate of such Commercial Bank's deposits and Bank Debentures issued at the time such loans is extended. judged to amplify the effectiveness of selective credit controls. In addition, housing market trading had started to slacken since the beginning of the year as a result of the concerted efforts under the government’s Healthy Real Estate Market Plan as well as the pandemic’s impact; given time, more results of the policy efforts are expected to show. Price trends In the year to date, Taiwan had suffered considerable pressures of imported inflation owing to global supply chain bottlenecks and the Russia-Ukraine war pushing up international grain and energy prices. More recently, though, as international raw material prices softened and domestic food price rises were also slowed by declines in vegetable prices, the annual growth rate of the consumer price index (CPI) dropped from 3.36% in July to 2.66% in August and that of the core CPI edged down to 2.73%. For the first eight months of the year, the annual CPI growth rate averaged 3.10%, mainly owing to rising prices for food, fuel and lubricants, consumer durables, and residential rent. As there was a more marked increase in prices of staples with a higher purchase frequency, consumers tended to be more conscious of upward price trends. Recent data on multiple inflation-related indicators all pointed to a prospective ease in domestic inflationary pressures. Spot crude oil prices already dropped from previous highs and would likely trend down steadily in the future, while international commodity futures also saw price corrections. The import price index and the producer price index also gradually came down. As for the NT dollar depreciation’s impact on domestic price trends, it remained within manageable range: If the NTD-USD exchange rate came from the 2021 average of 28.02 to the estimated 2022 average of 29.5 (representing a depreciation of 5.02%), this year’s CPI annual growth rate would rise by 0.12 - 0.25 percentage points; if the exchange rate came to 30 (a depreciation of 6.60%), the effect on the CPI annual growth rate would edge up to a rise by 0.16 - 0.33 percentage points. Given the decline in international raw material prices and a higher base effect, the annual CPI growth rate was expected to gradually come down from the third quarter of the year onwards. Looking ahead to next year, as global supply chain bottlenecks ease, global freight rates trend low, and international raw material prices continue with a downswing, domestic inflation would likely decrease to below 2%. The Bank forecasted the annual growth rate of the CPI and the core CPI to register 2.95% and 2.52% for 2022 and to decline to 1.88% and 1.87% for 2023. Projections for Taiwan’s annual CPI growth rate made by major forecasting institutions ranged between 2.85% and 3.30% for 2022 and between 1.30% and 2.40% for 2023, with the forecast average below 2% for next year. Looking ahead, upside pressures for domestic prices could arise from downward price stickiness (i.e., “easy to rise but hard to fall”) in some items of the services category, including food away from home and residential rent; the easing of border controls leading to hikes in airfares and travel group fees; greater demand for domestic travel as concerns over pandemic waves diminished, and the resulting rise in prices for hotels and accommodation; the planned hike of minimum wages next year. On the other hand, downside pressures could come from an expected softening of crude oil and other raw material prices in the second half of the year; lower international freight rates as supply chain bottlenecks ease; telecom operators cutting prices of mobile phones and other communication devices amid intense competition. Since the beginning of this year, the U.S., Europe, and some Asia-Pacific economies had aggressively raised their policy rates to tame relatively higher inflationary pressures. Taiwan’s price uptrends were similar to Japan and China; the Bank of Japan maintained an accommodative monetary policy stance and China’s central bank even reduced policy rates, whereas the Bank continued with a tightening stance with gradual rate hikes. Major considerations: The domestic inflation rate is likely to gradually come down in the second half of the year, but could still register above 2% for the year as a whole before declining to below 2% next year. The domestic economy is expected to see growth moderating to a pace slower than 3% next year. Spillover effects from the global economic downturn and tight financial conditions: As major economies including the U.S. and Europe take big steps in monetary tightening and global financial conditions become tighter, global economic growth is expected to slow in 2022 and 2023 and faces heightened downside risk. As a small open economy, Taiwan could be impacted by spillover effects via the following three channels: The real economy: With global final demand weakening, Taiwan’s exports have seen slower growth in recent months and private investment has turned conservative. The domestic GDP growth rate is projected by the Bank to slow to below 3% next year, which would also take some heat off domestic inflation. Prices: Global economic slowdown, declines in crude oil and other raw material prices on tepid demand, and lower international freight rates on the easing of global supply chain bottlenecks would combine to help mitigate pressures from imported inflation. Finance: As the Fed continues with rate hikes and global stock markets slump on concern about a global recession, Taiwan’s stock markets would experience more volatile downswings along with massive foreign capital outflows, and domestic financial conditions could tighten further. The government’s continued efforts to implement supply-side measures in response to fluctuations in energy and food prices, providing substantial support for sustaining overall price stability: A. Continued adjustments, as seen needed, of the tariff reduction measures, including commodity taxes on gasoline, diesel, and cement, and tariffs on beef, formula milk, butter, and wheat; an extension of business tax exemption on imported soybeans, wheat, and corns. B. A freeze on electricity tariff adjustments for the second half of the year, as per the resolution of the government’s review committee for electricity tariffs. The Bank’s approach of simultaneously affecting price (interest rate) and quantity (money stock) with hikes in both the policy rates and the RRRs, helping to rein in domestic inflation expectations: A. Reflecting the policy rate hikes, long and short-term market rates have gone upwards and financial conditions have broadly tightened. B. The RRR increase is expected to reinforce money and credit management and slow down monetary growth: As banks are required to set aside more reserves, their credit creation capacity would be restrained, helping to keep M2 growth at an appropriate pace. In recent months, the annual growth rate of M2 has declined, with the rate averaging 7.66% for the first eight months of the year – still higher than the 6.5% upper threshold of the Bank’s reference range. If the RRRs are to be raised further in the future, M2 growth would likely soften more markedly, which could amplify the effect of denting inflation expectations. Policy Propositions: To raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations by 0.125 percentage points to 1.625%, 2%, and 3.875%, respectively; and to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points, respectively. Board members decided to raise the policy rates by 0.125 percentage points each and reached a unanimous vote to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points. One board director stated that inflation has become a challenge to central banks around the world, with all major economies except Japan and China commencing a monetary tightening cycle. However, the Fed’s aggressive rate hikes could heighten the risk of a hard landing and further roil the financial markets. By contrast, Taiwan does fighting message to rein in expectations. Another board director expressed the view that a 0.125 percentage point rate hike was rather mild. With international sea transport gridlock thawing and global energy prices softening, domestic inflationary pressures would likely ease. Against this background, while considering potential impact on homebuyers’ interest burden, the director supported the 0.125 percentage point hike in policy rates. Regarding the RRR increase proposition, given that the M2 annual growth rate remained above the upper limit (6.5%) of the Bank’s reference range, the director also agreed with a 0.25 percentage point RRR hike. Another board director showing support for the two propositions also pointed out the following. Ocean freight rates pushed up by the pandemic have come down. While Ukrainian grain exports hampered by the war have been easing somewhat, many of their crop areas were no longer arable; combined with adverse weather conditions (such as droughts) in other major food commodity exporters, feed prices remained elevated, which could affect domestic prices of eggs and meat and impact the CPI trends. Under the circumstances, a policy rate hike would somewhat relieve household burdens associated with rising food prices; on the other hand, it could add to funding costs for housing and credit loans, hence the need to take into account the potential influences of policy rate hikes in terms of the size. One board director, in favor of both of the propositions, stated that despite steady economic growth, the National Development Council’s Monitoring Indicator had in recent months descended to the lower threshold of the “stable” signal range, the Leading Indicators had trended further downwards, and exports had also showed signs of weakening. While Taiwan’s inflation was mild relative to other major economies, it was partly sustained by tariff and tax control measures aiming at restraining raw material prices. If the war in Ukraine rages on and extreme weather conditions lack improvements, domestic inflation might not see meaningful declines; continued monitoring should be warranted. The director gave the reason for supporting a 0.125 percentage point rate hike, citing the consideration that higher policy rates affect the entire economy instead of specific segments, including posing an impact on borrowers’ interest payments. Still, the director recognized the importance to convey the Bank’s tightening stance. The RRR increase by 0.25 percentage point would affect money stock with a powerful punch. In order to help anchor inflation expectations at a lower level, the Bank should communicate its stance in a clear and unequivocal way. One board director pointed out the relatively lower inflation in Taiwan was mainly due to government efforts to reduce tariff and commodity tax rates and keep down electricity and oil prices through state-owned businesses, both of which were temporary measures. The director did not see the inflation rate to decline to below 2% in the second half of 2022 and in the year of 2023. Against a background of bold rate hikes by major central banks and a projected domestic inflation rate of nearly 3%, the fact that the Bank’s policy rates were only 0.25 percentage points higher than before the pandemic might not favorably affect inflation expectations. As for the RRR increase, it is a tool seldom used because it usually strikes hard and fast, but there would be two consecutive 0.25 percentage point RRR increases in Taiwan after today’s meeting; the Bank needs to indicate the actual effects of such a tool on the inflation rate. Another board director pointed to the complex international economic and financial conditions recently. Many major central banks continued to raise their policy rates to tackle inflation whereas some economies still kept an accommodative monetary policy stance or even reduced rates. Being key players in the world, these economies’ policies carry a weight on the global economic and financial scenes. At the current juncture, international uncertainties remain, the war in Ukraine continues, and the future outlook is clouded, therefore the director agreed to a policy hike but at a measured pace. The Fed’s aggressive hikes came with a worrying economic outlook; if the U.S. economy has a hard landing, then Taiwan could, in the following six months, sustain injury in many aspects including investment, consumption, and exports, a consideration that warranted the director’s support for a 0.125 percentage point rate hike. As for the proposed RRR increase by 0.25 percentage points, it would not bring about too much a hit given the enormous scale of Taiwan’s excess reserves now. Discussions on housing prices, residential rent, and consumer price measurement One board director noted that although tax policies may be the most effective tool to tamp down housing prices, as repeatedly stressed by the Bank and supported by some researches, this does not keep monetary authorities on the sidelines when housing prices continue to surge. For the Bank to safeguard financial stability, it needs to take policy actions in response to housing price changes. For instance, according to some economists at the Bank for International Settlements, housing prices in South Korea have dropped significantly since its central bank began a series of rate hikes last year. By contrast, it is wrong when the Bank pays great attention to indicators like housing credit growth and concentration but not enough emphasis on price changes. Another board director pointed out that information on housing price trends are reflected in the Bank’s publications, internal reports, quarterly Board Meeting reference materials, etc., indicating that the Bank has been keeping close watch. Indicators such as housing credit growth and concentration would reveal the trends in housing prices and housing market trading. Moreover, though being closely watched by the Bank, housing prices as an indicator does not in itself necessitate a systemic policy response. Indeed, housing prices has a role in financial stability but it is also affected by many factors. The Bank’s response measures were meant to stem market speculation and prevent credit resources from gushing into the real estate sector. When housing prices are bolstered by economic fundamentals, the ensuing price rises would not be interfered with unless financial stability becomes compromised. The Bank tackles housing market risks with selective credit control measures. The primary purpose of a policy rate hike is to combat inflation, with concomitant effects on housing prices; this is the same in the cases of rate hike decisions by other economies (including the U.S., South Korea, the U.K., and the euro area) as they aim at high inflation instead of housing prices. Another board director remarked that with domestic housing prices going higher in the second quarter this year, today’s rate hike would also help put the brakes on those price rises. In addition, since the Bank had already sent out messages of beginning a rate hike cycle, gradual hikes should not markedly increase mortgage borrowers’ burdens while still conveying the Bank’s gradual tightening stance. Two board directors remarked on housing prices, rent, and CPI measurement. One of them suggested that costs of housing should be reflected in the CPI statistics; the other cited examples of other central banks: The Fed chairman showed concerns about how rising home prices could lead to rent rises and thus push up inflation; the ECB had several years ago contemplated incorporating owner-occupied housing (OOH) prices in the CPI. Though such a concept has not been adopted in the official CPI program, it indicates the kind of thought given to OOH prices – in addition to rent – in that their increases may have a potential effect on the CPI. One supervisor stated that according to the DGBAS, who is responsible for CPI statistics compilation in Taiwan, residential rent has a weight of about 15%, while the U.S. assigns a higher weight to rent (above 30%) and the sample of housing units are for urban U.S. Across many countries, data show that housing prices have posted larger increases than rents. When home prices go up, prospective purchases would take into account buyers’ income and affordability, whereas rent surveys for CPI statistics reflect only the price factor. The international norm for CPI compilation is to seek to reflect the change in the cost of buying a fixed basket of goods and services of constant quality, whereas changes (such as improvements) in the quality or rises in the prices of a home property are not included in the CPI measurement. And the CPI data compiled by the DGBAS only measure the changes in residential rent, but not housing prices. Recently, residential rent seemed to be trending upwards, and that uptrend was indicated by the DGBAS’ CPI data using a compilation approach in line with the international principles. Regarding the previously mentioned idea of incorporating housing prices into CPI compilation, the supervisor noted that this was simply one of the suggestions once floated by the ECB, and currently there are no countries directly including housing prices in their CPI measurement. One board director noted that the DGBAS is Taiwan’s CPI compiler and follows the international principles; the institution’s authority and efforts deserve respect. Most countries, including the U.S. and Japan, use the “rental equivalence” approach; their rent is generally less susceptible to housing price changes, showing a more stable trend with little deviation from the CPI. This is also the case for Taiwan. On Proposition 1, the board directors decided to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations by 0.125 percentage points to 1.625%, 2%, and 3.875%, respectively. On Proposition 2, the board directors reached a unanimous vote to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points. The board directors and supervisors approved unanimously to issue the following press release in the post-meeting press conference, together with the Supplementary Materials for the Post-Monetary Policy Meeting Press Conference prepared by the Bank. Since the Board met in June this year, growth in the US, the euro area, and China has moderated, prices of commodities such as international crude oil have trended downward, and global supply chain bottlenecks have gradually eased, whereas global inflation remains at high levels. With most economies including the US and the European economies continuing with policy rate hikes, leading to a tightening of financial conditions, growth momentum for the global economy is expected to soften and international institutions have downgraded their forecasts for the 2022 global economic growth. Meanwhile, recent developments in US inflation and the Fed's monetary policy stance have sparked a drastic increase in volatility in international financial markets. The US dollar has strengthened, with the international US Dollar Index reaching a 20-year high and major economies' currencies all depreciating against the US dollar. Looking ahead, the global economy faces multiple downside risks, including the following: aggressive monetary policy tightening by the US and the European economies inducing tighter international financial conditions, which could weigh on global economic activity; the energy crisis fueled by the ongoing Russia- Ukraine war dragging down economic growth in Europe; China's zero-COVID policy affecting the easing of global supply chain bottlenecks and its real estate troubles undermining financial stability. In addition, geopolitical risks, extreme weather events, and the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic would also add to uncertainties surrounding the global economic and financial outlooks. International institutions project global economic growth to moderate further and inflation to fall back down in the year 2023. Domestic economic and financial conditions 1. Since around the middle of the year, domestic private consumption has rebounded on the stabilized pandemic situation at home. On the other hand, faltering final demand amid a slowing global economic expansion and the ensuing inventory adjustment by some firms have exerted a drag on Taiwan's export growth and private investment. The Bank trims its forecast for the economic growth this year to 3.51% (Appendix Table 1). The pandemic's impact on the labor market has waned. The July 2022 figures showed that the number of employed persons increased by 0.29% year on year; the unemployment rate rose to 3.78% owing to seasonal factors but the seasonally- adjusted rate came in at 3.68%, returning to the level before the domestic COVID- 19 flare-up in April this year. Looking ahead to next year, employment and wage growth are likely to benefit from the recovery in domestically-oriented services sector, helping to extend the uptrend in private consumption. Meanwhile, the global economic moderation could dampen growth momentum for Taiwan's exports and private investment. For the year 2023, the Bank forecasts the economy to expand by 2.90%. In recent months, domestic inflation eased on account of the decline in international crude oil and grain prices and local vegetable prices. The annual growth rate of consumer price index (CPI) dropped to 2.66% in August and that of core CPI (excluding fruit, vegetables, and energy items) edged down to 2.73%. For the first eight months, the CPI and core CPI annual growth rates averaged 3.10% and 2.49%, respectively. Given the softening in international raw material prices and the effect of a higher comparison base, the Bank expects the domestic inflation rate to gradually come down, with the CPI and core CPI annual growth rates at 2.95% and 2.52%, respectively, for this year (Appendix Table 2). Looking ahead to next year, global supply chain bottlenecks would likely be gradually alleviated and international institutions mostly anticipate a price downtrend for crude oil and other raw materials. The Bank projects the CPI and core CPI annual growth rates to drop to 1.88% and 1.87%, respectively, in 2023. Banks' excess reserves hovered slightly above NT$60 billion recently. For the first eight months of the year, the annual growth rate of bank loans and investments and that of M2 (measured on a daily average basis) were 7.77% and 7.66%, respectively. Short- and long-term market interest rates rose higher following the Bank's monetary tightening this year. Monetary policy decisions: Raising the policy rates by 0.125 percentage points and raising the reserve requirement ratios by 0.25 percentage points In today's meeting, the Board considered the following developments in domestic and foreign economic and financial conditions. Given the recent international commodity price decline, the domestic inflation rate is expected to come down gradually in the second half of the year, while registering above 2% for the year as a whole before dropping below 2% next year. Moreover, with a slowing global economy compounded by greater downside risk in the second half of the year through to next year, it is expected that the domestic economic growth momentum would weaken next year. The Board judged that, by continuing with policy rate hikes while also raising the reserve requirement ratios, it would help rein in domestic inflation expectations, maintain price stability, and help attain the policy objectives of fostering sound economic and financial development. At the meeting today, the Board decided to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations by 0.125 percentage points each to 1.625%, 2%, and 3.875%, respectively, effective September 23, 2022. The Board also decided to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points each (see Appendix for the requirements by type of deposits), effective October 1, 2022. Against a backdrop of elevated inflationary pressures and intensified headwinds facing the global economy, the Bank will closely monitor the implications for domestic price trends brought forth by international raw material price movements, geopolitical risks, extreme weather events, and the course of the pandemic worldwide, while also paying close attention to the trajectory of monetary policy tightening in major economies and the effects therefrom on economic and financial conditions at home and abroad. The Bank may adjust its monetary policy accordingly in a timely manner as warranted, so as to fulfill the statutory duties of maintaining financial and price stability, and fostering economic development within the scope of the above objectives. The Bank's selective credit control measures, implemented with four successive amendments from December 2020, have so far successfully bolstered credit risk management of the banking sector. In the year so far, banks' construction and housing loans have expanded at a slower pace, real estate loan concentration has been broadly steady, and the level of non-performing loan ratio for real estate lending has been low. The effectiveness of the existing credit controls would also have been amplified by the Bank's monetary policy tightening. In addition, housing market transactions have been dampened somewhat in the year to date as a result of the government's cross-agency efforts under the Healthy Real Estate Market Plan and the pandemic flare-up in recent months. The Bank will actively keep track of the developments in real estate lending and continue to review the implementation of the selective credit control measures, and make adjustments as needed in order to promote financial stability. While the currencies of major economies and the NT dollar have all depreciated against the US dollar so far this year, the NT dollar exchange rate has experienced comparatively less volatility. The Bank will keep close watch on international financial conditions and the trends of cross-border capital flows. In the event of excess volatility and disorderly movements in the NT dollar exchange rate with adverse implications for economic and financial stability, the Bank, in line with its statutory mandates, will step in to maintain an orderly market.