The ongoing Russia-Ukraine war pushed up international raw material prices. China’s zero-COVID policy added to global supply chain pressures, leading to a broad slowdown in corporate expansion in major economies. Moreover, the US and other economies began monetary tightening at a faster pace. For the year as a whole, international institutions expected global economic growth to moderate. International oil prices swung upwards from April due to the EU's proposal to phase out Russian crude oil by the end of the year. International institutions forecasted higher oil prices for this year compared to last year. Grain prices also rose due to export disruptions from the Ukraine war but eased slightly after successful talks to resume fertilizer exports from Ukraine and Russia. Significant increases in food and energy prices pushed inflation higher in major economies, leading international institutions to revise up their global inflation projections for this year. Inflation was expected to reach significantly higher levels compared to the previous year. Amid rising inflation in major economies, the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England continued raising policy rates, the European Central Bank prepared to end its bond-buying program, and Japan and China maintained broadly loose monetary policies. US and German 10-year government bond yields increased due to market expectations that the Fed would tighten monetary policy faster, begin shrinking its balance sheet, and that the ECB would end asset purchases and gradually start raising rates. Hawkish stances by major central banks led to declines in global stock markets. Reflecting expectations for larger Fed rate increases compared to other central banks, the US dollar index trended upwards, while the currencies of other major economies weakened. Looking ahead, the global economy faces several downside risks: the Ukraine war exacerbating supply chain disruptions and the global food crisis; elevated inflation amplifying inflation expectations and adding to price pressures; faster rate hikes worsening financial conditions and dampening global economic growth; China’s economic slowdown dragging down global growth. Additionally, recurring waves of COVID-19 complicate the already uncertain global economic outlook. Taiwan’s economy posted solid growth in the first quarter, with steady performance in the manufacturing sector and recovery in the services sector. While the coincident indicator for the business outlook rose mildly in April, the leading indicator fell for the sixth consecutive month. Pronounced price rises led to marginal growth in real total earnings for non-farm employees in the first four months, but 54% experienced negative growth, mostly in the services sector. The domestic COVID-19 case surge from mid-April slowed private consumption significantly, disrupting recovery in domestically-oriented services. Exports registered double-digit growth year-on-year for January to May 2022. However, export growth is expected to moderate in the second half due to a slowing global economy, though demand for emerging technology applications and digital transformation-related products will continue. The Bank projected solid export growth for the year as a whole. Private investment saw stronger momentum as large tech firms increased capital expenditure, and infrastructure projects like green energy and 5G networks progressed. However, global economic and trade uncertainties cast a shadow over investment plans, with private investment expected to grow mildly for the year. Private consumption, dampened by the mid-April COVID-19 surge, is projected to pick up later in the year as infection rates decrease and government stimulus measures support services. The Bank forecasted private consumption growth to gather pace. With domestic consumption disrupted by COVID-19 and the investment outlook clouded by global uncertainties, the Bank projected Taiwan’s economy to grow by 3.75% this year, down from the March forecast of 4.05%. Growth projections by major institutions ranged between 2.77% and 4.50%. Domestic long and short-term interest rates climbed recently, reflecting the Bank’s March rate hike and global financial market volatility caused by the Fed’s tightening and the Ukraine war. Average bank excess reserves stood at around NT$70 billion. Bank loans and investments rose steadily, with increased demand from both private and public enterprises. M2 growth trended downward from late 2021 but picked up moderately in recent months as bank credit expanded. In the housing market, transaction growth moderated due to the Executive Yuan’s Healthy Housing Market Plan and the local COVID-19 outbreak. Building ownership transfers nationwide increased by 3.34% year-on-year in the first four months, with a 0.7% increase in the six Special Municipalities for January to May. However, May data showed a 7.7% decline year-on-year. Rising construction costs and the national Urban Land Price Index drove new housing prices higher. The Housing Price Index showed annual increases of 8.63% in Q4 2021 and further rises of 14.66% for existing homes and 27.19% for new housing projects in Q1 2022. Sentiment among builders and real estate businesses became cautious, and banks grew less optimistic about residential housing in major cities. As of April 2022, annual growth rates for real estate lending, housing loans, and construction loans were 10.20%, 9.39%, and 13.30%, respectively. Real estate loans accounted for 36.91% of total loans, slightly lower than 37.16% at the end of 2021. The construction loan ratio stood at 26.86%, below the 30% cap prescribed in Article 72-2 of the Banking Act. Non-performing housing loans remained low at 0.08%. Since December 2020, four amendments to selective credit controls have kept real estate lending concentrations stable, contributing to improved bank credit risk management. The Bank’s tightening measures since March amplified the effectiveness of these controls. Policy efforts from the Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Finance, Financial Supervisory Commission, and local governments under the Healthy Housing Market Plan are expected to show results over time. Imported product costs, such as food and crude oil, increased this year, pushing up related domestic product prices. Unfavorable weather also affected harvests, contributing to inflation. For January to May, the CPI grew by 3.04%, driven by food, fuel, lubricants, and consumer durables. Consumers became more conscious of price increases for frequently purchased staples. Survey data on inflation expectations showed more corporate respondents anticipating inflation above 2.5% within 12 months, reflecting rising international raw material prices and domestic price hikes. The Bank forecasted annual CPI and core CPI growth rates of 2.83% and 2.42% for 2022. Inflation projections by domestic and foreign institutions ranged from 2.20% to 3.80%. Compared to major economies, Taiwan’s inflation rate was mild due to weak private consumption demand and government measures to stabilize prices. Long-term inflation is expected to remain around 1.5%. Upside price pressures could arise from higher freight costs, raw material prices, and eased border controls increasing travel demand. Downside pressures may include reduced customs duties, promotional price cuts during the COVID-19 outbreak, and telecom operators reducing device prices amid competition. Looking ahead, upside pressures for domestic prices could arise from upward price adjustments to reflect rising international freight fares and raw material prices, as well as the easing of border controls and continuous oil price uptrends resulting in a sizeable increase in airfares by aviation companies. On the other hand, downside pressures could come from government plans to reduce customs duties and commodity and business taxes to help ease the pressures of rising costs on product providers, promotional price cuts to prop up consumer interest amid an ongoing coronavirus outbreak, and telecom operators cutting prices of mobile phones and other communication devices amid intense competition. International commodity prices continued trending up, imposing heavy imported inflation pressures on domestic prices, which would likely stay at elevated levels. The Bank revised up forecasts for this year’s CPI and core CPI annual growth rates to 2.83% and 2.42%, respectively. The recent COVID-19 case surge at home disrupted the recovery of the domestically-oriented services sector and restrained private consumption growth. Domestic economic growth momentum could be dampened by a global economic outlook facing downward risks. The Bank revised down this year’s economic growth rate projection to 3.75%. The domestic price uptrend in the year so far was mainly due to supply-side factors such as higher costs for importing crude oil and food. To counter cost-push inflation shocks, a policy mix combining various suitable tools would be required to maintain price stability. The government took measures to stabilize oil and electricity rates and reduced several customs duties, commodity taxes, and business taxes where necessary. These supply-side measures adopted to address energy and food price volatility had greatly buttressed overall price stability. In the face of drastic price volatility caused by supply-side factors, monetary policy responses such as aggressive tightening could concomitantly restrain economic output; therefore, supply-side measures would serve better under the circumstances. However, as inflation was expected to stay elevated for an extended period of time, an appropriate tightening stance would still be needed to help anchor inflation expectations and reach a better supply-demand balance, so as to maintain price stability. The Bank raised the policy rates by 25 basis points in March this year, a decision based on the anticipation that the domestically-oriented services sector was on track towards continued revival and thus the policy rates could be brought back up to the pre-pandemic level. However, that pace of services recovery was disrupted by the recent spike in coronavirus infections, which dampened private consumption growth and rattled labor market conditions. The government, in response to recent Omicron waves, extended the special regulations governing pandemic relief measures to June 30, 2023. Accordingly, relevant relief loan programs would expire later than originally scheduled. The Bank’s Special Accommodation Facility to Support Bank Credit to SMEs would expire at the end of June this year, meaning that the rates of such preferential loans would go up afterwards. In light of elevated domestic inflation, a larger policy rate increase would more significantly exacerbate interest burdens of economically-vulnerable businesses and workers taking out relief loans and other policy loans; it would be more appropriate to adopt a more moderate pace for today’s rate hike. In light of the ongoing price uptrends at home, the Bank proposed to simultaneously raise policy rates and reserve requirement ratios to rein in public expectations for price growth. The Bank judged that adopting a monetary policy mix to affect price (interest rates) and quantity (money stock) would not only help amplify policy effects but also clearly demonstrate the Bank’s stance to continue tightening. Higher policy rates tend to affect not just one particular part but a broad range of the economy, including the deposit rates of financial institutions which current relief loans or other policy loans are typically linked to. Therefore, it would be more appropriate to refrain from unwarranted large rate increases. On the other hand, since higher reserve requirement ratios do not directly affect deposit rates, using this tool as part of the policy mix would therefore not add to the interest burden of vulnerable workers and firms. With the increase of reserve requirement ratios, banks would shift their funds from central bank-issued certificates of deposit or redeposits to required reserves, so that bank capital would park with the central bank for a longer period. This would reduce the stock of money in the economy, thereby alleviating inflationary pressures and helping maintain price stability. As banks will have to set aside more funds to be held as reserves, they would be more cautious in making new investments and extending new credit. This would constrain the capacity of credit creation by banks and, in turn, help maintain M2 growth at an appropriate level. The Bank proposed to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations by 12.5 basis points to 1.5%, 1.875%, and 3.75%, respectively, and to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 25 basis points. The Board members reached a unanimous vote to raise the policy rates by 12.5 basis points and to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 25 basis points. One board director stated that this year’s price rises were mainly due to imported inflation, and supply-side inflationary pressures were beyond the influence of monetary policy. Nevertheless, considering that price stability is part of the Bank’s statutory mandate, it would be imperative to adopt an appropriate increase in the policy rates to rein in inflation. Meanwhile, data showed that since the Bank’s March rate hike, the average excess reserves of financial institutions had come to levels higher than the same period last year. Therefore, raising the reserve requirement ratios by an appropriate extent would reduce the money stock and restrain bank credit expansion, thereby making up a tightening move that affects both quantity (money stock) and price (interest rates). Furthermore, in deciding the pace of the policy rate hike, one should also take into account the recent local COVID-19 resurgence’s impact on the SMEs. Therefore, the board director was in favor of a 12.5 basis-point rate hike and a 25 basis-point increase in the reserve requirement ratios. Another board director agreed with today’s propositions and stated that the considerations supporting the policy rate increase by only 12.5 basis points—including financial conditions having tightened, economic activity likely slackening off, relief loan programs closing (leaving the respective loan rates at the discretion of banks), and domestic demand recovery sputtering (e.g., domestically-oriented services sector posting negative real earnings growth)—were understandable. However, one of the main objectives of interest rate tools is to anchor inflation expectations; the Bank should communicate to the public that today’s decisions took into consideration the impact of evolving price trends and therefore it opted for an approach that would affect both money stock and interest rates. Such communication would promote policy effectiveness by improving public understanding of potential changes in inflation expectations and borrowing costs over the coming months or an extended time. One board director pointed out that although domestic inflation had been trending up owing to rising international oil prices, the government had introduced many supply-side measures, including a domestic oil price stabilizing mechanism and electricity rate freezes, to mitigate such supply-side inflation. Meanwhile, the Bank’s policy rate hike would also help temper inflation expectations, albeit with possible negative implications, especially for the domestically-oriented services sector. One board director noted that the services sector was battered by the pandemic and was having a hard time regaining its footing. With the Bank’s Special Accommodation Facility set to close soon, a further 25 basis-point rate hike would weigh on the services sector as well as the SMEs. In this view, it would help to tap an alternative solution by using the reserve requirement tool in tandem. The director, expressing support for today’s policy propositions, added that the reserve requirement tool influences through the stock of money. While it has been a while since the tool was last deployed, the increase in the reserve requirement ratios in today’s meeting would affect money supply through the money multiplier effect, the positive and negative outcomes of which should be rigorously followed to help guide future policy formulation. Another board director, approving of today’s policy propositions, noted that although the broad, ongoing price rises chiefly resulted from supply-side factors, the central bank should still take actions where needed. The director also pointed out that the downward revision to the Bank’s domestic GDP forecast primarily reflected below-expectation progress in private consumption. The rate hike, albeit based on a comprehensive assessment of the overall economic and financial conditions, would be helpful to some parts of the economy while undesirable to others. The Bank’s monetary tightening was aimed at combating inflation. The key would be to bring down inflation expectations of the household and corporate sectors, preventing such mentality from becoming entrenched and thus causing prices to spiral upwards. Since today’s increase in policy rates was smaller than the March rate hike and the reserve requirement tool functions indirectly via the bank credit channel, adequate communication to the public about the inflation-fighting effects of today’s decisions would be important for the policy to work well in containing inflation expectations. One board director agreed with a 25 basis-point rise in the reserve requirement ratios and, while supporting a policy rate hike, recognized the challenge in deciding on a rate hike by either 12.5 or 25 basis points. After the Bank raised the policy rates by 25 basis points in March, data showed that the overnight call loan rate and other short-term interest rates did not increase by a corresponding extent, implying that the March rate decision somehow did not go far beyond an announcement effect. Therefore, a further hike by 25 basis points would be more appropriate in today’s meeting, whereas a 12.5 basis-point hike, if adopted, should be accompanied by a 12.5 basis-point hike in the interest rates on 7-day (or other short-term) certificates of deposit issued by the Bank. One board director pointed out that Taiwan’s inflationary pressures were in fact much higher than what the actual data showed. Be it supply-side or demand-side, inflation of either type would certainly affect inflation expectations, an area where the Bank should tackle. Historically, regardless of the type of inflation, an easy money environment seems to have been the underlying cause of rising inflation. The clearer, the firmer, and the sooner an effective monetary policy is introduced, the more likely it will be to well anchor inflation expectations early on and to ward off the risk of an economic recession. Though monetary policy is not a cure-all, its timely effective deployment would help treat the problems. Slow and conservative rate hikes might not be powerful enough to constrain inflation and anchor inflation expectations. Meanwhile, despite four amendments to the selective credit controls on housing credit, each round was implemented with a light touch and may not be effective. Indeed, some of the relevant indicators – such as housing prices, housing loan portfolio concentration, the household debt-to-GDP ratio, housing prices-to-income ratio, and the housing loan burden ratio – had continued to hit record highs. This director expressed concern that the Board did not take action against the housing price issue in the March meeting, neither did it in today’s meeting. In addition, although a policy mix has the benefit of amplifying the intended effect, the one proposed in today’s meeting still appeared to err on the side of caution. Compared to the monetary policy conduct of central banks the world over, the extent of a 12.5 basis-point increase seemed to be out of norm and lack potency. One board director noted that Taiwan’s inflation had been mild so far this year compared to other economies; though inflation expectations had risen, the inflation rate was expected to gradually trend down in the second half of the year. Against this backdrop, it was warranted to raise the policy rates to stem higher inflation, but the pace should not be rushed in order not to adversely impact vulnerable sectors, such as the domestically-oriented services sector, in which a growing number of employees were furloughed amid the impact from the recent Omicron outbreak. Meanwhile, as domestic banks’ excess reserves stood at high levels, raising the reserve requirement ratios would help restrain the liquidity of money supply. In all, the director agreed with today’s propositions. Another board director also expressed support for the policy propositions, stating that the simultaneous tightening through price (interest rates) and quantity (money stock) would not only demonstrate the Bank’s resolve to keep inflation in check but also show the market that the Bank is keeping an eye on the overnight call loan rate, an indicator of short-term funding costs. Nevertheless, the reserve requirement adjustment has not been frequently deployed, and the effect of such policy implementation on bank excess reserves and market interest rates would need to be closely monitored. Moreover, with a policy rate hike, financially vulnerable borrowers would feel the pain of a heavier interest burden when banks correspondingly raise their interest rates on loans (as well as on deposits); on the other hand, larger corporates would be better equipped to sustain a rate hike as their funding costs via debt issuance are largely determined by bills finance and capital market interest rates. In this view, today’s proposition to administer a smaller rate hike, along with raising the reserve requirements, would be an equitable approach that looks out for the economically disadvantaged people. One board director pointed out that in the past three years, unanticipated shocks including the US-China trade conflicts, the coronavirus outbreak, and the Russian invasion of Ukraine had resulted in volatile price uptrends internationally and domestically, leading foreign and local institutions to keep upgrading inflation projections. In the US, inflation was spurred by both supply and demand factors, prompting the Fed to combat inflation with aggressive rate hikes. On the other hand, Taiwan’s inflation was mainly induced by supply constraints; with domestic consumer demand still lukewarm and the government adopting supply-side measures to stabilize prices, inflation remained mild compared to major economies, thus warranting a more moderate pace of rate hikes. Nonetheless, if inflation becomes persistently high, then monetary tightening should step up. In regard to housing market-related measures, the Bank’s four recent rounds of selective credit controls were in fact financial stability measures introduced to avoid an inordinate credit flow into the real estate sector, instead of attempts aiming directly at housing prices. Therefore, the effectiveness of such measures would be better reflected by financial stability-related indicators such as portfolio concentration and non-performing loan ratios of real estate lending. Currently, banks had shown good real estate credit management, housing transactions had slowed somewhat, and the policy efforts by other government agencies to ensure a sound housing market were expected to gradually make headway. In addition, monetary tightening since March would also help dampen housing credit growth. Based on such an assessment, it was judged appropriate to maintain the selective credit controls at the current status. In the future, the Bank should continue monitoring developments related to real estate lending and, if necessary, take further measures in a timely manner. One board director expressed concern because the proposition’s 12.5 basis points would trail farther behind the Fed’s rate hikes which included a 75 basis-point rise in June and another hike expected in July. Despite the fact that recent NTD weakness was mainly caused by foreign portfolio investment outflows, more downward pressures on the currency could ensue if a wider US-Taiwan interest rate differential induces more capital outflows. Since Taiwan’s price uptrends were due in large part to rises in import prices of raw materials, a weaker currency would also weigh on price stability. In addition, the relatively mild inflation in Taiwan was mainly supported by utility (oil, electricity, natural gas, etc.) fee freezes and subsidies from the government. Recent data pointed to little change in domestic economic and financial conditions; combined with the Fed’s aggressive rate hikes, it would seem more fitting for the Bank to raise the policy rates by 25 basis points. On the other hand, the last time the Bank adjusted reserve requirements was more than a decade ago, and the effect of this type of adjustment at a time when bank excess reserves stayed somewhat elevated would be limited. One board director approved of a 12.5 basis-point rate hike, noting that an appropriate hike would help rein in inflation expectations. However, given this was a small increase by 12.5 basis points, it would be important to heed potential impacts of a wider US-Taiwan interest rate differential on capital flows and NT dollar exchange rates. As Taiwan faced mainly price pressures arising from imported inflation, the widening differential would possibly induce capital outflows and further weaken the NTD, aggravating the problem of imported inflation. One board director stated that the US government bond yields have surged as the Fed tightened at a faster pace; this not only weakened the US economic outlook and weighed on future stock dividend growth, but also pushed up the discount rate (used in business valuation that converts future returns into present value) and led investors to downgrade stock valuations, causing sharp corrections in the US stock markets. Reflecting the US financial market turbulence, Taiwan’s stock indices also fluctuated downwards, triggering a sell-off by foreign institutional investors who, based on asset re-allocation and funds redemption strategies, executed large profit-taking trades and moved capital out, causing the NT dollar to weaken more markedly than usual. In addition, the majority of foreign capital in Taiwan is held in the form of stock holdings, and data also pointed to little change in the balance of foreign investor holdings of Taiwanese government bonds and NTD deposits. These showed that the widening interest rate spread between the US and Taiwan was not the main driver for the recent foreign capital outflow. One board director stated that the domestic inflation rate had been above 2% since April 2021 and was expected to remain so for the rest of 2022, longer than previously projected, while surveyed data also showed that experts and scholars still envisaged inflation exceeding 2% next year. If the coronavirus outbreak eases in the second half year or sometime in the future, domestic economic activity would rebound. Persistent price uptrends would continue to buoy inflation expectations. Therefore, it is important for future monetary policy deliberations to focus on the issue of inflation and inflation expectations. Several board directors discussed economic uncertainties lying ahead and a wider US-Taiwan interest rate differential, and stated that the Bank’s monetary policy conduct should be more nimble. If needed, the Bank may hold emergency meetings of Executive Directors before the next scheduled meeting so as to make swift, nimble policy adjustments as warranted. The board directors reached a unanimous vote to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations by 12.5 basis points to 1.5%, 1.875%, and 3.75%, respectively; and to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 25 basis points. The Board judged that raising both the policy rates and the reserve requirement ratios would send a clear message that the Bank continues to adopt a monetary policy stance of tightening. This will help strengthen the policy effects and rein in domestic inflation expectations, so as to achieve the policy objectives of price stability and sound financial and economic development. The Board decided unanimously to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations to 1.5%, 1.875%, and 3.75%, respectively, effective June 17, 2022. The Board also decided unanimously to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points each, effective July 1, 2022. The board directors and supervisors approved unanimously to issue the press release in the post-meeting press conference, together with the Supplementary Materials for the Post-Monetary Policy Meeting Press Conference prepared by the Bank. Since the Board met in March this year, the continued Russia-Ukraine conflict has pushed up commodity prices, and the strict pandemic-related restrictions in China have exacerbated international supply chain bottlenecks, significantly heightening global inflationary pressures. Meanwhile, further policy rate hikes by central banks in major economies like the US have induced tighter financial conditions. As a result, it is expected that growth momentum for the global economy is likely to soften this year. Recent global financial market turbulence has also intensified in the wake of monetary tightening in major economies. International institutions have further downgraded their forecasts for the 2022 global economic growth and revised this year's global inflation forecasts upwards. Looking ahead, the global economy is still clouded by multiple downside risks, mainly including the Russia-Ukraine conflict, inflation expectations likely being pushed up by high global inflation, a slowdown in China's economic growth, and tightening international financial conditions, which could weigh on global production as well as economic and trade activity. Moreover, recurring COVID-19 pandemic outbreaks would also add uncertainties to the global economy. In the first quarter of the year, bolstered by growth in exports and private investment, the domestic economy expanded at a solid pace. The manufacturing sector showed steady expansion, while the services sector gradually recovered. In terms of labor market conditions, the unemployment rate fell slightly compared to the same period of the previous year, whereas the number of employed persons recorded a modest year-on-year decrease. As inflation was elevated, the average real total earnings of all payroll employees in the industrial and services sectors only registered marginal growth, and there remained a pronounced difference in wage growth across sectors. The domestic COVID-19 resurgence since mid-April caused companies to institute more furloughs, and consumers shied away from dining out and travel. As a result, consumer spending slumped, and the recovery of domestically-oriented services sectors faltered. Looking ahead to the second half of the year, though the global economic expansion is likely to moderate, it is expected that continued demand for emerging technology applications and digital transformation-related products would support Taiwan's export growth. Private investment is projected to extend the uptrend, and government consumption is also set to increase, while private consumption would gradually pick up once the domestic coronavirus outbreak eases. The Bank forecasts Taiwan's economy to grow by 3.75% this year, lower than the March forecast of 4.05%. From the beginning of 2022, domestic prices of food and oil-related products were pushed up by rising import costs, and domestic harvests of fruit and vegetables were restrained by unfavorable weather conditions, leading the consumer price index (CPI) annual growth rate to trend upwards. For the first five months of the year, the annual growth rates of the CPI and core CPI (excluding fruit, vegetables, and energy items) averaged 3.04% and 2.33%, respectively. The Bank expects the inflation rate to gradually come down in the second half of the year but still at elevated levels. For the year as a whole, the Bank revises the CPI and core CPI annual growth rate projections upwards to 2.83% and 2.42%, respectively. Recently, banks' excess reserves stood around NT$70 billion. The annual growth rate of bank loans and investments averaged 8.62% for the first four months of the year, while that of M2 (on a daily average basis) registered 7.94% for the same period. Meanwhile, short- and long-term market interest rates both rose higher. In today's meeting, the Board considered these developments in domestic and foreign economic and financial conditions. Given mounting pressures of imported inflation fueled by rising international commodity prices, domestic inflation is expected to remain elevated. Meanwhile, as the recent surge of COVID-19 infections at home disrupted the recovery of domestically-oriented services sectors, private consumption growth would likely weaken. In addition, shrouded by downside risks, a more subdued global economic outlook could further weigh on Taiwan's growth momentum. The Board judged that raising both the policy rates and the reserve requirement ratios would send a clear message that the Bank continues to adopt a monetary policy stance of tightening. This will help strengthen the policy effects and rein in domestic inflation expectations, so as to achieve the policy objectives of price stability and sound financial and economic development. The Board decided unanimously at the meeting today to raise the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations to 1.5%, 1.875%, and 3.75%, respectively, effective June 17, 2022. The Board also decided unanimously to increase the reserve requirement ratios on NT dollar demand deposits and time (savings) deposits by 0.25 percentage points each, effective July 1, 2022. Against the backdrop of intense inflationary pressures and significant downside risks faced by the global economy, the Bank will closely monitor implications for domestic price trends resulting from the Russia-Ukraine conflict and other geopolitical risks, international commodity price movements, and the global pandemic progress. The Bank will also closely monitor how the monetary policy tightening of major economies would affect economic and financial conditions at home and abroad. Based on these assessments, the Bank may adjust its monetary policy timely and appropriately to fulfill its statutory duties of maintaining financial and price stability and fostering economic development. The Bank's selective credit control measures, first introduced in December 2020 and adjusted three times later, have so far successfully slowed down the expansion of construction and housing loans and kept real estate loan concentration broadly steady, thereby bolstering banks' credit risk management. As the government's cross-agency efforts proceeded further under the Healthy Real Estate Market Plan and the renewed pandemic waves created additional concerns, trading in the housing market has cooled somewhat for the year to date. Moreover, the monetary policy tightening would also boost the effectiveness of the existing credit controls. The Bank will stay attentive to developments in real estate lending, continue to review the implementation of the selective credit control measures, and make adjustments as needed to promote financial stability. When seasonal or irregular factors (such as massive inflows or outflows of short-term capital) lead to excess volatility and disorderly movements in the NT dollar exchange rate with adverse implications for economic and financial stability, the Bank, in line with its statutory mandates, will step in to maintain an orderly market.