Most members of the Governing Board pointed out that during the third quarter of the year the world economy continued to decelerate. Some members added that this was mainly the result of trade tensions, primarily between the United States and China. In this regard, one member mentioned the imposition of tariffs between these countries, as well as restrictions to trade in technology and to investment, while another member added that other idiosyncratic factors have also contributed to the economic slowdown. One member specified the latter has had a differentiated impact across countries, depending on their degree of openness and the overall state of their economies. The majority of members mentioned that the adverse global environment has contributed to a decline in world trade, in investment and in business confidence as well as in manufacturing production. One member stated that indicators of global manufacturing activity suggest that it could be reaching an inflection point, which would limit the impact of potential negative effects on world trade and on activity in the services’ sector. However, he/she added that the possible strengthening of the manufacturing industry is still uncertain. Most members mentioned that the main advanced economies have decelerated, which has been salient in the industrial sector, and has been mainly motivated by the abovementioned trade disputes. One member highlighted the fragility of aggregate demand in the euro area and Japan, and its strong dependence on world trade. Likewise, he/she mentioned that the United States has also been affected by trade disputes, but to a lesser degree. He/she added that in advanced economies, the services sector has performed better, thus supporting the labor market. In this regard, another member considered that labor markets in these economies continue to perform strongly, with low unemployment rates, which has allowed consumption and the services sector to be less affected by the economic slowdown. Regarding emerging economies, one member noted that some of them have been subject to risk factors of an idiosyncratic and political nature, and associated to public policies, which have reinforced the trend of lower growth and uncertainty and have hindered investment. Another member mentioned that emerging economies have shown some recovery, which could more than offset the weakening trajectory of advanced economies. Considering the above, he/she stated that the latest information suggests a stabilization of global economic growth by the end of 2019. With respect to the growth outlook, most members pointed out that it has continued to be adjusted to the downside. One member delved into the fact that, although an outlook of low interest rates has consolidated for a long time, investment tends to be more sensitive to an environment of high economic uncertainty. He/she added that, for that reason, it is likely that investment will remain weak and that looser financial conditions will support households’ spending and lead to greater leverage, rather than encouraging an increase in capital accumulation. Most members noted that trade tensions between the U.S. and China have eased, and that the probability of a disorderly exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union has diminished. One member pointed out that in the U.S. there is a lower probability of additional tariffs on imports of vehicles and vehicle parts from the European Union, among others economies. Another member considered that the favorable evolution of trade tensions, as well as the more accommodative stances adopted by the main central banks have mitigated the perception of risk for global economic activity. Nevertheless, most members emphasized that risks to the global economy persist, associated to trade tensions and geopolitical factors as well as political and social uncertainty in different countries. One member pointed out that emerging economies are facing considerable challenges, such as a greater-thananticipated deceleration, both at a global level and in some of these countries, particularly in China, where the authorities’ efforts to implement countercyclical measures could be insufficient. Another member mentioned that the global economic situation poses significant macroeconomic policy challenges. He/she stated that the room for maneuver for fiscal policy is limited, and that it is worrying that global indebtedness has reached historic highs. Finally, he/she argued that increasing the debt burden would imply adding more financial vulnerabilities to the world economy and could represent a major obstacle for sustainable growth. In this context, most members agreed that the balance of risks to world economic activity remains biased to the downside. Considering the weak economic environment, most members underlined that global inflation pressures have diminished. One member indicated that the indirect effects of the lower energy prices have also contributed to the above. In the case of the main advanced economies, most members mentioned that headline and core inflation remain below their central banks’ targets. One member added that inflation expectations for this group of economies have also been at levels below such targets. Most members agreed that these developments in inflation have taken place despite the upturn in wages, associated with the relative strength of the labor market. One member added that inflation in various emerging economies is also at levels below their respective targets. Finally, one member considered that the balance of risks for world inflation remains biased to the downside. The majority of members pointed out that some central banks of the main advanced economies have taken measures to relax monetary conditions in recent months. One member highlighted that the contribution of additional stimuli to address the economic slowdown is increasingly smaller. All members underlined that in its October meeting, the US Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Most added that, with this decision, a 75 basis point decrease has accumulated this year. They highlighted that the Federal Reserve communication indicates that the attained range is appropriate, considering the risks faced by the US economy and that, therefore, no further adjustments are expected in the short term. One member highlighted that the adjustment in the federal funds rate was made despite the fact that inflation is at its symmetrical 2% target and despite the strength of economic activity and of the labor market, given that, in his/her opinion, the Federal Reserve considers that uncertainty is high. In addition, another member stated that, given the referred adjustment, the US Treasury bonds’ yield curve is no longer inverted, even in its shorter segments. For the euro area, Japan and the United Kingdom, most members noted that the central banks of these countries have declared that they will maintain accommodative monetary policy stances until they reach their respective inflation targets. One member underlined that the European Central Bank increased its monetary stimulus considerably in September. Some members pointed out that the Bank of Japan stated that it could even reduce its interest rate in case it was necessary. As for emerging economies, another member expressed that most central banks have eased their monetary policies during the year. He/she mentioned that some of these have lowered their interest rates to a greater degree than the Federal Reserve, as Brazil Indonesia (100bp). Most members agreed that global financial markets exhibited lower volatility, due mainly to the mitigation of the above mentioned global risks. In addition, they indicated that the accommodative monetary policy stances in the main advanced economies have contributed to a better performance of such markets in recent weeks. Some members mentioned that, in view of a lower risk aversion, stock markets have recorded gains. One member noted that these have reached historic highs. Another member added that since the last monetary policy decision, advanced economies’ interest rates increased moderately and the US dollar registered a generalized depreciation. Most members pointed out that during the last weeks capital flows to emerging economies exhibited a positive trend, both to fixed income and equity markets, and that the currencies of these economies appreciated against the US dollar and their risk premia decreased. One member mentioned that both in advanced and emerging economies, financial markets anticipate an environment of low interest rates and that over 30% of fixed income instruments exhibit negative returns. However, he/she noted that volatility episodes have been observed during the periods in which different risk factors have intensified. In this context, most members indicated that financial markets could be affected by the prevailing risks to the global economy. Some members argued that these could, to a greater extent, affect emerging markets. One member pointed out that the negative effect of the materialization of such risks on financial markets should not be overestimated, given that the central banks of the main economies would seek to improve global financial conditions via more accommodative monetary policy stances. Some members considered that the risks to international financial markets have subsided, and one of them mentioned that the balance of risks to global financial markets remains neutral. All members pointed out that latest information on the third quarter of 2019 shows that the stagnation that economic activity in Mexico has been exhibiting for several quarters continues. Most members agreed that there has been practically no economic growth during a year and a half. Some members added that in the third quarter growth was marginal. One member specified that the economy grew 0.1%, while in the annual comparison a 0.4% contraction was observed. Some members highlighted that economic activity is decelerating at a faster-thananticipated pace. One member added that if the figures for the third quarter are confirmed, the first annual contraction since 2009 would be registered, along with the first desynchronization of the Mexican economy in 25 years with respect to the US economic cycle. Some members pointed out that such contraction would have its origins in the uncertainty related to domestic factors, such as governance problems and public expenditure below the programmed, and to external factors, such as the USMCA ratification process. Regarding aggregate demand, most members highlighted the weakening of consumption and the lack of dynamism of investment. Delving into the evolution of consumption, one member added that it has decelerated despite the continuous increase in remittances and in the total wage bill in real terms. Another member added that the weakness of consumption is evident in durable goods, while retail sales have registered sustained growth, which could be related to the expansion and creation of some social programs. As for investment, he/she highlighted that, after having followed a clear negative trend during the year, August figures were positive, albeit still insufficient to consider that there has been a change of trend. Another member specified that public investment has been contracting for several years and continues to bear the adjustment of public finances, while private investment has been affected by the uncertainty related to the trade relationship in North America and other domestic factors since late 2016. As for external demand, most members indicated that manufacturing exports lost dynamism, although some members pointed out that automotive manufactures destined to the U.S. partially offset the referred fall. On the supply side, most members mentioned the weakness exhibited by the industrial sector, in particular construction and mining. One member pointed out that the weakness in the mining sector was due to lower oil production. Meanwhile, another member highlighted that industrial activity started to rebound in August and seems to have stopped falling after reaching a minimum in July. He/she added that this behavior is accounted for by a better performance of mining, which finally appears to have started reverting the negative trend it had shown for many years, and because manufactures have continued to grow, showing greater resilience against an adverse environment. With respect to tertiary activities, most members noted their stagnation throughout 2019, which is a cause for concern. In this regard, one member highlighted that, in the past, these activities have contributed significantly to economic growth. Another member indicated that tertiary activities are the largest sector of the economy and added that most of their components have weakened, although activities such as transportation, trade and recreation are starting to show a slight recovery. One member noted that only primary activities performed favorably. Regarding the labor market, most members stressed the strong decline in the pace of formal job creation during the year. In this respect, one member noted that as of October 2019 the growth rate of annual formal employments was 1.68%, which is below the mentioned that the unemployment rate has risen moderately. However, one member added that this has been accompanied by higher rates of underemployment and informal sector employment. He/she argued that, in addition to the lack of dynamism, the labor market is characterized by the creation of job posts that are, to a large extent, of low quality or that cannot meet the workers’ needs. Some members noted that the performance of the labor market reflected the weakness of the economy. One member added that it has also reflected a trajectory of wages that has been incompatible with the evolution of productivity. Most members agreed that the stagnation of economic activity has implied the widening of slack conditions in the economy at a faster rate than foreseen. Some members noted that the negative output gap is expected to continue widening throughout next year. Most members mentioned that, based on the most recent data, expected GDP growth for the present and next year will be lower than that published in the Quarterly Report April – June 2019. Similarly, one member pointed out that specialists surveyed by the central bank once again revised their growth expectations downwards for the current and following years. With respect to growth in 2019, one member indicated that the economy would not grow in the last quarter of the year and another one added that, therefore, a delay is anticipated in the recovery foreseen for such quarter. Another member noted that this would partly be due to factors such as strikes and technical shutdowns that would affect the performance of the automotive industry during the fourth quarter of the year. Meanwhile, another member estimated that economic activity will tend to improve moderately starting next year, despite the current stagnation due to the statistical comparison basis, which will be more evident in certain sectors of the industry, for instance, in construction. In the same vein, he/she mentioned that 2020 will be a leap year, and therefore there will be an extra day to produce goods and services, as compared to the previous year. Finally, another member highlighted that the weakness of gross fixed investment has had considerable implications for the evolution of the economy’s capital stock and that its growth rate is estimated to intensify in 2019 the downward trend it has been showing over the last years, with the consequent risks for potential growth. Most members noted that in an environment of marked uncertainty, the balance of risks to growth continues biased to the downside. One member considered that such balance has deteriorated significantly given the unfavorable dynamics of the services sector and emphasized that one of the most important risks that economic activity faces is the continuation of very restrictive monetary policy stance for too long, because it operates through channels that affect real variables, such as consumption and investment. Some members stated that growth is subject to both external and domestic risks. Among external risks, besides the global risks described above, one member mentioned the threat of tariffs by the United States on Mexico, and delays in the USMCA ratification. Another member added that manufacturing exports could be affected by the evolution of industrial production and of the automotive sector in both the United States and the rest of the world. With regards to domestic risks, some members mentioned the situation of Pemex and of public finances. Regarding the latter, one member highlighted the risk of a reduction in public revenues and internal factors that affect confidence and the outlook for the Mexican economy. Another member added the negative effect of maintaining very high interest rates on public finances. One member mentioned various upward risks to growth: i) the possibility of the USMCA being ratified in the short term, which would improve the certainty outlook for investment; and ii) a better implementation of public policies. Finally, he/she added that the negative factors that affected the economic performance in 2019 are not likely to occur again, such as the difficulties caused by the fuel shortages, the strikes in Tamaulipas, the railroad blockages, and the suspension of important infrastructure projects. Most members mentioned that headline inflation has remained stable, and that in October it was 3.02% and thus lies around the point target. The majority stressed that this performance is due to the fact that non-core inflation has remained at low levels, lying at 1.01% in October, while core inflation has remained at higher levels, although it has shown a slight decline to 3.68% in such period. One member considered that headline inflation has declined at a faster-than-anticipated pace. Regarding non-core inflation, most members indicated that it is at historically low levels and pointed out that in recent months some downward risks have materialized in this subindex. Some members highlighted the lower rates of change of energy and agricultural and livestock product prices. One stressed that these have recently shown the lowest levels on record. However, most members highlighted that non-core inflation is subject to a high degree of volatility. With respect to core inflation, most members agreed that it has continued to show persistence. One member pointed out that it has remained at around that within the core component there are greater pressures on the prices of services other than housing and on food merchandise, partly due to the indirect effects of the energy price increases during the second half of last year and of wage increases since the start of this year, which also have a lagged effect. One member added that, given the negative output gap, an exchange rate that has remained most of the year at more appreciated levels than at the end of 2018, energy prices with negative annual growth and agricultural product prices with moderate growth, wages are the variable that seems to be contributing, to a larger extent, to core inflation’s persistence. He/she pointed out that econometric exercises lead to the same conclusion. Meanwhile, some members mentioned that core inflation has recently shown slightly lower readings. One member noted that in October it declined for the fourth consecutive month. Some members considered that the fall of core inflation is essentially explained by the lower growth of services prices. Most members indicated that short-term inflation expectations drawn from surveys have followed the latest data, while longer term expectations have remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above 3%. Some members detailed that in October headline inflation expectations for year-end 2019 decreased to 3%. One member added that for 2020 and for the medium and long terms they stood at 3.5%. Some members mentioned that compensation for inflation and inflationary risk implied in fixed income instruments has continued to decrease. One of them specified that break-even inflation is at its lowest level of the year. Regarding inflation forecasts, most members mentioned that the recent behavior of the factors that affect the foreseen trajectory of headline inflation suggests that it may lie slightly below the trajectory set forth in the previous Quarterly Report. One member pointed out that at the end of the year inflation is likely to be below the target. Meanwhile, another member stated that, on balance, the latest data on inflation and the expected trajectory of different economic variables do not significantly alter the outlook for the performance of headline and core inflation for the following months. One member indicated that, despite expectations of headline inflation converging to its target, the trajectory depends on core inflation’s persistence easing and on non-core inflation converging to levels close to the inflation target. Some members emphasized that a slight increase in headline inflation is expected in the first quarter of next year, as a consequence of the comparison base, calendar effects and seasonality. One mentioned that it is foreseen that inflation will return to levels of around 3% starting in the second quarter of 2020. Regarding the outlook for core inflation, one member outlined that its performance in the following quarters will depend on the interaction between the indirect effects of the energy price and wage increases, with the effects of the greater slack in the economy. He/she pointed out that core inflation is estimated to follow a gradual declining trajectory towards 3% within the forecast horizon, slightly above that anticipated in the last Quarterly Report. One member considered that there are two factors that make it possible to anticipate a greater reduction in the core component. On the one hand, the moving average of the annualized monthly changes of this indicator remains at low levels of 3.3%. On the other hand, fundamental core inflation, that is, the one that is more closely associated to the economic cycle, was only 3.38% in October. With respect to non-core inflation, another member indicated that this component is expected to rebound to levels much closer to 3%. In relation to upward risks to inflation, most members mentioned the possibility of core inflation continuing to show persistence. Some members added that this could occur despite the greater slack in the economy. In this respect, one member detailed that risks to core inflation’s trajectory are evident when considering that close to 70% of the basket of the item that includes services other than housing and education, excluding tourism, continues to show annualized monthly growth rates above 4%. In this context, some members expressed their concern about the persistence of headline and core inflation expectations above the central bank forecast for Most members added the following risks: i) wage increases above productivity gains, and that this generates cost pressures. Some mentioned that there is uncertainty associated with the new adjustments to the minimum wage in 2020: ii) that the peso exchange rate comes under pressure from both external and domestic factors; iii) the threat of tariffs by the United States and that compensatory measures are adopted, although they considered that this risk has diminished; iv) that public finances deteriorate; and, v) increases in agricultural, livestock or energy prices greater than expected. In addition, some members pointed out the risk that non-core inflation registers a reversal to its historic values. One member mentioned the composition of observed inflation as a risk to its trajectory. He/she indicated that currently its components do not correspond to a long-term equilibrium, given that non-core inflation is abnormally low and core inflation is high. As for downward risks, most members mentioned the following: i) a possible appreciation of the peso exchange rate, which could likely be associated with a context of greater risk appetite in international financial markets or in case the trade agreement with the United States and Canada is ratified; ii) that slack conditions widen more than expected or that their impact on core inflation is greater than foreseen; in this regard, one member indicated that, given that a negative output gap is observed, no demand-related inflation pressures are anticipated; and, iii) the possibility that the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex register lower rates of change. Some members pointed out as a possible indicator of lower inflationary pressures the fact that the producer price index was 0.6% in October as compared to the same month of the previous year, noting that this rate is the lowest observed since August 2015. In this context, most members agreed that uncertainty still persists regarding the risks that could make inflation deviate from its foreseen trajectory. One member considered that, although the balance of risks is more balanced in the short term, in a longer-term perspective it could become uncertain due to the above mentioned dynamics of the headline inflation components. Another member mentioned that although the balance of risks is complex, in his/her opinion, it continues biased to the upside. One member estimated that risks to inflation have subsided considerably during this year, associated with better global financial conditions and with the above mentioned downward risks. Therefore, he/she considered that the balance of risks to inflation remains neutral. Most members agreed that financial markets in Mexico performed favorably, in line with the improvement in global financial conditions. They indicated that government bond yields declined for all terms. One member specified that stronger decreases were observed in certain short-term segments, and another one indicated that interest rates have remained at their lowest levels of the year. One member added that the recomposition towards longer term assets in foreign investors’ portfolio continued. Another member stated that nominal and real yield curves are inverted in their shortest tranches. He/she added that, after breaking down long-term interest rates into short-term interest rate expectations and term premia, it is found that both components have declined in recent months. He/she argued that maintaining a prudent macroeconomic policy stance has been crucial for yield curves, both nominal and real, especially in their long end, to be adjusting in an orderly manner and to the downside, in a context of a slowdown of economic activity, looser global financial conditions, and idiosyncratic risks. All members noted that the peso exchange rate appreciated slightly. One member stressed that such appreciation occurred in a context of better market trading conditions. Another member highlighted that the Mexican peso has performed better than other Latin-American economies’ currencies, which he/she associated partly to the fact that the short-term interest rate in Mexico is higher. One member added that the exchange rate has maintained a favorable outlook in light of the possible ratification of the USMCA. Some members mentioned that the stock market recorded slight gains. As for risk premia, most members emphasized that these decreased. One member stated that the Credit Default Swap (CDS) premium has decreased, both for the sovereign and Pemex’s debt, as both of these were at their lowest levels of the year. Another member emphasized that despite this reduction, the level of the sovereign CDS premium suggests that markets are still discounting a downgrade of Mexico’s credit rating, given that said CDS level is above those of other countries with a similar or even lower credit rating. Most members agreed that risks persist, which could affect the performance of financial assets in Mexico. Among these risks is a possible downgrade of the sovereign and Pemex’s ratings. In this sense, one member claimed that, given the strong presence of foreign investors, the country is exposed to a reversal of capital flows and to an increase of the country risk premium. Another member pointed out that economic growth rates consistently below expectations are a risk to domestic financial markets. One member considered that, although risks for domestic financial markets have diminished, an important risk faced by these markets currently is the continuation of an overly-tight monetary policy for a prolonged period. He/she stated that an interest rate that is too high, in addition to affecting growth and public finances, contributes to maintain the exchange rate appreciated, which not only affects net exports, but also attracts speculative capital, which could increase the country’s financial vulnerabilities. He/she stated that it is possible that a very high interest rate, which in principle would seek to protect the economy from certain risks, could, paradoxically, end up being an additional destabilizing factor. Most members mentioned that the current environment continues to pose significant risks that could affect the country’s macroeconomic conditions, its ability to grow, and the economy’s price formation process. In this regard, they emphasized that it is particularly important that, in addition to a prudent and firm monetary policy, measures to foster an environment of confidence and certainty for investment and higher productivity are adopted, and that public finances are consolidated in a sustainable way. In this context, they underlined that it is necessary to strengthen the credit rating outlook for the sovereign and Pemex’s debt, as well as to achieve the fiscal targets for 2019 and the goals set in the 2020 Economic Package. Likewise, they also pointed that strengthening the rule of law, tackling corruption, and fighting insecurity are equally imperative. One member added that it is important to increase productivity by adopting new technologies and investing in human capital. Another member mentioned that such measures would prevent potential growth from further deteriorating. Delving into Pemex’s financial situation, the majority of members acknowledged that efforts for refinancing the company’s external liabilities have had a favorable impact, as recognized by markets. They also mentioned that during the third quarter Pemex registered a positive cash flow and that oil production ceased to fall. One member added that the state-owned company has improved its financial profile in the short and medium terms. Some members stated that due to the above, the price of debt instruments stabilized and the premium on its CDS decreased. One member specified that in addition to the latter, the significant channeling of resources by the federal government contributed to reduce Pemex’s 5-year CDS by 100 basis points over the last weeks and thus the possibility of a downgrade is significantly lower than it was a few months ago. Nevertheless, the majority warned about Pemex’s business plan continuing to be a cause of concern for the rating agencies. One member expressed that the state-owned company's financial results as of the third quarter of this year show that it is still premature to consider that the structural problems that have prevented it from being profitable have been overcome. He/she also mentioned that the International Monetary Fund must be revised. Another member pointed out that there is skepticism about Pemex’s ability to meet its production and reserve replacement goals. He/she asserted that one of the rating agencies, whose stance is decisive for maintaining the company’s investment grade, has pointed out that the company’s investment levels are far below those that, in its opinion, are required to increase production and reserves. Some members indicated that given the above, markets seem to continue discounting that Pemex will lose its investment grade. Faced with this scenario, such members warned that this company could require additional support from the Federal Government, which would exert greater pressure on public finances, which already face the challenge of achieving the revenues projected for next year, in an environment in which economic activity may be lower than originally forecasted. One member pointed out that, given the aforementioned, the sovereign credit rating may also be affected. Delving into the state of public finances, one member mentioned that according to the IMF, the weakness of public revenues can lead to pressures and that, in the absence of additional measures to raise revenues or reduce spending, it estimates that a fiscal gap of between 0.5 and 1.5% of GDP will appear over the next five years. On the other hand, another member mentioned that fiscal policy has remained prudent and that the proposal for 2020 is cautious and responsible by presenting a primary surplus of 0.7% of GDP. Finally, the majority added that, judging from the opinion of business people and analysts, among the obstacles for economic activity in Mexico those that stand out are factors related to problems of insecurity, the rule of law, corruption and the lack of clarity in some public policies. One member pointed out that the percentage of companies that report having been victims of a crime continued to increase, and that the cost of credit is clearly higher for companies in those states with higher crime rates. In relation to the monetary policy decision, considering that the lower levels recorded by headline inflation, as well as the ample slack conditions in the economy and the recent behavior of the external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, the majority considered adequate to reduce by 25-basis points the overnight interbank interest rate to a level of 7.50%. Most members highlighted that given the high uncertainty outlook faced by inflation, monetary policy must remain prudent. They stated that the monetary policy stance must be adjusted gradually, incorporate available information, respond to the economy’s conditions, and allow for an orderly and sustained convergence of inflation to the target. One member argued that the level of the attained rate allows for gradually decreasing the level of monetary restriction, according to the economy’s conditions, and facilitates the efficient convergence of inflation to its target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Another member mentioned that the outlook has become more complex as GDP growth has turned out to be lower than anticipated, while core inflation and inflation expectations continue to show persistence, and an environment of high uncertainty prevails around factors that could affect inflation, even in the short term, such as the wage policy and Pemex’s situation. In this context, he/she asserted that while any room for maneuver that is available should be used to ease the monetary policy stance, this should be done with caution given the risks faced by the economy. One member pointed out that it is necessary to determine the best balance for the monetary position that considers i) an external environment of lower inflationary pressures and interest rates; ii) a headline inflation around its target, a persistent core inflation and an atypically low non-core inflation; iii) a widening of economic slack; and iv) the need for aligning short-term interest rates to procure an orderly adjustment of the economy; that is in tune with the yield curve and the risk premia; that contributes to maintain the attractiveness of domestic markets; and that helps the yield curve incorporate short-term interest rate expectations that are consistent with the central bank objectives. The same member considered that the above suggests that, under the current environment, the monetary policy stance should be adapted gradually. He/she added that in such process it is necessary to identify, in the best possible manner, the economy’s conditions, the risks that it faces, as well as possible vulnerabilities that might arise. Some members highlighted that the monetary policy stance is very restrictive, considering both the domestic situation as well as its position relative to other countries, and that therefore the policy rate should be adjusted by 50 basis points. As for the domestic situation such members argued that economic slack has increased significantly and that inflation is at the central bank’s target. One of them considered that the adjustment in the interest rate in Mexico is lagging very much behind with respect to the current conditions in the country and in the world. He/she pointed out that from September 2018 to October 2019 inflation decreased by 200 basis points, while the policy rate is at the same level as in September last year. In this context, he/she considered that a reduction of only the important fall registered by inflation in the last year. He/she also argued that it would obviate other factors that have changed significantly during said period: the deceleration of the global economy, the relaxation of monetary policies of advanced and emerging economies, as well as the decline in some internal risks associated with Pemex and public finances. He/she also mentioned that Mexico is the investment grade emerging market country with the highest real rate in the world, and that it is the only country in Latin America that simultaneously has inflation close to its target together with a tight monetary policy position. He/she considered such stance atypical, in addition to unjustifiable and insensitive to the current circumstances. He/she considered such stance inexplicable given that already headline inflation is at its objective and the output gap is at its most negative level since the the interest rate remains too high. Finally, he/she warned that the monetary policy stance might be contributing to an over-adjustment of the economy in an effort to keep inflation low, which is already at its target level, and considered that monetary policy operates through channels that affect real variables, such as consumption and investment, and thus maintaining a very tight monetary policy stance for a long period constitutes a risk to economic activity, public finances and financial stability. Given the prospects of a more negative output gap, another member pointed out that although monetary policy is not the most effective instrument to induce a recovery, its transmission mechanisms, especially the interest rate, credit and asset price channels, do influence, albeit modestly, aggregate demand. Such member added that the primary goal of a 3% inflation should be pursued at the lowest possible cost. He/she mentioned that the policy rate is over the upper bound of the estimation range for the neutral rate, even after incorporating risk premia. He/she also considered that since the economic cycle is in its low phase, the monetary policy stance must be reduced in absolute terms, although a tight monetary policy stance is still required in order for core inflation to converge to 3% levels. However, he/she noted that it is not appropriate to maintain the current levels of monetary tightening, which are higher than those observed in other episodes where inflation was higher, the output gap was positive, and the balance of financial and global risks was less favorable. One member pointed out that the current economic weakness cannot be overcome with monetary policy measures, as its margins of maneuver are narrow, since the level of the policy rate is a reflection of the risks faced. In this regard, he/she noted that interest rate spreads with other economies decrease considerably when the foreign exchange risk is incorporated. He/she added that the evidence suggests that the impact of interest rates on economic activity is relatively modest and that countercyclical policies do not address the main cause of stagnation: an environment of uncertainty and not conducive to investment. Such member underlined that an imprudent easing of monetary policy, by constituting an additional source of uncertainty, would have an effect opposite to the one intended, and that the risks are particularly high in economies as open as Mexico’s. He/she argued that monetary policy is not a substitute for the economic and institutional measures needed to foster investment and increase productivity. Another member pointed out that although economic activity is slowing down at a faster pace than anticipated and slack conditions have widened, the challenges faced by the economy, the price formation process and inflation are not only those that stem from the economy’s cyclical position. He/she emphasized that there are multiple challenges and risk factors, both external and domestic, which have an impact on the economy and inflation. As for the monetary policy stance relative to other countries, some members pointed out that Mexico's interest rate spread with respect to the United States is at its highest levels in recent history and considered that a reduction of 25 basis points would keep such spread unchanged. Such members argued that the relative monetary policy stance is high when taking into consideration that the external and domestic risks faced by the economy have decreased and monetary policy has eased globally. One of them mentioned that the spread between Mexico and US interest rates is the second highest among emerging and advanced economies. Another member stated that keeping interest rate spreads constant gives a double false impression: on the one hand, it makes it seem that Mexico is responding mechanically to the Federal Reserve’s actions. On the other hand, it suggests that there has not been a significant change in the country’s economic and financial conditions, which sends a misleading message about the balance of risks faced. All members pointed to the notion that while the Federal Reserve's actions are a factor that is considered by Banco de México, they are not a determinant for monetary policy decisions. One of them added that, from previous decisions, it is possible to observe that Banco de México responds by assessing a wide range of factors that might influence inflation. Another member highlighted that the monetary policy stance should not be tied to monetary conditions relative to other economies which respond to a different context. As for monetary policy communication, one member mentioned that Banco de México’s communication policy must be transparent, concise, and easy to understand, so that the general public has an understanding that the central bank actions have as a priority to guarantee the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she added that the above prevents distortions in inflation expectations that could compromise such convergence, as well as incorrect expectations regarding monetary policy intentions. He/she mentioned that communication should emphasize that a strategy of gradual and prudent adjustments in the absolute and relative monetary policy stance will be followed, which will strengthen consistency with the economic cycle and with future expectations. He/she indicated that this strategy must take into account the level of uncertainty and the lag with which monetary policy operates. Such member added that the forward guidance on the monetary adjustment cycle should be subject to what the margins of absolute and relative monetary policy stances suggest, as well as to incoming data and unexpected events. He/she mentioned that this strategy should facilitate the understanding of monetary policy actions and improve their effectiveness. Another member stressed the importance of an adequate and objective communication by the central bank. He/she also underlined that the tone of the communiqué should highlight the decrease in both inflation and its risks. He/she pointed out that this would send a message of certainty and confidence and confirm that the central bank can ease monetary policy without compromising its mandate and with the lowest possible costs for the Mexican economy. The majority of members concluded that under the current environment of high uncertainty it must be communicated that monetary policy will adjust prudently, contributing to an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to its target. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasts, taking into account the monetary policy stance and the time frame in which monetary policy operates. In this process, it uses available information on all inflation determinants as well as on medium- and long-term inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. Monetary policy must also act prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by the economy increases significantly. In this context, considering that the lower levels registered by headline inflation, the ample slack in the economy, as well as the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.50%. Two members voted for lowering the target to 7.25%. In order to consolidate a low and stable inflation, in an environment in which price formation and slack conditions in the economy are subject to risks, the Governing Board will continue to follow closely all factors and elements of uncertainty that have an impact on inflation and its outlook, and will take the required actions based on incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s relative monetary policy stance in an external environment that it is still subject to risks, and the behavior of slack conditions and cost-related pressures in the economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and its expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and firm manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to a level of 7.50%. Gerardo Esquivel- Hernández and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 7.25%. Headline inflation has performed better than expected and will soon have been at figures very close to the inflation target for a full quarter. Indeed, accumulated inflation so far allows us to anticipate that annual year-end inflation will be less than 3%. Although core inflation is still at relatively high levels, its recent trend is clearly downward, and it is estimated to maintain this tendency in the coming months. On the other hand, the generalized reduction of interest rates in other economies, as well as the widening of the negative output gap and the reduction of certain domestic and external risks, opened up space for easing the country’s relative monetary policy stance. It is worth remembering that Mexico is an atypical case since it is the only Latin American country that has inflation close to target and, simultaneously, maintains a tight monetary policy stance. For this reason, I believe that on this occasion it was possible and desirable to reduce the interest rate by 50 basis points, without jeopardizing or compromising Banco de México’s fundamental mandate. Under the current economic conditions, a too late. Headline inflation has reached the 3.0% point target, economic activity remains stagnant and forecasts indicate that the negative output gap will continue to widen. Monetary policy easing is being observed worldwide, as well as relatively stable financial markets and a moderation of domestic and external risks, which, nevertheless, are still latent. All of the aforementioned favors adopting a less tight policy stance. I restate that maintaining a tight monetary policy stance is necessary to guarantee a core inflation consistent with the inflation target. However, the levels of tightness of the current policy stance are the highest in the past eleven years. In relative terms, despite the reductions in the policy rate, the monetary policy stance has not changed given that monetary policy easing has continued worldwide. In absolute terms, although there has been a reduction, we are still far above the upper limit of the estimates for the long-term neutral rate. Consequently, there is a wide margin of maneuver for the proposed reduction, even if considering that the balance of risks for inflation, despite being well-balanced in the short term, is uncertain in a longer time horizon.