All members agreed that towards the end of 2018 the world economy decelerated, with most advanced and some emerging economies showing less dynamism. One member mentioned that, although the weakening of the global economy has been persistent, it has occurred at a moderate rate. Some members argued that such deceleration was sharper than expected, due partly to the escalation of trade disputes and to idiosyncratic and geopolitical factors. Some members noted the negative performance that coincident and leading indicators are recently showing. One member pointed out the negative evolution of industrial production, investment spending, and global trade flows for advanced and, more recently, for emerging economies. As for the outlook for global economic activity, all members stated that growth expectations for this year have been revised downwards on an ongoing basis, while some added that forecasts for 2020 have also been reduced. One member noted that trade tensions, mainly those between the U.S. and China, have contributed to the downward revision of growth expectations. As for the balance of risks to global growth, most members stated that it is significantly biased to the downside and one pointed out that it has deteriorated. Most members agreed that, among the main risks, the following stand out: i) an escalation of trade disputes; ii) a lower-than-expected economic growth of the Chinese economy; and, iii) political, geopolitical, and idiosyncratic factors. In relation to the first of these risks, most members highlighted the uncertainty surrounding the trade disputes between the U.S. and China. In this regard, one member warned that, although the negotiations within the ninety-day-period agreed to in December appear to be progressing satisfactorily, it is not possible to rule out a scenario of greater trade barriers between both economies starting in March, which would have effects on the world economy. As for the second risk, another member argued that the Chinese economy registered its lowest growth rate since the beginning of the 1990s and that a significant decline in ChinaU.S. trade can already be observed. The same member added that this lower dynamism would lead to a deceleration of global demand for basic commodities, with a negative effect on global trade. In regards to the third risk, some members mentioned that international financial markets may react abruptly to developments of either economic, political or geopolitical nature, with spillover effects on the real economy. One member pointed out that vulnerable emerging economies would be particularly affected. Among these events, most members noted the possibility of a Brexit process without mutually convenient agreements between the U.K. and the European Union, as well as prospects of a resumption of the U.S. government shutdown. Some members stated that the uncertainty stemming from such factors has translated into a warning of a further decline in economic activity. One member noted that business confidence has been affected by both the impact of the aforementioned developments on the real economy and the uncertainty and volatility that they have generated in markets. Most members highlighted the lower dynamism of economic activity and continued divergence among the main advanced economies. In this regard, some members pointed out that the U.S. has decelerated less than other advanced economies. One member attributed this difference, among other factors, to the transitory effects of the procyclical fiscal stance adopted by this country during the mature phase of its business cycle. Another member mentioned that the economic contraction of the Eurozone has become more visible due to the deceleration of external demand and the presence of transitory factors that have affected industrial production in certain economies, in addition to business confidence remaining in negative terrain. Regarding growth expectations of advanced economies, most members agreed that those for 2019 and 2020 have been revised downwards on an ongoing basis. The majority highlighted that in the particular case of the U.S., the uncertainty about the outlook for its growth persists and the probability of a recession over the next 12 months has even increased. In this regard, some members noted that some financial variables suggest the possibility of a recession. Nevertheless, one member acknowledged that the change in the Federal Reserve’s message regarding future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate and the possible moderation of the balance sheet reduction process could mitigate or postpone the possibility of such recession. Other members stated that the outlook for deceleration in the U.S. is associated with the fading fiscal incentives, a progressively less expansionary monetary policy stance, the economic costs of the partial government shutdown, and the decline in investment. Regarding emerging economies, most members mentioned that their economic growth has weakened and that forecasts about their growth rate have been revised downwards. One member pointed out that the deceleration of China is a risk factor for other emerging economies, both directly through a reduction in trade, and indirectly through lower commodity prices. Most members highlighted that the Chinese economy has decelerated more than the other emerging economies and that the risk of a lower-than-expected dynamism prevails. One member noted that economic growth estimates for China have been declining steadily and in a sustained manner. In this regard, some members underlined the willingness of the Chinese authorities to seek an orderly adjustment in the transition to a more moderate and balanced growth by considering the adoption of fiscal, monetary and regulatory easing measures. One member stated that, to reverse the negative impact of the trade dispute with the U.S., the People’s Bank of China relaxed its reserve requirements, pointing out that it will grant improved financing conditions to small and medium enterprises. Most members noted that due to the lower economic dynamism and the fall in energy prices, inflationary pressures have moderated worldwide. As for such pressures in advanced economies, most members mentioned that these have decreased, while some of them added that pressures have decreased in both headline and core inflation. Some members emphasized that this has occurred notwithstanding the tightening of their labor markets and faster wage growth. As for the U.S., some members pointed out that headline inflation is near the Fed’s 2% target, while in the Eurozone and Japan inflation is still below the targets of their central banks. Continuing with the U.S., one member stated that there are no signs of possible inflationary pressures in the foreseeable future, except for a possible impact stemming from wage pressures on its labor market. One member added that the behavior of the prices of food and of some industrial metals, as well as the favorable performance of core inflation in some emerging economies, have also contributed to diminish inflationary pressures worldwide. As for inflation in emerging economies, another member underlined that it decreased due to the fall in crude oil and food prices, the fading effect of the depreciation of their currencies on prices, and lower global dynamism. All Governing Board members highlighted that the lower dynamism of global economic activity has been reflected in expectations of a slower monetary policy normalization by the major central banks, and in lower short- and long-term interest rates in the United States. Most members added that, as expected, in January, the U.S. Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged. Such members mentioned that this central bank stated that it will be patient in making future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate. Some members indicated that the Fed sent clear signals that the upward trend of interest rates will stop at least for some time, eliminating from its statement all references to additional rises. In this regard, one member highlighted the change in the Federal Reserve’s policy stance. Another member noted that, in this environment, market variables no longer incorporate the possibility of an additional increase in the reference rate during this year and are even starting to discount a decrease in interest rates in 2020. Additionally, most members pointed out that the Fed stated that it could adjust its balance sheet normalization program if necessary, one member adding that the balance sheet normalization program could end sooner and at a higher level than expected. Nevertheless, another member warned that, in a context of an economic downturn but with forecasts for GDP growth above potential for this year, there are greater challenges in terms of the assessment of the economy’s cyclical position as well as in terms of communication. Therefore, the same member estimated that surprises in the monetary normalization process cannot be ruled out. From a longer-term perspective, another member argued that, since the years after the 2008 crisis, the Federal Reserve has used forward guidance to exert a greater influence on expectations for short-term interest rates along the entire yield curve and strengthen its effects on aggregate demand. The same member considered that this policy was useful for the cyclical recovery of the U.S. economy, but that it has faced significant challenges in the current phase of the cycle. In this regard, he/she highlighted that, albeit having announced several years ago that the withdrawal of monetary stimulus was to be gradual and preannounced, this type of guidance and commitment faces significant challenges when the monetary policy stance is close to a possible inflection point or when it faces an environment of high uncertainty. He/she pointed out that this has occurred in recent months, when the cyclical path of the U.S. economy has become more uncertain. He/she mentioned that this situation led to a considerable adjustment in the Fed’s message, which in September appeared to be operating under a prescheduled strategy, while by the end of December and in January, it announced that its actions would be determined on the basis of incoming information. Another member underlined that, on the one hand, the central banks of the Eurozone and Japan left their reference rates unchanged, stating that the Bank of Japan pointed out that it will continue with a highly accommodative monetary policy for a prolonged period. The same member mentioned that, on the other hand, the central banks of most emerging economies left their monetary policy stances unchanged and several of them have stated that they will remain vigilant to developments and incoming data that may jeopardize the convergence of inflation to their targets. Most members mentioned that, recently, financial markets in both advanced and emerging economies have exhibited a more favorable performance associated, to a large extent, with the greater caution with which the central banks of advanced economies, particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve, have stated they will proceed henceforth. Some members agreed that interest rates in these economies decreased and one member noted that this decrease was more significant in the U.S. Some members highlighted that the yield curve in that country flattened considerably. Most members stated that this has been reflected in an appreciation of most emerging economies currencies against the U.S. dollar. One member emphasized that the best performing currencies were those exhibiting greater interest rates spreads vis-à-vis advanced economies. Some members underlined that as a result of this environment, emerging economies have registered significant capital inflows. Nevertheless, most members warned about the persistence of certain risks, whose materialization may affect financial markets significantly. Some members pointed out that the global economic deceleration might sharpen and lead to greater financial volatility, reversing the apparent increase in risk appetite. One member added that tight financial conditions may become even tighter than they already are. In this regard, some members warned that financial markets were already affected in 2018, precisely by a deterioration of growth forecasts due to the materialization of some risks to the global economy. One member recalled that the abovementioned led to a lower risk appetite. The same member pointed out that the initial adjustment in financial markets to an environment of increasing interest rates implied a downward adjustment in stock markets and high credit risk spreads, thus tightening financial conditions. He/she stated that, towards the end of 2018, markets recovered as expectations of lower interest rates consolidated gradually. Finally, he/she underlined that now that lower pressures from external markets are expected, the performance of emerging economies will be determined, to a larger extent, by idiosyncratic risk factors and by the soundness of their macroeconomic fundamentals. As for economic activity in Mexico, most members highlighted that during the fourth quarter of 2018, it decelerated significantly as compared to the previous quarter. One member mentioned that this deceleration is due to transitory factors as well as others of a more persistent nature and that, thus, the rate of economic growth continued on a downward trend which has been observed since 2016. Some members stated that the evolution of the labor market also suggests a weakening of economic activity during such period. One member noted that latest figures for the fourth quarter of 2018 imply that growth for the entire year was 2% and indicate the effects of some factors that have affected growth negatively. On the demand side, most members agreed that consumption showed signs of deceleration during the fourth quarter of 2018. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that, overall, consumption continued on a positive trend supported by the recovery of the total wage bill and the dynamism of revenues from remittances, which, during 2018, reached historical highs of above 33 billion USD. Most members mentioned that private investment continued following a downward trend and one member stated that this is due to the lower spending in both construction and machinery and equipment. The majority of members noted that in the last quarter of 2018 manufacturing exports maintained a level similar to that of the third quarter. One member mentioned that in December imports fell drastically vis-à-vis the previous month. Another member pointed out that the public sector is anticipated to have continued being a drag on aggregate demand at the end of 2018. One member noted that recent indicators suggest that the weakening of economic activity during the fourth quarter of 2018 may extend to the beginning of 2019. As an example, the same member highlighted that consumption started showing signs of deceleration for the first time. Another member stated that it remains to be known if the economic slowdown is transitory, resulting from the adjustment that usually occurs at the beginning of a new administration, or if it is a phenomenon associated with a new phase of the economy’s business cycle. The same member argued that maybe the most evident sign of this latter phenomenon is what is reflected in the trend of all the components of the Coincident Indicator of INEGI’s Cyclical Indicators System, which have contributed negatively to this indicator for at least four consecutive months, and stated that some of these components have been contributing negatively to such indicator for at least nine consecutive months. He/she stated that the last time that such indicator reached a level as low as that of November 2018 with a negative trend was between November and December 2008, right at the beginning of Mexico’s last recession. One member mentioned that there is not enough statistical information available to make an accurate assessment of economic activity for the beginning of the economy may weaken further during the first quarter of 2019, given that no changes have been observed in the fundamental determinants that have recently been affecting the economy, highlighting the complex international environment and the global slowdown, and a domestic environment of persisting uncertainty. Such member added that in addition to the aforementioned, the impact of the transitory shocks should also be considered, especially the shortage of fuel in several regions of the country, the blockage of railroads in Michoacán, the labor conflicts in Tamaulipas, and the U.S. government shutdown. In this context, the same member pointed out that growth forecasts for the next two years have deteriorated, and that it is foreseen for 2019 that the economy will expand less than what was observed in 2018 and then strengthen slightly in 2020. In this regard, some members warned that such forecasts are subject to a higher degree of uncertainty. One member added that a negative growth rate for the first quarter of 2019 would not be surprising. Another member considered that the environment for growth for 2019 will depend on the public policies to be implemented. Most members highlighted that private sector specialists have revised downwards their growth forecasts for 2019. Another member delved into the dispersion of such forecasts, which increased between December 2018 and January pointed out that the range for such forecasts decreased during the same period. Another member mentioned that the most worrying concern is the deteriorating prospects for growth, as gross fixed investment has remained stalled for three consecutive years and consumption and exports have not exhibited sufficient dynamism to foster higher growth. The same member added that the start of every six-year administration is always complicated and is now accompanied by additional transitory challenges, such as those associated with fuel distribution, the blocking of transportation routes, and the labor conflicts in the state of Tamaulipas. Such member expressed his/her view that starting out with a persistent environment of caution for investment in addition to the direct and indirect effects originated by the aforementioned developments, a stronger emotional constraint must also be considered. All members said that the balance of risks to growth is biased to the downside: one member added that the downward bias is present in both short- and medium-term horizons and some members noted that the balance of risks has deteriorated. One of them argued that there are external and domestic factors that have substantially increased the uncertainty about the country’s economic performance. The majority warned that in the beginning of 2019 transitory factors that could affect the growth rate during the first quarter of this year have been observed. One stressed that it is estimated that the shortage of fuel in some states will have a negative effect on GDP growth in the first quarter of 2019, which will depend on its intensity and duration. In addition to the global risks described above, the majority mentioned other downside risks for growth, such as: i) obstacles in the ratification of the trade agreements reached between Mexico, the United States and Canada; ii) factors leading to greater domestic uncertainty and less confidence in the outlook for the Mexican economy; and, iii) certain delays in the execution of public expenditure related to the beginning of a new administration. In this regard, one member added that, given the lower global dynamism, the country will face a certain deceleration in foreign trade, which has been one of Mexico’s main growth drivers in recent years. Another member warned that the substantial reallocation of public expenditure can translate into greater delays and inefficiencies in resource allocation and weaken economic activity to a larger extent than normally observed at the beginning of a new administration. One added the uncertainty about public policies in the next years, which according to such member is hindering the recovery of business confidence from its very low levels. In addition, some warned that a lower-than-expected growth would reduce tax collection, and would make it difficult to execute public expenditure in the second half of this year. As upside risks for growth, some members pointed out the important increase in consumer confidence. One member added that there could be a positive effect from new social programs, which could boost the domestic market given their focus on segments of the population, such as seniors and young people, which have a high propensity to consume. Another member added as a risk the possibility that economic policy and public expenditure begin making a positive contribution to economic growth, which could surprise to the upside towards the second half of the year or towards 2020. In addition, such member mentioned that, given the deterioration in growth expectations, the unusual increase in consumer confidence is striking, which was especially motivated by the perception of the country's future economic situation, currently at historical highs. The same member noted that there is an exceptional contrast with business confidence, which has not really changed in the past months. However, such member specified that the latter indicator has improved in the past couple of years and that it maintains a path which is slightly above the 50-point threshold. The same member noted that consumer perception about the country’s future economic situation is better than that of business owners, while that of the future situation of households is practically aligned with the future perception of businesses. In this regard, such member pointed out that despite the events of recent months and the deterioration in growth projections, firms maintain positive expectations, while consumers have more confidence in government actions. The same member concluded that it is possible that these confidence levels favor consumption and an eventual recovery in private investment, which could translate into a better economic performance during the second half of the year or by 2020. Most members considered that slack conditions in the economy relaxed towards the end of 2018 and the beginning of this year, and one member highlighted that these slack indicators have remained at less tight levels than those registered at the beginning of 2018. In this regard, another member pointed out that with indicators which exclude oil production these conditions remained neutral. As to the labor market, some noted the rise in the unemployment rate at the end of 2018, and one noted the deceleration in the creation of IMSSinsured jobs during the last quarter of 2018. This last member indicated that labor market figures might have been affected by factors related to the present juncture, such as the cancelation of the New Mexico City International Airport’s construction, which would also have been reflected in economic activity in general. Some members mentioned that, notwithstanding the latter, the labor market remains tight. Some pointed out that slack conditions in the economy are expected to widen in the coming quarters and indicated that it is very likely that during the period of influence of monetary policy the output gap with and without oil production begins to lie in the negative region. One of them noted that it is relevant to consider that the economy is currently in a situation with an output gap that is not very different from zero. The majority pointed out that from November to January, headline inflation decreased, some members specifying that it went from 4.72% to mentioned that this decrease was mainly due to the reduction of non-core inflation. One of them indicated that headline inflation continued with the downward trend shown since September. Another member warned that although this reading points in the right direction, it is early to conclude that inflation has returned to a clear downward path. He/she added that coincident and prospective indicators associated with prices suggest that despite the marginal improvement, the inflationary process continues to show a strong resistance to decline. Likewise, one member remarked that the decrease in January was due to one-time adjustments, such as the reduction of the VAT in the border region. Another expressed that headline inflation has been affected by the significant adjustments in the real exchange rate. However, one member stated that the latest inflation figures are in line with their anticipated path of gradual convergence to the target in the horizon in which monetary policy operates. As for the components of headline inflation, all members highlighted that core inflation continues to show a resistance to decline and some of them pointed out that it went from 3.63% in November to inflation has remained around 3.6% in the last 10 months. One member emphasized that it shows a high persistence which for several months has prevented it from decreasing at the desired speed. Some members indicated that, given that core inflation is a more appropriate indicator of fundamental pressures on prices and it is the component that should respond more to monetary policy actions, its persistence is a matter of concern. Nevertheless, another member stated that despite its rigidity, core inflation seems to have started a downward trend. With regards to the factors that explain core inflation’s behavior, some members mentioned the increase in prices of services other than housing and education, as well as the indirect effects of increases in energy prices. One member added to the above the indirect effects of recent increases in the prices of some fruits and vegetables. Another member mentioned also the impact of the exchange rate, the tight economic conditions observed until recently, and the real wage increases during 2018. Regarding non-core inflation, some members stated that it fell from 8.07% to 6.81% between November and January. Some mentioned that this reflects lower increases in energy prices and livestock products, although such effect was partially offset by greater increases in the prices of some fruits and vegetables. One member indicated that the recent trends of core and non-core inflation seem to be associated with the credibility of Banco de México’s monetary policy decisions and to the operation of monetary policy’s real transmission channels. The majority mentioned that headline inflation expectations for 2019 and 2020 showed a clear deterioration in December and some improvement in January. They highlighted that those corresponding to the end of 2019 went from 3.71% in October to in January. Some noted that those corresponding to the end of 2020 were adjusted upwards from 3.5% to 3.79% and then downwards to 3.71% in the same comparison periods. Regarding core inflation expectations for the end of 2019, the majority emphasized that they went from 3.45% in October to rated the behavior of inflation expectations drawn from surveys as mixed, since those of headline inflation improved from December to January, while those of core inflation did not. One member stated that both headline inflation and core inflation expectations had a shift in trend, since between May and December 2018 both had been increasing steadily and significantly. Some members stressed that core inflation’s persistence has even contaminated inflation expectations, one member adding that, in particular, it has had an influence on medium-term expectations. The majority indicated that headline inflation expectations for the medium and long terms still stand above the permanent target of 3%, at levels of around 3.50%. One member pointed out that a convergence of long-term core inflation expectations to the levels of headline inflation can be observed. As for information derived from market-based instruments, some stressed that medium- and longterm inflation risk premium showed a deterioration by the end of 2018 and subsequently decreased, although it continues at high levels. One highlighted that these levels continue to suggest significant upward risks for inflation in the medium and long terms. Some members noted that inflation forecasts suggest that inflation is following a downward trajectory in line with Banco de México’s last Quarterly Report. One member highlighted that it is estimated that forecasts for the next 12 months will have mixed revisions. As for the outlook for headline inflation, a member mentioned that it has been affected significantly by non-core inflation, which has also put pressure on core inflation, albeit its effects have slightly decreased. Some members highlighted an upward revision of core inflation during the first semester of the year because of its resistance to decline. One member emphasized that this can affect the convergence of headline inflation to its target. Another member cautioned that the risk of inflationary pressures that are not consistent with the attainment of the target within the expected timeframe persists, and that a larger number of favorable observations is necessary to confirm that risks of possible second round-round effects have started to dissipate. Nevertheless, one member indicated that the latest figures suggest that the paths of headline, core and non-core inflation could be converging even faster than as indicated in the last Quarterly Report. Most members considered that the balance of risks with regards to the expected path of inflation continues to be biased to the upside, in an environment of marked uncertainty. One of them indicated that the upward bias is slight and another one that inflation faces a more benign scenario than at the time of the previous monetary policy statement. As for the main risks to the upside for inflation, the majority highlighted the possibility that the peso exchange rate continues to be pressured by external and domestic factors, one of them adding that in his/her opinion this is one of the main risks for inflation in the near future. The majority mentioned that inflation could also be affected in case that new pressures on the prices of energy or agricultural products are observed, or if there is an escalation of protectionist and compensatory measures worldwide, or in case public finances deteriorate. One of them pointed out that this last risk has intensified. Some members indicated that a further continuation of the problems in fuel distribution as well as the blocking of railways and labor conflicts, are also risks for inflation. Additionally, the majority agreed that, given the magnitude of the recent increases in the minimum wage, beyond their possible direct impact, there is the risk that these lead to wage revisions that exceed productivity gains and thus generate cost pressures, affecting formal employment and prices. One member expressed that the above would imply a higher resistance or even additional pressures on core inflation. One of them alerted to the possibility of secondround effects in the price formation process. Most members warned about core inflation’s persistence, which could lead to a higher resistance to decline for long-term inflation expectations. One of them highlighted that it is particularly worrisome that core inflation is expected to remain in coming months above the level that was forecast only recently. Additionally, some members insisted that inflation expectations implied by financial market instruments continue signaling upward risks to inflation. One of them pointed out that the above can be observed for the medium and long terms, and another one argued that expectations drawn from surveys also signal the same risk. One of them added that inflation expectations drawn from surveys show a contrasting behavior, with those for 2019 and 2020 linked to headline inflation beginning to decline, while those focused on core inflation registering a slight upward trend. He/she pointed out that in the case of longterm inflation expectations, although those corresponding to headline inflation have remained stable at around 3.5%, there is a convergence of those corresponding to core inflation towards the levels of those of headline inflation. He/she argued that, if it continues, this trend would represent a deterioration of long-term inflation expectations, since it would imply a stronger anchoring of such expectations at levels above the target. Another one argued that such upward trend as well as the decreased dispersion among forecast answers in the survey, at levels above the target in the last few months, suggest a risk of contagion of long-term inflation expectations. Regarding downside risks, some members mentioned the possibility of smaller variations in the prices of certain goods included in the non-core index, or that slack conditions widen more than expected. All members highlighted that since the last monetary policy decision, financial asset prices in Mexico exhibited a more favorable performance. Most of them agreed that this was a reflection of more favorable external conditions and of domestic factors such as the approval of the economic package for included fiscal targets that were in line with market expectations; investors’ consent to the New Mexico City International Airport bond buyback offer; and, the implementation of a prudent monetary policy with interest rate spreads above those of other economies. All members pointed out that the peso exchange rate appreciated and reduced its volatility while one member added that the foreign exchange market’s operating conditions had improved and that analysts’ exchange rate expectations had been revised downwards. The majority pointed out that risk premia and long- and medium-term interest rates decreased, and some of them mentioned that operating conditions in government securities markets also improved. One member mentioned that foreign investment inflows have been observed, in particular, to government securities. Regarding the stock market, most mentioned that in line with the appreciation of the peso and the decline in interest rates, it registered gains during the same period, and some of them indicated that it has reversed the losses observed in the last quarter of 2018. Most members emphasized that, recently, domestic financial markets resented Fitch’s revision of Pemex's credit rating from BBB+ to BBB- with a negative outlook, albeit one member pointing out that such revision had already been anticipated by markets. One member stressed that, despite the latter, sovereign risk premia have not been affected, although an impact on them cannot be ruled out if this situation deteriorates. The majority of members mentioned that although financial asset prices in the country have exhibited positive results, the peso-US dollar exchange rate, medium- and long-term interest rates, and risk premia are at levels higher than those registered at the beginning of October, before domestic uncertainty escalated as a result of factors such as the announcement of the cancellation of the New Mexico City International Airport, the presentation of some legislative projects and raising concerns about the business model of Pemex. In this regard, one member mentioned that an environment of high uncertainty prevails in domestic financial markets, especially related with domestic factors. Another member mentioned that the balance of macro-financial risks has deteriorated due to the increasing uncertainty about the country's economic and financial environment. The same member added that this could mean lower inflows of foreign investment (direct and portfolio) to the country, with its subsequent impact on the exchange rate. Another member pointed out that future episodes of volatility in domestic financial assets in response to external and/or domestic factors cannot be ruled out. From a longer-term perspective, one member stated that in recent years the economy has faced two major shocks: i) a lower availability of external resources; and ii) a significant deterioration in the oil trade balance. The combination of both shocks has led to a major adjustment of the non-oil trade balance. Such member acknowledged that the economy has also been affected by uncertainty about the trade relationship with North America, the process of monetary policy normalization in the United States and other idiosyncratic factors. The same member argued that this has required a significant depreciation of the real exchange rate and that for such an adjustment to take place in an orderly way and without affecting domestic output, the nominal exchange rate must be flexible, and inflation must remain contained and close to its target. Such member added that this process requires the combination of a sound fiscal policy and a responsible monetary policy stance to prevent the contagion of inflation expectations and the deterioration of the price formation process. Also, that the economy still faces a significant tightening of external financing which is imperative to reverse. In this regard, another member highlighted that the greatest risk of not mitigating the country’s economic and financial uncertainty is the possibility of having lower inflows of foreign investment (direct and portfolio), with the subsequent increases in risk premia that would make credit more expensive, thus hampering the country’s economic recovery. Most members considered that the current environment continues facing medium- and longterm risks that might affect the country’s macroeconomic conditions. Among such risks, the majority of the members mentioned: Pemex’s financial fragility and outlook, and, in particular, an additional downgrade to its credit rating as it could have an impact on the federal government’s financial cost and, in general, on the country’s conditions for accessing external financing. One member pointed out that the business strategy to be adopted by Pemex will play a key role in determining the shortand medium-term outlook for the Mexican economy. The same member added the latter is due not only to the size of the oil company and its connection with many other corporations and domestic financial institutions, but also to its relevant role in domestic and international financial markets, stressing the importance of Pemex’s debt in the portfolio of different asset management institutions specialized in emerging markets. Another member pointed out that the recently announced actions to improve the financial situation of Pemex represent a positive element, but that additional efforts to strengthen the oil company’s production capacity and its financial outlook and, therefore, credibility on the fiscal targets for the short and long terms are required. The same member stated that the intention of the authorities to announce shortly a set of measures to face these challenges is highly relevant, given that greater hardships faced by Pemex would significantly affect public finances and, in general, the overall economy. Most members mentioned that a potential financial support to Pemex by the federal government or a reduction in its fiscal burden addressing its structural problems could mitigate the aforementioned risks, as long as these measures are consistent with the fiscal targets set by the government. Most members pointed out that in order to foster higher growth it is key to consolidate a solid macroeconomic framework as well as measures that contribute to raise productivity levels. In this regard, some stated that it is relevant to ensure an environment of confidence and certainty for investment and that public finances are consolidated sustainably. As a risk for the latter, some members highlighted, besides the already mentioned financial fragility of Pemex, the possibility of a lower-thanexpected GDP growth, which might affect tax collection and put at risk the attainment of the fiscal targets. One member added that it is important that the primary surplus target of 1% for 2019 is achieved. Finally, some members pointed out that the macroeconomic framework that accompanied the fiscal package for 2019 presented last December contributed to increase investors’ confidence and generated a positive response from markets. As to measures to boost productivity, some members considered that public policies must foster an efficient allocation of resources in the economy. In this regard, one member emphasized that the policies affecting price formation, as well as the higher minimum wages and the guaranteed prices are a cause for concern. Some members pointed out the need to ensure the Rule of law and tackle the challenges of public insecurity, corruption and impunity. In addition to these measures, another member considered the need for adopting public policies that support the strengthening of human capital, the adoption of new technologies, the narrowing of opportunity gaps, and the generation of adequate incentives for growth and development. Another member highlighted the need to carefully assess the implications of the current strategy for long-term growth and to introduce corrective measures when needed, particularly because of the economy’s low potential growth and the risks to the economy stemming from the continuous contraction in investment ratios. Most members acknowledged that the weakness of investment is a factor that may affect the country’s productivity and future growth. One member added that it is desirable that the new public investment is channeled to projects of proven economic and social returns. All members agreed that Mexico’s economic activity decelerated and that its balance of risks continues to be biased to the downside. One member considered that, in principle, the country’s economic deceleration should favor a faster process of inflation reduction. Nevertheless, the same member noted that, under the current juncture, inflationary risks stemming from Mexico’s complex economic and financial environment persist. Another member stated that the current environment features dilemmas and risk in the short- medium- and longterms, adding that it is clear that the challenges to the economy and to inflation are not only of a cyclical nature. In this regard, he/she underlined that it is important to avoid a situation with a period of weak economic growth and where also other factors that affect the price formation process keep inflation under pressure and above its target. Most members agreed that the evolution of headline inflation has remained in line with the forecast published at the end of November in Banco de México’s past Quarterly Report and that core inflation continues to exhibit a resistance to decline. One member mentioned that this is a cause for concern since such component should be responding more clearly to the monetary policy actions. Another member highlighted that although core inflation has shown resistance to decline, it is starting to follow a downward trend. Most members pointed out that Banco de México should maintain a prudent approach and signal clearly its commitment with its price stability mandate. In this regard, most members considered that the current monetary policy stance is consistent with the convergence of headline inflation to the target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. One member added that the outlook that inflation is facing, in addition to the persistent risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, suggest that the monetary policy tightening implemented should be kept in place for a lengthy period. Another member argued that the central bank should remain vigilant to the conditions prevailing in Mexico’s economy so that a very restrictive monetary policy stance is not in place for too long, in case the economy’s slack conditions continue to widen significantly. One member underlined that the combination of a weakening economic activity, on the one hand, and persistent inflationary pressures with a balance of risks to the upside and short-term and long-term inflation expectations above Banco de México’s projections, on the other, intensifies the challenges for monetary policy. The same member argued that monetary policy must focus on attaining the inflation target, but considering the high uncertainty prevailing as well as the effects of the evolution of economic activity on prices and the need of an orderly and efficient convergence of inflation to the target. He/she pointed out that the latter requires a prudent approach in which monetary policy decisions will depend fundamentally on additional information on inflation, its determinants and outlook, and which must be aimed at strengthening the central bank’s credibility. Such member indicated that given the aforementioned, additional adjustments to the monetary policy rate cannot be discarded. One member emphasized that the central bank message should not reflect an easing of monetary policy stance given the weakening of economic activity, but rather convey the persistence of risks to inflation, thus strengthening monetary policy’s credibility. The same member added that the central bank’s communication should reflect the concern for core inflation’s resistance to decline in spite of the clearly restrictive monetary policy stance so far adopted. Some members mentioned that the rises in the reference rate have increased interest rate spreads vis-à-vis other countries, thereby helping to mitigate the volatility that financial markets have exhibited due to external and domestic factors. One of the members stated that, given the expectations of more gradual and smaller increases in interest rates in advanced economies, Banco de México would have a slightly wider margin as to its monetary policy decisions. Most members highlighted the importance of pointing out that Banco de México’s Governing Board will remain vigilant to the evolution of inflation, its determinants and expectations and, that if necessary, it will take the actions required to attain the inflation target. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecast trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and long-term inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. In this context, considering that the recent developments in inflation and its main determinants have not changed significantly with respect to their foreseen trajectories, that the cyclical position of the economy has loosened somewhat, and that the current monetary policy stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target, Banco de México’s Governing Board has decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 8.25%. Considering the risks inflation is subject to, the Governing Board will take the necessary actions so that the reference rate is kept at a level consistent with the convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S., under an external environment that it is still subject to risks, and to the behavior of the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank rate (target rate) unchanged at 8.25%.