Most members agreed that since the second half of downward trend, although it recovered moderately during the first quarter of 2019 in some economies, such as the U.S., the U.K, the euro area and China, largely associated with transitory factors. In particular, some members claimed that this recovery was a result of the fiscal and monetary stimuli in such countries. As for growth expectations, most members noted that these are still being revised downwards. One member mentioned that the International Monetary Fund’s forecasts for 2019 decreased in a generalized manner, and another one pointed out that the probability of new downward revisions for this year and the next one apparently has increased. In this context, most members agreed that the outlook for investment has deteriorated and business climate worldwide has worsened. One member stated that some analysts expect a gradual deceleration in global economic activity and a low risk of recession. He/she added that given the more adverse environment for world trade, manufacturing has been one of the most affected sectors and that, on the demand side, investment has been affected by the impact of this environment on global value chains. In contrast, he/she stated that services, which is a more labor intensive sector and is less exposed to global trade, has continued to expand in the major economies, supporting consumption and the labor market. The same member highlighted that two factors have led to a reallocation of resources from manufacturing to services: one medium- and long-term factor, associated with a greater trade integration and specialization, and a more recent one, related to technological change and its use in the services sector. Most members indicated that the balance of risks to global growth remains biased to the downside. Among the risks that still persist the majority mentioned the escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and its trade partners. In this respect, most members warned that the recent announcements of protectionist measures between China and the U.S. affected investors’ sentiment, thus reversing the optimism that had conveyed stability to global markets. They also considered that this could lead to a sharper economic deceleration. Most members added the following risks: i) a more prolonged weakening of some of the major economies than expected; ii) new episodes of volatility in international financial markets; and iii) the intensification of certain political and geopolitical risks. Regarding the latter, some members stressed the possibility of a disorderly Brexit process, and one of them added the tensions generated by North Korea and conflicts in the Persian Gulf. Such member warned that this could deteriorate consumer confidence, discourage investment, weaken further the lack of dynamism of global growth, increase the volatility in markets and worsen global financial conditions. In this respect, another member stated that the financial channels could magnify the economic slowdown. As to the evolution of labor markets in advanced economies, one member highlighted the high levels of job creation and the historically low levels of the unemployment gaps. In the same line, he/she emphasized the contrast between the high levels of consumer confidence and the fast deterioration of business climate observed since mid-2018. In the case of the U.S., another member argued that its anticipated deceleration reflects the fading of the fiscal stimulus and its protectionist trade policy. Some members mentioned that such policy could lead to a greater-than-anticipated deceleration. One member underlined that the probability of a recession in the U.S. taking place in the following twelve months has decreased, albeit from relatively high levels. However, the same member mentioned his/her concern about the performance of some financial indicators being similar to those observed in the months prior to past recessions. In contrast, another member noted that, although the yield curve of Treasury bonds has inverted in certain tranches, the lower term premium suggests that such performance points more to a deceleration rather than a recession. Most members highlighted the lower dynamism in emerging economies, although stating that some of these have slightly rebounded recently. One member pointed out that the tightening of global financial conditions affected to a greater extent the more vulnerable economies. Another member mentioned that economic activity in China seems to be responding favorably to the implemented stimuli and stressed that the Chinese authorities have expressed their intention to use the policy tools at their disposal to attain an orderly adjustment of their economy. However, he/she added that there is still the risk that these actions turn out to be insufficient and that shocks occur that could contribute to a greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the economy. Regarding the outlook for emerging economies, some members anticipate a decreasing growth trend. One member specified that this will be more evident in Asian economies, which already show signs of weakness after having exhibited a positive performance in early 2019. Another member stressed that emerging economies that are more open to world trade face considerable challenges to boost investment. In addition, he/she noted that in some economies, idiosyncratic factors have increased the uncertainty regarding the economic outlook and have hindered investment. Some of the downward risks for growth of emerging economies that he/she highlighted are: i) the deterioration or persistence of trade tensions; ii) that these give rise to a greater deceleration of the Chinese economy and to lower commodity prices; iii) that, with the aim of attaining quantitative targets for the bilateral deficits of larger economies, trade opportunities for other economies are restrained; and iv) that a restructuring of investment portfolios towards lowerrisk assets is observed. The same member pointed out that the environment for these economies has become more uncertain and that their performance will be determined by idiosyncratic factors and by the soundness of their macroeconomic foundations. Most members mentioned that global inflationary pressures remain at moderate levels, some of them pointing out the downward pressures associated to a lower global demand, although the majority acknowledged that increases caused by higher energy prices have also been observed. In the same vein, most members mentioned that although headline inflation has rebounded due to the above, core inflation has decreased in several economies, in some cases due to transitory factors and methodological changes. The majority clarified that in the U.S., the euro area and Japan, core inflation lies below their central banks’ targets. In this sense, one member added that in many developed countries inflation expectations for the end of 2019 have been adjusted downwards, below such targets. Most members noted that although labor markets in advanced economies continue to exhibit strength and certain wage increases, no inflationary pressures have been detected so far. One member considered that the performance of labor markets could contribute to attain their inflation targets, but he/she also stated that this is still subject to uncertainty, given the moderate increases in labor costs and the risks for global economic activity. However, he/she warned that an unexpected rebound in inflation cannot be ruled out, as a result of a greater pass-through of wage increases or of import tariffs on prices. Another member underlined that in advanced economies a number of factors have kept inflationary pressures structurally low, such as the difficulty for firms to pass on cost pressures associated with wage-related increases to goods and services’ prices. He/she pointed out that technological change and globalization have allowed the fragmentation of production processes according to the comparative advantages and to the cost structure in different countries and regions. He/she added that this has generated productivity gains and more competitive markets, making more difficult for firms to increase their prices. Finally, he/she underlined that the future performance of inflation will largely depend on the persistence or weakening of these factors, and that although inflation in advanced economies is expected to remain low, this scenario is not free of upside risks. Regarding inflation in emerging economies, one member stated that it followed a slight upward trend, but also pointed out that core inflation remained relatively stable, once the effects of the exchange rate depreciation dissipated and due to a lower global demand. All members noted that given the environment of lower inflationary pressures and of lower world economic dynamism, expectations that the central banks of the major economies will follow a more accommodative monetary policy strategy have strengthened. Nevertheless, one member underlined that the risk of monetary policy surprises cannot be ruled out. All members mentioned that in its May meeting the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, and reiterated its message that it would be patient in making adjustments to the range. One of them added that the Fed has also adopted a strategy that relies more on the most recent information and without a predetermined direction or bias. Another member pointed out that market variables are no longer incorporating increases in the federal funds rate in 2019. Regarding international financial markets, most members stated that the outlook of lower interest rates in advanced economies led to an easing of global financial conditions, to greater risk appetite, and to a better performance of emerging economies’ assets and currencies. One of them highlighted the gains that have been observed in the main economies’ stock indices, the decline in government and corporate bond interest rates, and the pause in the strengthening of the US dollar. Some members noted the greater capital flows to emerging economies and one pointed out that these were channeled particularly to fixed income assets and, to a lesser extent, to stock markets, reflecting the higher uncertainty about economic activity worldwide and in emerging economies. Most members pointed out that, more recently, markets were affected by the escalation of trade tensions. Some members commented that in this juncture investors sought refuge in lower risk assets, and one of them highlighted the moderation in capital flows to emerging economies, as compared to the beginning of the year, and even registering outflows of equity assets in recent weeks. The same member warned that political and geopolitical risks could aggravate global financial conditions. In this regard, another member noted that the recent negative performance of financial markets could persist or even worsen, given the resurfacing of different political and geopolitical tensions. If the above materializes, it would have an adverse effect particularly on emerging economies. In addition, he/she warned that, if upward monetary policy surprises materialize in the main advanced economies, it would surely lead to sharp adjustments in international financial markets. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that the escalating trade tensions have not reversed the improvement in global financial conditions, and that due to the above and to expectations of a continued monetary policy easing, the risks to economic activity and international markets remain biased to the downside. All members said that timely information suggests that the weak performance that the Mexican economy had been exhibiting since the previous quarter intensified during the first quarter of 2019, due to both external and domestic factors, some of which are transitory. Most members noted that, according to timely estimates, using seasonally adjusted figures, GDP contracted 0.2% during the first quarter of the year, and some members specified that such weakening was greater than anticipated. Most members indicated that transitory factors affected economic activity. In this regard, some of them mentioned the fuel distribution problems, the blocking of railways, the strikes in northern Mexico, and the delays at border crossings. Given the above, one of the members deemed that the recent growth figures are likely to overestimate the weakness of economic activity. Another member mentioned that the economic cycle measured by INEGI’s Coincident and Leading Composite Indicators System (SICCA, for its acronym in Spanish) points to an upward phase covering 119 consecutive months at the end of the first quarter of phase has been the longest in Mexican history since growth. He/she mentioned that its current stage points to a temporary stagnation, without signaling yet the beginning of a recession. Another member stated that the Coincident Indicator of INEGI’s Cyclical Indicators System (SIC, for its acronym in Spanish) has lay below its long-term trend for 7 consecutive months, registering even more prolonged negative contributions in certain indicators related to employment and economic activity. With regard to economic activity from the demand side, most members noted that manufacturing exports have decelerated. Some noted that this has been associated with the negative impact on global trade. They stressed that the decline in growth expectations of US industrial production for 2019 implies a lower dynamism of external demand for Mexico. One member warned that the slow growth of non-oil exports has taken place despite certain dynamism in the US economy and a very favorable real exchange rate. Specifically, he/she highlighted the deceleration of automotive exports. As for domestic demand, most members emphasized the persistent lack of dynamism of investment and the recent slowdown of consumption. One member noted that investment is expected to have continued decelerating after the rebound observed in January. Another member commented that a cause of concern is that private investment has remained practically stagnant since 2016 and that, since then, the cost of financing to firms has increased and the growth rate of bank lending to firms, particularly to small- and medium-size firms, has declined. The same member added that it is also worrisome that a secular slowdown in private consumption has been observed since 2016, while the growth rate of credit to households has declined considerably, which has been accompanied by a significant increase in the costs of such credits. In this regard, he/she indicated that it is no coincidence that the slowdown in consumption and the stagnation of investment have coincided with a period in which the real interest rate has increased significantly, given that, although consumption and investment respond to different determinants, interest rates are a key factor in their evolution. He/she pointed out that the above shows that the monetary policy transmission mechanism is functioning through channels that affect real variables. Another member stressed that the weakness of investment has continued for approximately four years, due to several factors, such as the fall in public investment, fundamentally explained by the strategy adopted to strengthen public finances, and an environment of persisting uncertainty. He/she specified that the stagnation of investment has not responded to the adopted monetary policy stance, since such stagnation began when the reference rate was at 3%. He/she added that recent surveys among entrepreneurs and analysts do not assign a major role to monetary policy as an explanatory factor of low growth rates. On the other hand, one member warned that, given different transitory and idiosyncratic factors, it is foreseeable that GDP components on the expenditure side will continue exhibiting negative growth rates or rates very close to zero in the first quarter. On the supply side, most members emphasized that in the first quarter of the year contractions were observed in the industrial and services components. As to industrial production, one member stressed that data up to March show a downward trend in three out of its four main components, along with a stagnation of the manufacturing industry. Another member stressed that the significant contraction in construction is a cause of concern, while another one added that the persistent fall in oil production is also worrisome. Most members noted that given the GDP figures at the beginning of 2019, growth expectations for the year have deteriorated. One member noted that growth expectations for 2019 by private sector specialists surveyed by Banco de México have been decreasing constantly for more than a year. Nevertheless, some members indicated that a recovery in the growth rate is expected starting from the second quarter. One of them pointed out that this could be driven by consumption, given the higher real wages, the real increase in credit for consumption and the increase in the purchasing power of remittances. He/she commented that positive, albeit marginal, contributions of private investment and exports are foreseen. Likewise, he/she pointed out that, in this scenario, along with the implementation of the priority programs of the new administration, a new phase of growth is likely to begin. Regarding growth expectations for 2020, another member pointed out that these have been adjusted downwards from April 2018 to April 2019. However, most members noted that in recent months such expectations have recovered somewhat. In this regard, another member mentioned that this seems to reflect an arithmetic effect, as there are no elements that lead to assume a more optimistic view. All members pointed out that the balance of risks for growth has become more uncertain and that it continues biased to the downside, as a result of external and domestic factors. Among the former, in addition to the already described global risks, most members added the possibility of obstacles in the ratification process of the trade agreement reached in North America, other actions that can affect trade in the region and the risk that the US authorities include Mexico in the list of countries subject to trade retaliations. One member considered that, if the ratification of the aforementioned agreement is delayed, the investment outlook could become more complicated. Another member added among external risks the decline in the growth rate of manufacturing production in the U.S. and the potential implications of the fall in the Purchasing Managers’ Indices in both that country and worldwide. Among domestic risk factors, most members highlighted the risk of additional reductions in oil production, which may negatively affect public revenues. One member added the uncertainty regarding the direction of public policies in different sectors, which has contributed to maintain an adverse environment for investment. Another member pointed out that greater uncertainty, apart from undermining private investment, may also curb consumption. The same member also added the following downward risks to growth: i) the possibility of a downgrading of Pemex’s credit rating, coupled with a reduction in the country’s risk rating; ii) a further delay in the implementation of the new government’s priority programs; iii) that the new government’s austerity program leads to a greater inactivity of government than anticipated; iv) that the real exchange rate appreciates and discourages non-oil exports; v) that the growth of family remittances starts to fade; and; vi) that the increase in the purchasing power driven by the recent wage increases dwindles due to the difficulty to abate inflation. As to medium-term downward risks, such member noted the possibility of a recession in the United States. Some members argued that there are upside risks to growth, such as the significant increase in consumer confidence that has persisted for several months, the increase in the total wage bill, the start of new social programs aimed at segments of the population with a high marginal propensity to consume, and a more favorable performance of remittances. One member added the following risk factors: i) a greater-thanexpected dynamism of the US economy, an early ratification of the new trade agreement in North America as well as an elimination of trade tariff and non-tariff barriers imposed by US authorities on Mexico; ii) a greater–than-expected upturn of private investment due to positive signals from the government; iii) an early start-up of the new public investment projects, coupled with a higher-thanexpected return; and iv) the possibility of a higherthan-anticipated rebound effect resulting from a low base of comparison. Most members mentioned that the economy’s slack conditions loosened towards the end of 2018 and early 2019. One member pointed out that they remain at a neutral level, while another member noted that they are expected to widen in the following quarters. One member stated that, considering the current real GDP forecasts for the next two years, it is reasonable to anticipate a negative output gap, although below the one derived from statistical estimates, given the probable decline in the country’s growth potential over the last years. Such member highlighted the paradox that, in an environment of economic weakness, there have been increases in different indicators of wage pressures, such as contractual wages, IMSS-insured workers’ wages, and unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector. He/she stated that the upward trend of the latter has become more evident since late 2018, due to wage increases being above labor productivity. The same member argued that the natural outcome of this combination of trends has been a fall in formal employment, an increase in informal labor, and a rise in the unemployment rate, which has probably been softened by the higher levels of employment in the informal sector. He/she added that, naturally, the contraction of employment has been more marked in certain regions of the country, such as the northern border zone, where greater wage adjustments have been observed, even showing a sharp contrast with the neighboring municipalities that have not been affected by such adjustments. As for the path of headline inflation, most members mentioned its decline at the beginning of the year. One member highlighted the unusually low monthly inflation in January, due to the VAT reduction in the border zone. Another member emphasized that after accumulating 44 basis points in the first three months, it was the lowest inflation for a first quarter since Mexico’s Consumer Price Index (INPC, for its acronym in Spanish) exists. Such member added that, in February, the annual inflation rate lay marginally below the upper limit of the variability range for the first time since December 2016. One member emphasized that inflation showed a clear downward trend between September and February, although it rebounded in March and April. The same member added that cumulative inflation from December to April has been the second lowest since years. Another member pointed out that core inflation, which reflects more accurately inflationary pressures, registered a higher growth during January-April of this year than in the same period of the previous year and the second highest figure in the last 5 years. All members underlined that headline inflation rose from 4.00% to 4.41% between March and April. Most members noted that the latter figure is higher than expected and one member further stated that headline inflation lay again above the upper limit of the variability range. Another member highlighted that inflation was affected by the impact of major adjustments stemming from the peso exchange rate and from significant pressures on the non-core inflation component. One member pointed out that the possibility of headline inflation turning out higher during the second quarter of the year vis-à-vis the first quarter, was expected given the change in weights from the update of the CPI’s base year adopted in mid-2018 and due to comparison base effects. Most members noted that the recent rise in headline inflation was due to increases in its two components, pointing out that the core inflation component contributed in greater measure to such an increase. As to this latter component, most members emphasized that it remains at high levels and recently rose further than expected, going from added that this was the highest annual rate in the last behavior of core inflation was due to the variation of food merchandise prices, which continues to increase, while that of services prices rebounded recently. One member explained that the prices of food merchandise, education and services other than housing and education have grown at rates near or above 5%. Most members mentioned that services prices were influenced by the calendar effect, given that the Easter holiday this year took place in April, while in 2018 it did so in March. Nevertheless, they noted that, even after eliminating this effect, services prices register an increase. One member underlined that this effect is transitory and that he/she expects that it would start to revert starting from the third quarter of the year. Another member added that services other than tourism are not registering price increases as significant, although their growth rate has not decreased either. Such member pointed out that the rise in food merchandise prices is worrisome. He/she stated that, although INEGI reported that food merchandise inflation was 4.75% in April, Coneval estimated that the cost of the basic food basket used to measure extreme poverty, increased 6% in the same period. In this regard, such member further stated that preserving the population’s purchasing power and protecting the poorest sectors of the population should be the priority. One member said that the trend of core inflation showing a weak connection between the price dynamics and the economy’s cyclical position is of concern. Another member highlighted that several measures to track trend core inflation show persistence or even an upward trend. Such member added that, given the deceleration of economic activity, no demand pressures on prices are observed at this moment and that this, in addition to the performance of the peso exchange rate, suggests that the recent path of core inflation is explained mainly by supply shocks, stemming from the indirect impact of food and energy prices, and by the behavior of wages, together with a certain degree of inertia of core inflation. One member pointed out that it is too soon to draw conclusions about the persistence of core inflation since it cannot be ruled out that it may be due to the confluence of supply shocks that will eventually fade away. As for noncore inflation, most members mentioned that it increased from 5.47% to 6.08% from March to April, partly reflecting that since the second fortnight of February 2019, the downward path in the rate of change of energy prices reverted. As for inflation expectations, most members stated that those for short- and medium-term headline inflation increased recently. Some members noted that this was due to the recent increase of headline inflation and of some of its components. Nevertheless, one member considered that inflation expectations for the end of 2019 have been decreasing after rebounding at the end of 2018, from a median of 3.90% in November to one of 3.60% in March and of 3.70% in April. Another member explained that, between February and April, the median for headline inflation expectations for 2020 remained at 3.60%. As for headline inflation expectations for the long term, most members expressed that they remained unchanged. As for core inflation expectations, most members pointed out that those for the short and medium terms increased. One member added that, between February and April, the median of such expectations for the end of 2019 and for 2020 increased from respectively. One member considered that the median of those corresponding to the end of 2019 has not changed significantly over the last months and remains relatively stable at around 3.50%. Another member warned that long-term core inflation expectations have been converging to those of headline inflation in the last years. In sum, most members stated that all inflation expectations are clearly above the 3% permanent target, with one member specifying that this situation has been observed for a long period. Some members underlined that analysts’ inflation expectations for all terms remain above those projected by Banco de México. As for information drawn from market instruments, most members pointed out that, after having followed a downward trend, the medium- and long-term inflationary risk premium recently increased and remains at high levels. One member considered that this points to a new increase of inflationary risks in the medium and long terms. Some members mentioned that the increases in headline and core inflation and the evolution of their determinants could lead to revisions to their foreseen paths. One member highlighted that the future paths have become more uncertain. Another member noted that although headline inflation is foreseen to resume a downward trend in the second half of 2019, its convergence to the 3% target is expected to be slower than anticipated, adding that this target appears to be difficult to attain during the first half of in the absence of other shocks, it is feasible to be very close to the 3% target towards the first half of have been according to or even better than what was foreseen. In this regard, such member pointed out that average annual headline inflation during the first quarter of 2019 was in line with the forecast of the last Quarterly Report. As for inflation risks, most members highlighted the possibility that the peso exchange rate comes under pressure from external or domestic factors. The majority added that inflation could be affected if additional pressures on energy prices or on agricultural and livestock product prices arise, if an escalation of protectionist and compensatory measures worldwide materializes, or in case public finances deteriorate. Moreover, most members agreed that, given the magnitude of the increases to the minimum wage, in addition to their possible direct impact, there is the risk that these bring about high wage revisions in a variety of sectors. Some members expressed that a possible source of wage pressures are the labor commitments subscribed within the framework of the United States-MexicoCanada Agreement (USMCA). Some members underlined that wage revisions in some sectors have already exceeded productivity gains, which could give rise to cost pressures and affect formal employment. Some members mentioned that available information suggests that wage revisions may be putting pressure on core inflation, mainly through prices of labor-intensive goods and services. One member considered that although based on available information it is too early to assess the lighthouse effect that minimum wage increases may have on other wages and, subsequently, on the price level, it is important to monitor the economy’s absorption capacity to ensure that such increases do not generate additional inflationary pressures. The same member stated that it is difficult to analyze this phenomenon due to the characteristics of the labor market where minimum wage increases mostly impact the low income deciles and the informal sector of the economy. He/she warned that the analysis is further complicated by the extraordinary increase in the minimum wage level in the country’s northern border zone, which could impinge upon contractual wage negotiations for firms not only at the border zone but also in the rest of the country. He/she also highlighted that the increase of tourist services prices is of concern since, due to their labor intensive nature, they are more exposed to wage increases, and that such price increases may be the result of an undesirable pass-through effect. Another member emphasized that, up to now, there is no evidence that increases in the minimum wage, both at the national level and in the border zone, have translated into significant inflationary pressures. He/she noted that, in the case of the northern border zone, where such pressures may have been greater, inflation has been even lower than in the rest of the country. Some members added the risk that the persistence shown by core inflation could lead to a greater resistance to decline of medium- and long-term inflation expectations. One member stated that the recent dynamics of core inflation implies the materialization of some of the upwards risks that had been mentioned on previous occasions. Finally, some members highlighted the risk that the widening of economic slack does not translate into lesser pressures on inflation, given the factors that have been putting upward pressure on core inflation. As for downside risks, the same members mentioned the possibility that the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex could register lower variations and that economic slack could widen more than expected. One member considered that, in his/her opinion, such balance is relatively stable. The same member argued that risks have decreased as compared to those at the beginning of the year, due to the fact that the improvement of global financial conditions implies lower pressures on the peso exchange rate and, eventually, on inflation, among other factors. He/she added that stable energy product prices are expected on account of the price setting policy of the new administration. Most members pointed out that, although there has been an intensification of certain downside risk factors, like the greater slack in the economy, there are other factors that could make inflation remain at high levels and, therefore, deviate from its foreseen path, given the factors that have restrained core inflation from decreasing. Thus, most members agreed that, in an environment of high uncertainty, it is deemed that the balance of risks for inflation relative to its forecasted trajectory remains biased to the upside. As for domestic financial markets, most members pointed out that the Mexican peso appreciated compared to the levels observed during the last monetary policy decision, although it has exhibited higher volatility. Some members mentioned that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market point to an orderly functioning of such market. Most members stated that Mexico’s relatively high interest rate spreads with respect to other economies have contributed to the positive performance of the peso. Regarding interest rates, the majority noted that these recently increased, mainly those for the medium and long terms, which was associated with the escalation of the trade tensions that affected international financial markets. Some members added that the higher-than-expected inflation figures also contributed to such increase. Notwithstanding the above, one member highlighted that trading conditions in the fixed income market are at adequate levels. Another member pointed out that the stock market exhibited a marginal increase during this period. Some members delved into the performance of domestic financial markets and analyzed their development throughout a longer period, particularly since the last quarter of 2018. One member argued that it is useful to divide the analysis into two periods. During the first period, from October to the first half of December 2018, the peso depreciated significantly, while interest rates on government bonds, risk premia, and the stock market index exhibited a negative performance. Such member emphasized that this was due to a generalized strengthening of the US dollar given the outlook of a further tightening of monetary policy in the United States as well as the natural higher uncertainty present at the beginning of a new federal administration, and to some controversial public policy decisions. He/she mentioned that, during the second period, extending from the second week of December 2018 to date, the Mexican peso has been one of the best performing currencies. He/she added that interest rates on government bonds and risk premia decreased, while the stock market resumed a positive trend. He/she noted that this improvement was due partly to the aforementioned international factors and also to the fact that the natural uncertainty associated with the beginning of a new federal administration has been fading as some key decisions have been taken. Among these, he/she highlighted the USMCA, the fiscal discipline included in the Economic Package for 2019, the successful negotiation with the bond holders of the New Mexico City International Airport, and the fight to deter fuel theft. He/she considered that all of these factors appear to have contributed to restore, at least partially, an environment of greater confidence and certainty. Therefore, this member noted that the risks for domestic financial markets have been decreasing. Another member pointed out that these markets have exhibited a positive performance despite the uncertainty associated with the announcement of new public policy measures. Most members agreed that risks prevail which may affect the performance of domestic financial markets, and highlighted the uncertainty regarding the external environment and the risks regarding the credit outlook of both Pemex and the overall Mexican economy. One member underlined the uncertainty and the risk factors still prevailing have domestic assets trading at a discount or with an additional risk premium relative to their behavior in the last years or with respect to their current credit ratings. The majority of the members warned that the current environment continues to pose significant mediumand long-term risks that could affect the country's macroeconomic conditions, its growth capacity and the economy’s price formation process. Most members stressed that it is particularly important, in addition to maintaining a prudent and firm monetary policy, to promote the adoption of measures to foster an environment of confidence and certainty for investment and higher productivity, and to consolidate public finances in a sustainable way. One member noted the importance of promoting the adoption of new technologies, strengthening human capital, reducing opportunity gaps and generating the necessary incentives for growth and development. In this context, the majority mentioned that it is particularly relevant that the fiscal targets of the Economic Package for 2019 are met and that strengthening the rule of law, tackling corruption and fighting insecurity are imperative. Delving deeper into public finances, one member noted that there is a growing concern about a shortfall in public revenues, due mainly to lower oil revenues. He/she warned that this problem could worsen due to the economic slowdown and to lower tax revenues derived from the support measures for Pemex. In addition, he/she stressed that during the current fiscal year, various factors could put pressure on public finances, among which the following stand out: i) expectations of lower revenues, without considering the decrease in fiscal revenues due to the support provided to Pemex; ii) the need to reduce Pemex’s expenditures; and iii) the increase in the cost of the public debt, which could even increase further during the rest of the year subject to the behavior of the sovereign risk and the inflation premium. Finally, such member warned that public spending has been reallocated in detriment of public investment, and that together with the lack of vigor of private investment, this has adverse effects not only on economic activity in the short term but also in the medium and long run by affecting productivity and the economy’s growth potential. Another member mentioned that meeting the fiscal targets implies in the short term addressing in a timely manner the pressures stemming from the developments in oil production, the measures to support Pemex, and from a lower than expected economic growth. In this regard, most members pointed out the concern about the persisting reduction in oil production, which has led to lower-than-budgeted oil revenues, leaving the federal government with less room for maneuver to implement its priority projects and meet its fiscal targets for 2019 and 2020. Delving into Pemex’s situation, most members mentioned that the federal government’s efforts to support this state-owned company, such as the recent agreements to lessen its tax burden and refinance its debt, although they point in the right direction, it is necessary to solve the company’s structural problems. Such members added that this company has structural problems and that it is essential not only that it submits a credible and functional business plan, which does not jeopardize the federal government’s fragile fiscal balance, but also that it offers a permanent solution. In this context, the majority highlighted that its credit rating is a risk factor for domestic financial markets and for the country’s economy. One member underlined that it is important that the actions that are adopted contribute to generate confidence and to anchor more effectively the outlook for the Mexican economy. Another member noted that according to experts, returns on projects involving oil exploration and production are far higher than those involving oil refining. The same member added that neither Pemex nor the federal government have the resources to make the necessary investments. He/she argued that it is also necessary to promote private investment in this sector as well as to offer legal certainty to private companies’ contracts and to improve Pemex’s corporate governance. Some members mentioned the risks associated with the decision to build the oil refinery in Dos Bocas. One member pointed out that the federal government has had to adjust public spending for 2019, which could compromise physical investment in Pemex. Finally, another member underlined that markets’ questioning regarding the institution’s solvency, the strength of public finances and their possible impact on the economy, will continue as long as Pemex does not have a business model that opens the perspective of a recovery of crude oil production and of a financially viable institution in the long run. In addition, one member highlighted that in the last years the economy and price formation have faced considerable shocks, both external and domestic, and that for this reason both fiscal and monetary policies had to be strengthened. Such member stated that having a sound macroeconomic policy contributes to an orderly adjustment of the economy and to the attainment of the inflation target, and provides the necessary room to adopt the required actions to foster greater certainty and confidence. In this regard, the same member expressed that is necessary to avoid that economic deceleration occurs with the adoption of policies that could affect the economy’s price formation, keeping inflation under pressure and above its target. All members considered that the current monetary policy stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Nevertheless, most members expressed their concern about the persistence exhibited by core inflation. One member stated that the recent increase in core inflation reflects the challenges to consolidate its convergence to 3%. Another member mentioned that expectations of the US Federal Reserve adopting a more accommodative monetary policy stance relieves the pressure to synchronize Mexico’s monetary policy with that of the U.S., providing greater room for maneuver to Banco de México. Such member added that this allows the central bank to focus on its main goal of maintaining price stability and also meet its additional objectives related with financial stability, and even center its attention on how the economy positions itself in the business cycle. In this regard, such member pointed out that monetary policy can influence the business cycle only around the long-term growth trend, but it cannot influence the trend itself. He/she considered that monetary policy’s most important contribution to a country’s economic development is to guarantee price stability, which is a necessary condition for sustained economic growth, but which is far from being a sufficient condition. The majority of members agreed that the evolution of inflation expectations is an important factor to consider for monetary policy conduction. One member pointed out that despite the tight monetary policy, analysts estimate that core inflation will not decline considerably in the next two years, anticipating a path significantly above Banco de México’s forecasts. Such member mentioned that given the decline in inflation in early 2019, inflation expectations for the end of the year were adjusted downwards, and several analysts foresaw that Banco de México would start a cycle of monetary policy easing. However, just as the central bank had warned at the time, it was not clear that such downward trend could be sustained in the short term, as proven by the recent increase in inflation. Moreover, he/she also highlighted that the monetary policy stance does not depend only on the behavior of a single variable. The same member underlined that although the growth in the annual inflation rate in April should not have been surprising, most analysts did not anticipate it and ended up revising upwards their expectations for the end of 2019. He/she considered that the latter suggests that a shift towards a more accommodative message in the previous monetary policy statement would have been very premature. However, he/she emphasized that the anticipated increase in headline inflation for the second quarter of the year is a temporary phenomenon that might fade away as long as the current monetary policy stance is maintained long enough to ensure that observed inflation and its expectations converge clearly to inflation’s permanent target, as has been forecasted. One member mentioned that the increase in longterm core inflation expectations is difficult to explain in a context where inflation has been decreasing, short-term inflation expectations have remained relatively stable and the risks to inflation have diminished. In this regard, he/she argued that the tone of the monetary policy statement is an economic policy tool and that, when private agents have imperfect information on the state of the economy, they use the information provided by the central bank to update their beliefs about such state. He/she argued that the tone of the central bank’s communications may constitute a mechanism for coordinating or confirming private agents’ beliefs. He/she considered that the tone of the last three monetary policy statements has been relatively pessimistic and has highlighted the potential upward risks to inflation, which might be one of the reasons behind the recent increases in short- and long-term inflation expectations. Another member argued that the behavior of such expectations is not related with a pessimistic message by the central bank regarding the path of inflation, given that the forecasts published are based on objective criteria and, up to the last Quarterly Report, they estimated that inflation would converge to its target in the first half of 2020. Most members noted that the current environment poses a complex outlook and dilemmas for monetary policy. They argued that, although the weakening of economic activity and the widening of economic slack should mitigate inflationary pressures, there are still significant risks that could increase inflation. Some members expressed that the central bank should monitor the evolution of the economy so that the tight monetary policy does not continue for too long. One of them warned that this could generate greater economic slack, lead to an excessive appreciation of the real exchange rate and to downward pressures on export activity, and attract volatile capital flows, which, in the long run, could increase the instability and vulnerability in the foreign exchange market. He/she mentioned that, in view of a stable balance of risks for inflation, the upward cycle of interest rates should be thought of as concluded, unless extraordinary events occur. Nevertheless, he/she acknowledged that it is important for Banco de México to send a clear signal of prudence and commitment to complying with its main mandate. He/she stated that for the monetary policy decision to contribute to attain the inflation target and to maintain financial stability, the tone of the monetary policy statement should be more neutral than that of previous ones, thus contributing to anchor inflation expectations. He/she stressed that inflation has behaved accordingly to the central bank’s projections, that the inflation target is expected to be attained in the near future, and that inflation risks have diminished. Another member argued that it is key for the monetary policy statement to emphasize that, despite the weakening of economic activity, the balance of risks to inflation has deteriorated in an environment of significant domestic and external uncertainty. Most members warned about the risks of easing the monetary policy stance too early, in an environment where: i) headline and core inflation have increased; and ii) the future path of these indicators considers additional pressures and has become more uncertain. One member mentioned that this could lead to higher volatility in domestic financial markets, undo the progress achieved in granting higher real wages and even foster a less favorable macroeconomic environment for sustained economic growth. Another member pointed out that although the negative output gap forecast should contribute to ease inflationary pressures, there is the risk that supply shocks on inflation and, specifically, the trends that are being observed in wages, lead to a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, especially in an environment of increases in shortterm headline inflation expectations and of a persisting upward trend in long-term core inflation expectations. He/she emphasized the risk of core inflation following an inertial behavior and also added the importance of exercising extreme caution in light of the challenges that might arise in a situation of high domestic and external uncertainty. Some members noted that under these circumstances, an easing of the monetary policy stance or a premature message in this direction would validate the above mentioned inflation expectations, would call into question the commitment to the inflation target and would affect the central bank’s credibility. One member pointed out that this could even affect economic activity negatively, as it would be reflected in upward adjustments of long-term interest rates. Some members added that the current monetary policy stance should be maintained for as long as it is required to guarantee the convergence of inflation, and one of them stressed that this is the only way for inflation expectations to begin decreasing. Most members indicated that the central bank should be prepared to respond to the extent that is required to attain such convergence and considered that, given the environment of both external and domestic uncertainty, Banco de México should maintain a firm and cautious policy stance. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance and the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. Monetary policy must respond prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by the economy increases considerably. Although headline and core inflation have increased, these developments are considered to be transitory and the current monetary policy stance consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. For this reason, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at and stable inflation as well as those the economy’s price formation is subject to, the Governing Board will continue to follow closely all factors and elements of uncertainty that have an impact on both inflation and its outlook, and will take the necessary actions so that the reference rate is kept at a level consistent with the convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the period in which monetary policy operates. Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S.-in an external environment that it is still subject to risks- and the behavior of slack conditions and cost-related pressures in the economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and firm manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 8.25%. Against the Monetary Policy Statement (press Although I agreed with the decision to keep the target interest rate level constant, I do not agree with the press release that informs about such decision. Specifically, I differ on both the restrictive tone that characterizes it as well as the conclusion reached with respect to the balance of risks to inflation. This is based on the fact that inflation observed throughout 2019 has behaved in line with (or even more favorably) than what was expected in late monetary policy stance of several developed countries as well as the marked deceleration of Mexico’s economic activity allowed for releasing a monetary policy statement with a more neutral tone. I am particularly concerned that inflation expectations and inflation risk premia are increasing despite the relatively favorable behavior of inflation in 2019. It is not totally unlikely that such expectations are being affected by the central bank’s communication. I also differ with the emphasis given to the minimum wage increase as an upward risk to inflation. After five months of this increase, there is no convincing evidence that this is in fact occurring.