All members agreed that, during the fourth quarter of 2018, the world economy grew at an apparently lower rate than during the first half of the year and with heterogeneity among regions and countries. One member added that, although the global economy’s dynamism has been gradually moderating, some indicators suggest a possibly larger weakening of the world economy than currently expected, highlighting the cases of the U.S., China, the Eurozone, and Japan. Most members pointed out that the forecasts for global economic activity have been revised downwards and, for this reason, global economic activity is expected to grow at a more moderate rate. In this context, some members concorded that the balance of risks for world economic growth continues biased to the downside. Most members agreed that the main risks for global economic growth include: i) the escalation of trade disputes; ii) the tightening of global financial conditions, although this risk has declined recently; iii) several political and geopolitical factors; and, iv) the volatility of crude oil prices. Regarding the first risk, most members mentioned that the trade dispute between China and the U.S. remains as one of the main factors of concern. In this regard, one member added that, despite the recent progress made in the trade negotiations between these economies, a new stage of higher tariffs between the U.S. and China cannot be ruled out. In this sense, another member warned that global trade has decelerated significantly and that the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) of the manufacturing sector show a clear reduction, particularly those regarding export orders. Finally, another member noted that the intensification of the above mentioned risk factor could affect global value chains and exhaust the possibilities of an early recovery of the global economy. As to political and geopolitical risks, some members explained that the persisting difficulties in some systemically important economies continue to heighten the climate of uncertainty. One member highlighted the Brexit, where not only significant delays have materialized, but also that the probability of an agreement on terms reasonable for both the United Kingdom and the European Union has diminished. Furthermore, the same member added that, although the agreement on fiscal matters reached between the government of Italy and the authorities of the European Union eliminates the possibility of sanctions and reduces uncertainty, the risk of a sustained deterioration of Italy’s public finances and macroeconomic outlook persists. In this context, one member underlined that political and geopolitical issues in the United Kingdom, Italy, France, and China, as well as idiosyncratic risks of emerging economies, will continue contributing to the environment of high uncertainty. Finally, regarding the risks related to crude oil prices, one member stressed that, in an environment of a global economic slowdown, and due to the higher production of crude oil by other producers, the behavior of oil prices in the next months is still uncertain, despite the production cuts agreed by some of the main producing countries. Most members pointed out that the divergence in the performance of the main advanced economies continues. In this regard, most members pointed out that, although in the U.S., the growth rate of economic activity moderated during the fourth quarter 2018, it continues to expand at a higher rate than the Eurozone, Japan, and the United Kingdom. In particular, one member stated that the dynamism of the U.S. economy reflects, among other factors, the procyclical fiscal stance adopted and the mature phase of the business cycle the U.S. economy is currently going through. As to the growth forecasts of advanced economies, most members agreed that these have been revised downwards. The members stated that, in the case of the U.S., the latest information from financial markets reflects the expectations of an economic deceleration and that considerable risk factors will be faced during this process. In this regard, one member highlighted that there is the perception that the aforementioned deceleration will materialize when the effects of the fiscal stimulus fade away, among other factors. Some members mentioned that, although the possibility of recession in the U.S. in the next years is still low, it has been increasing. As to emerging economies, one member mentioned that their economic growth exhibits significant differences and has weakened. The same member noted that growth forecasts for this group of countries have been revised downwards. In this regard, most members highlighted the economic deceleration of China and the downward revisions in Chinese growth forecasts, given the escalating trade tensions with the U.S. Finally, another member noted that the risks for emerging economies are expected to persist. Most members added that less inflationary pressures have been observed worldwide, albeit with significant differences among countries. Some members mentioned that recent information indicates a tightening of labor markets. One of them also stated that there have been gradual increases in wages. Nevertheless, some members pointed out that in the major advanced economies inflation apparently has moderated its upward trend and one member added that it seems to have already reached its maximum levels in this cycle. Another member emphasized that the current levels of inflation are relatively low in historical terms. In the case of the U.S., most members pointed out that its lower economic dynamism, the recent fall in crude oil prices and the further strengthening of the U.S. dollar, have contributed to making headline and core inflations lie around the Federal Reserve’s 2% target. One member mentioned that, in contrast, in the Eurozone and Japan, core inflation remains clearly below their central banks’ targets. Another member considered that the balance of risks for global inflation remains relatively stable. As for monetary policy in advanced economies, some members pointed out that, given the environment of lower inflationary pressures and lower dynamism worldwide, the pace of monetary policy normalization is expected to be slower than as foreseen some months ago. One member mentioned that in these economies the prices of several financial assets are reflecting expectations of a significant moderation in the speed of monetary stimulus withdrawal. In the case of the U.S., all members stated that, as expected, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate in December and anticipates that the pace of its monetary policy normalization will be more gradual in the future. All members argued that the abovementioned is due to the outlook of lower inflationary pressures and to expectations of a reduced economic dynamism. Some members pointed out that the projections of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) are reflecting now two additional increases for the target range in 2019 and one in 2020. Another member stated that such projections indicate a lower level of interest rates in the coming years and for the long term. As for market instruments, one member explained that they are reflecting expectations of lower increases in the reference rate, while another member added that, at this time, they do not incorporate additional adjustments in 2019. Additionally, one member mentioned that the policy of quantitative tightening will continue to be gradual, transparent, and foreseeable. In this regard, another member specified that although the U.S. Federal Reserve has followed a gradual and pre-announced monetary policy normalization process, the escalating trade tensions and the significant fiscal stimulus adopted in the mature phase of the economy’s business cycle, have made the behavior of the economy and of the outlook for inflation in that country more complex and uncertain. As for the Eurozone, one member pointed out that, although the European Central Bank announced the end of its assets purchase program, it also stated that the level of the interest rate and the size of its balance sheet may remain at their current levels for a long period. As for the central banks of emerging economies, one member noted that these have maintained a more vigilant monetary policy rhetoric with respect to inflation and emphasized their interest in preserving financial stability. Most members agreed that international financial markets exhibited high volatility and that the prices of financial assets of emerging economies have deteriorated slightly, although their evolution has improved in the last days. In this regard, some members mentioned that the greater uncertainty about economic activity, especially in the U.S., and its implications for global financial conditions, have led to adjustments in stock markets and to greater risk aversion. One member stated that this adverse international environment was also due to the combination of increased trade tensions between the U.S. and China and to the perception of a certain exhaustion of the effects of the fiscal stimulus on economic activity. The same member explained that this environment is particularly noticeable in the countries that have vulnerable macroeconomic fundamentals or are facing idiosyncratic risk factors. Another member pointed out that decreases in the interest rates of government bonds have been observed recently in the main advanced countries as well as a depreciation of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies. One member pinpointed that so far into the fourth quarter of 2018, the U.S. stock market has exhibited an accumulated loss of nearly 15%, and interest rates of 10-year Treasury bonds went from 2.86% in early September to December 18. Additionally, some members pointed out that crude oil prices have continued to decline, which has contributed to this environment of uncertainty. One member also warned that it is important to take into account that market adjustments can be considerably abrupt in face of the events related with the deceleration of the Chinese economy, in a context where it is not foreseen that new wide-scale measures will be implemented to offset such downturn. In this regard, one member highlighted that, in this environment, the financial assets of emerging economies registered moderate losses and investors continue to reduce their exposure to fixed-income assets of these economies while they have increased their exposure to equity assets. One member noted that, recently, expectations of a more gradual monetary policy normalization process in advanced economies has eased the volatility in international financial markets and allowed for a certain recovery in the asset prices of emerging economies. Finally, most members pointed out that, given the possible persistence and/or materialization of some of the above mentioned risk factors, the potential for new episodes of financial turbulence persists. Regarding economic activity in Mexico, most members considered that in the fourth quarter of compared to the upturn observed in the previous quarter. One member mentioned that, although available information is limited, several indicators published to date, including those of industrial production, opinion surveys of the business sector and figures related to IMSS-insured jobs, point to a lower growth. As for aggregate demand, most members agreed that the negative trend of investment persists, one member highlighting the lower expenditure on construction and in machinery and domestic equipment. Another member pointed that the trajectory of investment continues to be a cause for concern and noted that gross fixed investment has been following, up to September, a downward trend starting from very low levels. The same member added that it seems unlikely that this indicator will strengthen in the short term and that although there are several determinants of investment weakness, the lack of confidence is clearly one of the most relevant, and if no decisive actions are taken to revert this situation, the recovery of investment will be significantly limited. Most members stressed that, in the opinion of economic analysts surveyed by Banco de México, the current juncture to make investments is going through difficult times. One of them warned that this scenario worsened considerably in the last survey. Another one stated that in recent months business confidence indicators have deteriorated overall, those of the manufacturing, commercial, and construction sectors reaching levels considered as pessimistic. Most members underlined the expansion of private consumption. Regarding external demand, some noted that, at the margin, the dynamism of manufacturing exports has moderated. One of them highlighted the case of automotive exports. Another member stated that, despite the downturn observed in October, manufacturing exports remain on an upward trend. As for the production side, one member added that, although the dynamism of services has prevailed, industrial activity weakened at the margin, especially manufacturing and mining, which showed a marked deterioration associated with crude oil extraction. Most members stated that forecasts for economic growth for the end of this year and for 2019 have been revised downwards by international organizations as well as by public agencies and private sector organizations. One member highlighted that the growth environment for 2019 is subject to high levels of uncertainty and will depend on the public policies that are implemented and their effects on private investment and consumption. In this context, most members expressed that the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside and has deteriorated. One member added that the downward bias is observed in both a short- and a medium-term horizon. In addition to the global risks described above, some members mentioned additional risks, such as: i) facing obstacles in the ratification of the trade agreements reached between Mexico, the United States and Canada; ii) that factors that lead to greater domestic uncertainty and less confidence in the outlook for the Mexican economy arise; and, iii) that certain delays arise in the execution of public expenditure related to the change of administration. Most members argued that there are considerable risk factors for the medium and long terms, indicating one member that these are even of greater concern than those for the short term. Among the risks mentioned by most members are those of a structural nature derived from the possible adoption of policies that could lead to deep changes in the economy and in growth capacity; as well as those derived from the lack of rule of law, public insecurity and impunity, which are significantly affecting the prospects for investment and economic growth. One member added that the challenges are even more complex considering that no increase in the ratio of public investment to GDP is foreseen in the coming years; that it is difficult to expect that the dynamism of consumption will continue in an environment of persistently weak investment; and that exports might be affected given the outlook of lower world trade growth. Most members considered that the slack conditions in the economy have remained relatively less tight than those observed at the beginning of the year. Some members mentioned that the phase of the business cycle that the Mexican economy is going through has not changed significantly since the last monetary policy decision. In this regard, some members indicated that most slack indicators, except those of the labor market, remain in neutral territory. One member specified that the economy operates with an output gap close to zero. Some members commented that the labor market maintains tight conditions, and one of them added that wages have increased. Some members argued that aggregate demand pressures are not perceived in the short term. One of them pointed out that this is due to the fact that some moderation in economic activity is expected in such horizon. In this regard, another member added that the output gap is still expected to continue to decrease in the following quarters, reaching levels around zero towards the end of 2019 and moderately below zero towards the end of 2020. The majority indicated that headline inflation fell from 4.90% in October to 4.72% in November, exhibiting reductions in both its core and non-core components. One member pointed out that after reaching a maximum level of 6.77% in December decreasing trend. Another member specified that from October to November headline inflation decreased for the second consecutive month, while another member warned that it is still early to conclude that the inflationary trend has resumed a downward trajectory and added that most indicators on the present juncture confirm that inflationary pressures persist. One member highlighted that, since June, headline inflation has been affected by considerable increases in non-core inflation, particularly in energy prices. As for headline inflation components, some members mentioned that non-core inflation fell from the lower increases in energy prices. They added, however, that such effects were partially offset by the higher increases in the prices of some agricultural products, so that non-core inflation remains at high levels. In this respect, some members specified that the prices of fruits and vegetables have increased significantly in recent weeks. Regarding core inflation, all members agreed that the shocks that have affected non-core inflation have also influenced core inflation due to the indirect effects they have had in production costs. The majority indicated that despite the reduction in core inflation from 3.73% in October to decline due to the aforementioned shocks and also to structural factors. One member emphasized that core inflation has decreased with noticeable sluggishness. Another member mentioned that the recent behavior of core inflation does not yet reflect a general decline in all of its components. A member noted that, after decreasing in the first half of the year, core inflation was 3.62% in June and 3.63% in November, and that it has been affected by an increase in the annual price variation of services other than housing and education. Finally, another member added that the high persistence in the merchandise and services subindex, as well as the indirect effects of the exchange rate, have also contributed to the evolution of core inflation. Most members mentioned that headline inflation expectations for different terms have increased. In particular, those for the end of 2019 increased from while those for the end of 2020 were revised upwards from 3.50% to 3.79% during the same period. The majority also indicated that during the same period, core inflation expectations for the end of 2019 were adjusted from 3.45% to 3.50%, while those for the end of 2020 increased from 3.33% to long-term headline inflation expectations are still above the permanent 3% target, at levels around expectations (up to four years) were adjusted upwards and that the dispersion of long-term expectations has increased. As for information drawn from market instruments, the majority pointed out that medium- and long-term inflationary risk premia remain at high levels. The majority of the members pointed out that inflation forecasts were revised upwards. One member stated that the indirect effects on core inflation have caused its deviation from the trajectory anticipated in the forecast. In this context, some members highlighted that the upward revision of forecasts is mainly due to a path for the exchange rate more depreciated-than-previously anticipated and to higher prices of agricultural products, particularly, fruits and vegetables. One of the members stated that the upward revision in the prices of such categories —as a result of adverse weather conditions— partially offsets the fall in energy prices. Another member added the recent increase in minimum wages to the factors affecting the projections for inflation. The majority of the members considered that the balance of risks for the expected trajectory of inflation has deteriorated and remains biased to the upside, in an environment of marked uncertainty. Some members noted that, in an adverse external environment and with significant factors of domestic uncertainty, some of the risks to the upside for inflation have materialized. One of the members highlighted that, under such an environment, the outlook for medium- and short-term inflation has become more uncertain. One member estimated that, at the margin, the stabilization in the exchange rate market as well as a slightly less unfavorable external environment have improved the outlook for inflation in the short term. However, that member also acknowledged that considerable risks for the longer term persist for inflation and that core inflation continues to show an elevated degree of uncertainty. Some members agreed that there is a high risk that the convergence of headline inflation to its 3% target is delayed. One member added that such risks increase in an environment in which survey-based expectations for headline inflation and, to a lesser extent, for core inflation, for the next two years have been adjusted upwards, even without incorporating the recent increase in minimum wages. As for the main cyclical risks to the upside for inflation, most members highlighted: the possibility that the peso exchange rate continues to be subject to pressures stemming from external and domestic factors; that additional pressures on energy prices or increases in the prices of agricultural products are observed; that a possible escalation of worldwide protectionist or retaliatory measures materializes; and, that public finances deteriorate. The majority also mentioned that considering the magnitude of the recent minimum wage increases, in addition to their possible direct impact, there is the risk that these bring about wage revisions that exceed productivity gains and create cost pressures, affecting formal employment and prices. Some members mentioned that due to the observed shocks and the levels reached by inflation, there is the risk of second-round effects on the price formation process. Most members pointed out that inflation also faces structural risks related to the possible adoption of policies that could lead to significant changes in the economy’s price formation process. In this respect, some members noted that a structural weakening of public finances could be observed, and one member added that, in his/her opinion, this is one of the main risks for inflation. Another member mentioned the possibility that the economy registers a lower potential growth rate. All members highlighted that since the last monetary policy decision, the prices of financial assets in Mexico continued to exhibit marked volatility. Most members coincided that in addition to the aforementioned external factors, such environment continued to reflect the uncertainty regarding the policies of the new administration, one of them stating that in his/her opinion, this latter factor has been the most relevant. Most members underscored the following as factors that have led to an environment of uncertainty: the intention to cancel the project of the New Mexico City International Airport, concerns about the business model of Mexico’s state-owned oil company legislative proposals. The majority pointed out that in such environment, the exchange rate has been under pressure, although some members mentioned that the operating conditions of the foreign exchange market remain adequate, while one of them added that the foreign exchange market has maintained stable levels of liquidity, depth and volume. Most members indicated that interest rates, mainly medium and long term, as well as sovereign risk premia remain at high levels. They also pointed out that medium- and long-term interest rates reached their highest levels in the last ten years and that operating conditions in that market have deteriorated significantly. In this regard, one member argued that primary auctions have exhibited lower participation from investors, both domestic and foreign, especially for instruments with longer terms and duration. Another member highlighted that interest rate differentials with respect to those of the United States are also at high levels. Some members added that stock indexes fell as well, and one of them emphasized that the Mexican Stock Exchange is currently at levels not observed since 2014. The majority stated that, despite the volatility observed in domestic financial markets, in the last days these have had a better performance, with a moderate reversion in the depreciation of the Mexican peso, and a reduction of both medium- and long-term interest rates, and of sovereign risk premia. One member elaborated along the same lines that long-term interest rates have fallen by more than 50 basis points and that, as a result, the yield curve steepening that had been observed has significantly reverted. The majority argued that this improvement was caused by the favorable response of markets to the submittal of the 2019 Economic Package by the Ministry of Finance (SHCP, for its acronym in Spanish) to Congress, as well as to external factors, particularly expectations of fewer increases in the federal funds rate by the U.S. Federal Reserve. Most members considered that both the domestic and external environment as described before imply medium-and long-term risks that could affect the country’s macroeconomic conditions and thus, it is particularly important that, in addition to continuing with a prudent and sound monetary policy, measures to foster an environment of confidence and certainty for investment are adopted, public finances are consolidated sustainably, and actions that lead to higher levels of productivity are implemented. One member argued that all this has become necessary not only to promote greater economic growth and development, but also to avoid the materialization of risk factors that could lead to capital outflows. As some of the measures to improve investor confidence, most members mentioned the need to offer greater clarity on Pemex's business model and, in general terms, on the energy policy to be implemented in the coming years. In this regard, one member stressed that there are strong concerns about the future of Pemex and the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE, for its acronym in Spanish), while another member argued that obtaining a higher confidence could require additional efforts in different fronts and would also take a long time. As for public finance consolidation, most members stressed that the 2019 Economic Package submitted by the Ministry of Finance strengthening required in this matter and that it was prepared considering a macroeconomic scenario based on realistic assumptions. Most members argued that, as part of the measures to strengthen the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals, it is particularly relevant that the fiscal targets included in the Economic Package are met. Some members considered the strict implementation of the fiscal targets a challenge, given the ambitious nature of the new projects by the Federal Government and the uncertainty inherent to the macroeconomic assumptions used. One member stated that this challenge is the most far-reaching one for public finances in 2019 given the deterioration of confidence. Among the risks to which the assumptions for 2019 are subject, most members pointed out the possibility that lower tax rates at Mexico’s northern border cause a higher-thanexpected reduction in tax collection; that the economy grows at a rate lower than the 2% considered in the budget as a result, for example, of a lower-than-expected global growth; and that the oil production platform turns out to be below that considered in the Federal Income Law. As additional risks, one of the members mentioned greater cuts in public spending, which typically occur at the beginning of a new administration as a result of the departure of experienced public service officials due to the austerity measures, and that a sovereign credit rating revision takes place, hence leading to a higher financial cost for public debt. With regards to the measures aimed at strengthening productivity and potential growth, some members highlighted the need to reduce the country’s insecurity levels, corruption and the weak rule of law. One of them noted that doubts prevail as to the effectiveness of the fight against corruption and the improvement in public security. The same member stated that economic analysts surveyed by Banco de México continue mentioning these two obstacles and, in general terms, the lack of rule of law, as significant drags on growth and investment. Some members pointed out that, in addition to the aforementioned, the low effectiveness of the policies to promote economic competition have also hindered the country’s potential growth and have been a source of inflationary inertia. In the same line, some members considered that the federal government policies may generate market distortions and affect the efficiency in allocating resources in the economy and, therefore, productivity. One member pointed out that it will be necessary to assure that the government actions, the multiannual projects considered and the assumptions used mainly on the estimates for economic growth and oil production, are consistent with the soundness of public finances in the medium and long terms. Some members warned that the Economic Package does not improve the composition of public spending and that the new strategy of the government seems to privilege consumption rather than human and physical capital formation, which could also affect the economy’s potential growth. They also mentioned that, in the new budget, the ratio of public investment to GDP does not increase and that public investment will be allocated to projects whose financial and social returns are not evident. One of them added that the new social programs do not seem to include a clear structure of intertemporal incentives oriented to improve productivity and efficiency, which could imply a significant cost for the population’s welfare. Another member stated that the combination of investment stagnation and consumption strengthening might have major implications for both economic growth and the conduct of monetary policy. One member highlighted that the new government still needs to reveal its new strategies regarding key sectors for development, such as education and energy, in which there were already in place processes for the implementation of reforms with medium- and longterm reach and maturity. The same member mentioned that, in the future, it will be key for both fiscal and monetary authorities to keep an open and direct communication in order to identify any possible deterioration of macroeconomic fundamentals on time and for each to act rapidly and prudently in their spheres of competence. One member delved into the factors to be considered in the conduct of monetary policy, highlighting that since mid-2015 the economy has been facing an adverse shock to its potential growth, together with a tighter external financing constraint. In this context, the same member mentioned that in recent years, the reduction in the current account deficit from around 2.5% of GDP in orderly manner, with a cost on growth of slightly over one percentage point, from 3.29% in 2015 to same member stated that in the presence of these shocks, the fiscal policy stance tightened, and therefore public sector borrowing requirements decreased by approximately three percentage points of GDP between 2015 and 2018, from 4% in that, in turn, monetary policy responded by tightening significantly its stance, in order to prevent inflation expectations in the long term from unanchoring and to restrain the decompression of the term premium, raising the target rate from 3% to its current level of 8.25%. The same member pointed out that due to the referred shocks, both the real exchange rate and real interest rates exhibited adjustments. The relative magnitude of the adjustment in the real exchange rate and real interest rates depends on the relative magnitude of the adjustment between the fiscal and monetary policies. To the extent that fiscal policy undergoes a higher adjustment, a larger part of the adjustment is reflected on the real exchange rate, whereas if monetary policy undergoes a higher adjustment, a larger part is reflected on real interest rates. The same member noted that the strong inertia exhibited by both core and fundamental core inflation. This member noted that it has been driven by null productivity growth, which makes it difficult for the economy to absorb supply shocks without having a high cost in terms of inflation. Such member added that there are other distortions that make inflation show a high persistence, such as the high market power prevailing in certain sectors of the economy, which makes core inflation exhibit a high resistance to decline. Moreover, the same member highlighted that under such market distortions, monetary policy is not an effective instrument in bringing down inflation. Such member mentioned that a case that illustrates the aforementioned is having real wages growing above productivity, which could lead to higher levels of inflation, putting at risk the goal of raising the purchasing power of earnings. This member argued that implementing a decisive policy to promote competition in some sectors of the economy should contribute to reduce the relative prices of goods and services with low levels of competition, and in turn prompt an increase in wages’ purchasing power, without creating risks or putting pressure on inflation. Such member highlighted that this situation is particularly relevant in the case of the consumption baskets of those segments of the population with the lowest incomes, given that it is possible that nearly 50% of the goods and services that make up their consumption baskets come from sectors with a high degree of market concentration. The same member warned that the fact that minimum wages have been below extreme poverty levels makes it more urgent to create an effective policy to promote competition. Such member highlighted that other factors that might be contributing to inflation’s strong persistence are public policies related to price determination of energy products and hysteresis in the economy’s price formation process. Also, that there are several distortions in the economy which might be playing a role on the high degree of inertia exhibited by core inflation and that, in some cases, monetary policy is and must continue to be the main instrument to fight inflation, while, in other, it can turn out to be a less effective instrument, depending on the distortions that are generating inflation’s persistence. All members agreed that monetary policy continues facing a complex situation, characterized by a high degree of uncertainty in which the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside, in which some of the foreseen inflationary risks from a shortand medium-term perspective have materialized, and in which there is a possibility of medium- and long-term inflation expectations being affected. Most members stated that among the factors to consider for the monetary policy decision are: that non-core inflation remains high, affecting headline inflation and putting pressure on core inflation; that core inflation has shown a resistance to decline; that short-term inflation expectations have been adjusted upwards; and, that inflation risk premia has reached high levels. One member added that the aforementioned takes place together with an outlook of a negative output gap and a balance of risks to growth tilted to the downside. Some members warned about core inflation deviating from the forecasted trajectory and continuing to exhibit a high degree of uncertainty, which constitutes a risk for monetary policy. In this regard, most members agreed that the central bank must strengthen its monetary policy stance consistent with the attainment of the inflation target in the expected time frame and mitigate the risk of an un-anchoring of inflation expectations. Another member highlighted that the convergence to the inflation target during 2020 might require further increases in the reference rate. Nevertheless, such member stated that in order to define the above, it will be necessary to assess thoroughly the latest information on the outlook for inflation and its determinants, including the domestic and external factors of uncertainty that might affect inflation, in order to attain the abovementioned convergence at the lowest possible cost for economic activity. Another member emphasized that considering the U.S. Federal Reserve’s recent increase in the target for the federal funds rate, as well as the uncertainty surrounding the development of the Mexican economy and the volatility that domestic financial markets have exhibited, the short-term interest rate differentials can help the Mexican economy to transit through an environment of higher uncertainty in an orderly manner and keeping inflation expectations anchored. Most members highlighted that given the current environment, the monetary policy stance must remain prudent in the next months. One member mentioned that despite expectations of an economic slowdown in Mexico, prudence in the conduct of monetary policy is necessary given the shocks that have affected inflation, the possible persistence of an environment of uncertainty, and expectations of a continuing process of monetary policy normalization in the U.S. In this regard, the same member added that it is important to keep in mind that a deterioration of confidence in the central bank would imply higher costs in terms of both inflation and economic growth. Also, that maintaining credibility on the inflation target is necessary and, for this reason, Banco de México must focus on such target but always analyzing the implications for economic activity, which requires a balanced approach. Another member considered relevant that the monetary policy statement should include that under the present environment of high uncertainty, the Governing Board must remain vigilant to the development of inflation, its determinants and its expectations and, if necessary, act once more in a timely manner to reinforce its commitment with price stability. The same member mentioned that with these actions the central bank contributes to the attainment of the economic development goals and to improve the population’s welfare. One member added that it is important to present a forward guidance of monetary policy that communicates that given the inertia exhibited by core inflation and the prevailing uncertainty, the target rate will probably need to be kept high for a long period. To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and long-term inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors. Monetary policy must also respond prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by the Mexican economy increases significantly. In this context, considering the environment of high uncertainty, in which the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the upside and some of the risks that might affect it in both the short and long terms have materialized, and in view of the possibility that medium- and longterm inflation expectations may be affected, Banco de México’s Governing Board has decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 8.25%. Considering the challenges to consolidate a low and stable inflation, as well as the risks that the economy’s price formation process is subject to, the Governing Board will take the necessary actions, specifically, maintaining or, in its case, strengthening the monetary policy stance, so that the reference rate is kept at a level consistent with the convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the period of influence of monetary policy. Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Manuel Ramos-Francia and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted unanimously in favor of raising the target for the overnight interbank rate (target rate) by 25 basis points, to 8.25%.