Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.
Hybrid – 4 May 2021

			Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
			Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
		
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
				Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International
				Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets
				Department)
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global
				outlook had improved, and risks had become more balanced, because of progress in vaccinations and the
				provision of additional fiscal support. Growth in the global economy was expected to rebound solidly in
				both the current and the following year. Even so, the global recovery remained uneven. Output remained
				well below pre-pandemic levels in a number of countries because of recurring outbreaks of COVID-19, and in some emerging market economies, where financial conditions had
				tightened, there was limited scope for ongoing large-scale fiscal support. The level of output was
				expected to remain below its pre-pandemic trajectory in many economies over the forecast period, with
				the United States and China notable exceptions. Substantial spare capacity was likely to persist in most
				economies, including in the services sector, keeping underlying inflation pressures subdued for some
				time. However, members noted that the upswing in commodity prices would boost inflation readings in the
				near term, and that it was possible that supply bottlenecks for some goods would be more persistent than
				generally assumed.
Members observed that a significant share of the population had been vaccinated in only a small number
				of countries, notably the United States, United Kingdom and Israel. Some other countries where infection
				rates had been relatively low through the pandemic, including Australia and in east Asia, were expected
				to achieve high levels of inoculation by the end of 2021 or early 2022. However, vaccine supplies
				remained limited in many emerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries. India had
				experienced a very serious surge in infections, accounting for a large share of new cases globally and
				prompting curfews and partial lockdowns in the worst-affected states. This would weigh on the Indian
				economy in the June quarter.
Members observed that the global fiscal policy response to the pandemic had been the largest since at
				least the Second World War, and that it continued to evolve. In the most acute phase of the pandemic,
				governments had prioritised direct fiscal support for health systems and households, and targeted
				measures aimed at reducing layoffs, such as wage subsidies for firms. The latter had limited the extent
				of economic scarring. The size and composition of the fiscal response had also varied considerably
				across countries, reflecting differences in health outcomes and the nature of automatic stabilisers
				already in place. Fiscal support had been particularly large in the United States. Fiscal policy was
				likely to remain supportive in most advanced economies for some time after the pandemic. In countries
				where health outcomes were becoming more favourable, the focus of this fiscal support was likely to turn
				toward boosting public and private investment and other longer-term priorities.
A key development in the global economy in recent months had been the rebound in commodity and producer
				prices. Highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policy settings, a surge in global demand for goods and
				a strong recovery in industrial production in China and elsewhere had contributed to a sharp increase in
				the prices of commodities and other inputs. In some cases, the rebound in global goods trade had
				outstripped the ability of global supply chains to cope, which had contributed to delays and upward
				price pressures for key components such as semiconductors; this in turn had hampered downstream
				production for a variety of goods, such as motor vehicles. Strong demand for steel in China and
				international supply disruptions had also pushed iron ore prices to their highest levels in a decade and
				boosted Australia's terms of trade. The increase in commodity and other input prices was expected
				to contribute to higher inflation globally in subsequent months, and members noted that inflation
				expectations in advanced economies had also increased to be closer to central banks' targets.
In turning to the domestic outlook, members noted that the Australian economy was transitioning from
				recovery to expansion earlier and with more momentum than previously anticipated. The unique features of
				the pandemic and the policy response had seen the economy rebound much faster than in previous
				downturns. GDP was expected to have returned to its pre-pandemic level in the March quarter and there
				were more people employed in March than before the onset of the pandemic. In response to the stronger
				starting point and improved outlook further out, the forecast for GDP under the baseline scenario had
				been revised upwards. GDP growth of 4¾ per cent was expected over 2021 and
				3½ per cent over 2022. If realised, this would leave the level of GDP a little below that
				forecast before the pandemic, mostly owing to lower population growth. Members noted that the release of
				the Australian Government Budget in May would contain further information relevant to the outlook for
				public demand.
Members agreed that an important source of uncertainty for the domestic outlook was the path for
				household consumption. In the baseline scenario, household consumption was expected to be supported by
				the further lifting of restrictions on services, a stronger outlook for employment and thus labour
				income, wealth effects from higher housing prices, and reduced uncertainty generally. In this scenario,
				households were assumed to treat the savings accumulated in the preceding year as wealth and therefore
				were expected to consume only a small share of these savings over the forecast period; the household
				saving ratio was also expected to decline further.
Conditions in the housing market had continued to strengthen. Housing prices had increased further in
				April. In recent months, the upswing in housing prices had become more broadly based across capital
				cities and regional areas. Turnover had also increased to around its highest level in a number of years,
				with many properties staying on the market for short periods of time. Strong demand was encouraging an
				increase in new listings, although the total stock of listings was below the average of recent years
				because new listings were being sold quickly. Rental markets had tightened in recent months but
				conditions remained uneven. Rents were increasing at a stronger pace for houses than for units, and in
				regional areas compared with capital cities. Rental vacancy rates remained high in Melbourne and, to a
				lesser extent, Sydney, depressing advertised rents there. In other capital cities, vacancy rates were
				low and advertised rents were increasing at a quicker pace.
The outlook for dwelling investment remained strong. Approvals for detached dwellings and alterations
				& additions had increased to record high levels in the March quarter, boosting the pipeline of
				construction activity over 2021. In addition to the support provided by low interest rates, the increase
				in approvals had been driven by the HomeBuilder program and other state-based grants; commencement of
				construction on many of the large number of projects being approved under these programs had only
				recently begun. Some construction firms in the Bank's business liaison program had reported cost
				pressures and delays to construction timelines owing to difficulties in securing materials and
				labour.
Members noted that the strong recovery in domestic activity and policy support had lifted the outlook
				for non-mining business investment, although this had followed a lengthy period in which it had been
				weak. Strong profitability and a reported increase in capacity utilisation and business confidence were
				expected to provide further support for machinery & equipment investment in the near term, following
				a strong response to the tax incentives provided by the Australian Government. Recent indicators, such
				as building approvals, pointed to a more gradual recovery in private non-residential construction
				activity. The forecast profile for mining investment had been revised upwards a little, but there were
				few signs that major mining firms were planning to expand iron ore-related investment in response to
				higher prices.
Members discussed the continued improvement in labour market conditions. Employment and total hours
				worked in March were higher than before the pandemic, underemployment had returned to pre-pandemic
				levels, and the decline in the unemployment rate to 5.6 per cent in March had occurred
				considerably faster than expected earlier. Employment growth was expected to remain firm in the months
				ahead, given the solid momentum in activity and buoyant forward indicators of labour demand. Some
				surveyed firms were reporting a lack of available labour as a constraint on output. While job losses
				from the end of the JobKeeper program were likely, these were expected to be more than offset by demand
				for labour elsewhere in the economy.
Further out, the stronger forecast profile for growth in output and employment was expected gradually
				to reduce spare capacity in the labour market. In the baseline scenario, the unemployment rate was
				expected to continue to decline to around its pre-pandemic level of 5 per cent by the end of
				2021 and to 4½ per cent by mid 2023. This lower forecast unemployment rate was
				expected to put some modest upward pressure on wages growth over time. Led by private sector wages,
				growth in the Wage Price Index was expected to pick up to a little under 2 per cent over 2021
				and to around 2¼ per cent by mid 2023.
Despite the strong recovery in economic activity, the recent Consumer Price Index (CPI) confirmed that
				inflation pressures remain subdued in most parts of the Australian economy. The forecast for inflation
				had been revised upwards slightly, in line with the stronger outlook for activity, but inflation was
				still expected to increase only gradually. In the baseline scenario, underlying inflation was expected
				to increase from 1½ per cent over 2021 to close to 2 per cent by mid 2023.
				Headline inflation was expected to spike above 3 per cent over the year to June 2021, partly
				as the effect of COVID-19-related one-off price changes dropped out of the
				calculation, before declining back below 2 per cent over the remainder of the forecast
				period.
Members noted that the extent of spare capacity in the economy at the end of the forecast period was
				uncertain, which meant that the gradual increase in inflation could be slower or faster than envisaged
				in the baseline scenario. Wage and price inflation were at much lower levels than over the preceding
				decade, and, because of inertia in wage- and price-setting practices, it was possible that price
				pressures could be slow to build even if spare capacity were absorbed more quickly than expected.
				Alternatively, higher commodity prices, persistent supply chain bottlenecks and firms' reduced
				ability to address labour shortages through access to workers from abroad could mean that wages growth
				and inflation picked up earlier and more rapidly than expected as the economy continued to expand.
Although households had been adjusting well to the tapering of fiscal and other temporary support
				measures, members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by considering 2 alternative
				scenarios based on different assumptions for household consumption.
A stronger economic trajectory than the one envisaged in the baseline scenario was possible if
				households increased spending by more than expected. This could be in response to stronger wealth
				effects and a decline in uncertainty, which boosted households' willingness to consume out of
				earlier savings and recurring labour income. As a result, private investment and employment would be
				stronger. The unemployment rate would decline at a faster pace and to a lower level, around
				3¾ per cent, compared with the baseline. In this upside scenario, inflation would
				increase to around 2¼ per cent by mid 2023.
Alternatively, members noted that a weaker path for the economy could eventuate if households chose to
				consume a smaller share of their income and accumulated savings than assumed in the baseline scenario.
				In this downside scenario, spending would be stimulated by less than implied by historical wealth
				effects, with households assumed to continue strengthening their balance sheets, including by paying
				down debt. Subdued consumption and private business investment would contribute to the unemployment rate
				remaining relatively high in this downside scenario, with inflation remaining around
				1½ per cent over much of the forecast period.
Members observed that financial market conditions had been broadly stable over the preceding month.
				Longer-term sovereign bond yields had settled around pre-pandemic levels in most advanced markets after
				increasing noticeably earlier in the year in response to the improving economic outlook. Most of the
				increases in bond yields had reflected increases in expected inflation to levels that were consistent
				with or below central banks' targets. Members noted that the increase in inflation expectations had
				been most marked in the United States.
Corporate bond issuance had remained robust in advanced economy markets and spreads on corporate bonds
				had declined to low levels in expectation that the improved economic outlook would moderate the rise in
				default rates seen over the preceding year. Equity prices had also increased further in prior months and
				in most of the major markets were above pre-pandemic levels. Members noted that equity issuance,
				particularly initial public offerings by so-called ‘blank-cheque’ financing vehicles in
				the United States (which raise funds to invest in private companies to take public) had eased in recent
				weeks, having been very strong earlier in the year.
Major central banks had reiterated that their policy settings would remain highly accommodative until
				sustained progress towards their employment and inflation objectives had been attained. The Bank of
				Canada had upgraded its economic projections and updated its expectations for the timing of the first
				increase in its policy rate, which was closely aligned with market expectations that the first increase
				would occur in the second half of 2022. Market pricing suggested that policy rates were expected to
				begin to increase in New Zealand in late 2022 or early 2023, and in the United States and United Kingdom
				in the first half of 2023. The Bank of Canada had also announced a reduction in the pace of its
				government bond purchases. This change had been anticipated and there had not been a significant market
				reaction to the announcement.
The US dollar had depreciated as bond markets had stabilised over the prior month to be back
				around its levels against other major currencies at the start of the year. The Australian dollar had
				continued to trade in a relatively narrow range, and was slightly above its levels at the start of the
				year on a trade-weighted basis and against the US dollar.
In emerging market economies (EMEs), financial conditions had generally stabilised in line with
				developments in the advanced economy markets. Flows into EME bond and equity funds had resumed,
				following some outflows during the period of heightened market volatility earlier in the year. Financial
				conditions in China had remained accommodative, although concerns about a large state-owned financial
				firm had seen spreads widen on bonds issued into offshore markets by Chinese firms.
In the domestic market, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin very low interest
				rates and the provision of credit. The yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond had remained
				around 10 basis points and no further purchases had been required to support the Bank's yield
				target over the preceding 2 months. Nevertheless, yields on other 3-year financial instruments had
				increased since the start of 2021, and were consistent with market participants expecting the cash rate
				to begin increasing from its current level during 2023.
Yields on longer-dated Australian government bonds had moved roughly in line with US Treasuries over
				the prior month and the spread between 10-year yields in the respective markets had remained close to
				zero. The Bank's bond purchase program had continued to run smoothly and in early April the Bank
				concluded the initial $100 billion of purchases under the program. The second $100 billion of
				bond purchases was scheduled to be completed in September. Projections suggested the Bank would hold
				around 30 per cent of outstanding Australian government bonds and 15 per cent of
				bonds issued by the semi-government authorities by the conclusion of the program in September.
Bank funding costs and lending rates had remained at historic lows. Drawings on the Bank's Term
				Funding Facility had increased as the 30 June deadline for accessing the 3-year funding program
				approached. Liaison had indicated that many banks would take up most, if not all, of their remaining
				allowances. Demand for housing finance had continued to pick up, driven by owner-occupiers, although new
				lending to investors had also increased. Members noted that there had been a pick-up in issuance of
				residential mortgage-backed securities by non-banks at favourable spreads, which had been accompanied by
				an increase in their share of the household lending market. Lending to businesses had also increased a
				little in preceding months, reflecting a pick-up in lending to large businesses.
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy had continued to recover
				from the pandemic and the outlook was for strong growth in output in 2021 and the following year.
				Although the pace of COVID-19 vaccinations had been supporting the rebound
				in the global economy, the recovery remained uneven and some countries were yet to contain the virus.
				Global goods trade had continued to increase strongly and commodity prices were higher than at the
				beginning of 2021. Despite the more positive real economic conditions, in many countries wages growth
				and inflation remained low and below central banks' targets.
In preceding weeks, sovereign bond yields had been steady after rising earlier in the year in response
				to the positive news on vaccines and the additional sizeable fiscal stimulus in the United States.
				Inflation expectations had increased from around record lows to be closer to central banks'
				inflation targets, although central banks in major advanced economies had indicated no intention to
				dampen monetary stimulus until inflation outcomes were sustainably higher than currently.
The economic recovery in Australia had been stronger than expected and the central forecast for GDP
				growth had been revised upwards. The recovery had been especially evident in the strong growth in
				employment, with the unemployment rate expected to continue to decline from its current level of
				5.6 per cent.
Despite the strong recovery in economic activity in Australia, wage and price pressures remained
				subdued. The recent CPI data confirmed that inflation pressures remained low in most parts of the
				economy. A pick-up in inflation and wages growth was expected, but this was likely to be only gradual
				and modest despite the lift in the forecast for output growth. Members noted that inflation would rise
				temporarily above 3 per cent in the June quarter before falling back below the target. Spare
				capacity in the economy and a strong focus on cost containment by businesses were both expected to
				contribute to continued subdued wage and price pressures. Members also noted that public sector wage
				policies were likely to restrain aggregate wage outcomes. It would take some time for spare capacity to
				be reduced and the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage increases consistent with achieving
				the inflation target. Moreover, it was likely that wages growth would need to be sustainably above
				3 per cent, which was well above its current level.
Members noted that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase in all
				major markets. Housing credit growth had also strengthened, with strong demand from owner-occupiers,
				especially first-home buyers. Given the environment of strong demand for housing, rising housing prices
				and low interest rates, members agreed on the importance of maintaining lending standards and carefully
				monitoring trends in borrowing.
In discussing specific elements of the current monetary policy settings, members agreed that, at the
				July 2021 meeting, the Board would consider whether to retain the April 2024 bond as the target bond for
				the 3-year yield target or to shift to the next maturity, the November 2024 bond. Members agreed that a
				change to the target of 10 basis points was not warranted. Also at the July meeting, the Board
				would consider future bond purchases following the completion in September of the second
				$100 billion of purchases under the government bond purchase program. The Board remained willing to
				undertake further bond purchases if doing so would assist with progress towards the Bank's goals of
				full employment and inflation. Future policy decisions would be based on close attention to the flow of
				economic data and conditions in financial markets in Australia. Members agreed that a return to full
				employment is a high priority for monetary policy and would assist with achieving the inflation target.
				Consequently, monetary policy would be likely to need to remain highly accommodative for some time
				yet.
Members noted that the date for final drawings under the Term Funding Facility is 30 June 2021,
				that banks had drawn down $100 billion and that a further $100 billion was available. The
				facility provides funding for 3 years, which means it will continue to support low funding costs in
				Australia until mid 2024. In an environment where financial markets in Australia are operating
				well, the Board did not see a case for a further extension of this facility.
Members concluded their discussion by observing that the current package of monetary policy measures
				had continued to support the economy by encouraging an ample supply of credit to businesses and keeping
				financing costs very low, thereby strengthening household and business balance sheets. The 3-year
				government bond yield remained at the Board's target of around 10 basis points and lending
				rates on outstanding business and housing loans had continued to drift down from already low levels. As
				well as lowering domestic funding costs, the policy package had contributed to a lower exchange rate
				than would otherwise have been the case. The Australian dollar had moved within a narrow range since the
				start of the year, a period in which commodity prices had tended to increase. Together, monetary and
				fiscal policy had been supporting the recovery in aggregate demand and the pick-up in employment.
The Board remained committed to doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, and
				would maintain highly supportive monetary conditions until its goals for employment and inflation were
				achieved. Members affirmed that the cash rate target would be maintained at 10 basis points, and
				the rate of remuneration on Exchange Settlement balances at zero, for as long as necessary. The Board
				will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to
				3 per cent target range. For this to occur, wages growth would need to be materially higher
				than it is currently. This would require significant gains in employment and a return to a tight labour
				market. The Board viewed these conditions as unlikely until 2024 at the earliest.
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				