In December, consumer prices decreased by 0.40 percent and annual inflation fell by 1.32 points to 20.30 percent. The largest contribution to the decline in inflation came from energy and core goods groups. Oil prices and exchange rate developments favorably affected the energy group, while core goods prices were affected by both exchange rate developments and weaker domestic demand. Services inflation decreased across all subcategories. Against this background, both the annual inflation and the underlying trend in core indicators decelerated. In sum, consumer prices in December reflect the appreciation in the Turkish lira as well as demand-side effects led by weaker economic activity. Annual inflation in food and nonalcoholic beverages maintains its elevated levels with 25.11 percent. As of December, annual food inflation is 27,09 percent in unprocessed food group and 23,22 percent in processed food group. Annual core goods inflation dropped by 2.22 points to 24.67 percent in December. In this period, durable goods prices decreased across all subcategories, most visibly in automobiles. The deceleration in annual clothing and footwear inflation also continued in December due to demand conditions. Although monthly price increases in other core goods significantly lost pace, annual inflation in this group remained high. To sum up, the decline in core goods inflation is attributed to the appreciation in the Turkish lira and the weaker domestic demand. Slowdown in economic activity continues, partly due to tight financial conditions. Although there has been some improvement in financial indicators recently, loan demand and supply remain subdued. Leading indicators have yet to show signs of recovery in domestic demand. The extended tax cuts for durable goods are likely to spur consumer demand in the first quarter. However, the weak labor market will continue to curb aggregate demand. Labor market data confirm that the economy continues to slow down on the back of domestic demand. In the September-November period, construction employment declined further while industrial employment remained flat, and services employment picked up slightly. Business activities with relatively stronger external trade links and the public sector continued to make a positive contribution to employment. Increased protectionist trends in international trade continue to keep the risks to the global growth outlook alive by increasing uncertainties regarding global economic policies. The global economic slowdown has been slightly more pronounced since the previous MPC meeting. Therefore, the outlook for 2019 has been revised down for both advanced and emerging economies. The buoyant labor markets across advanced economies sustain the wages-backed upside risks to global inflation. Nevertheless, given the weaker global growth otlook and the fall in oil prices, the global inflation pressures are judged to be mild in the upcoming period. Still, the Committee will continue to closely monitor the risks to global inflation arising from the high volatility of energy prices and the wage inflation. Expectations on the normalization of monetary policy stances in advanced economies have moderated since the last MPC meeting. However, global financial risks and the uncertainty over global economic policies are rather elevated for the coming months, upholding the downside risks to portfolio flows to emerging economies. The Central Bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective. Inflation expectations, pricing behavior, lagged impact of recent monetary policy decisions, contribution of fiscal policy to rebalancing process, and other factors affecting inflation will be closely monitored and, if needed, further monetary tightening will be delivered. Collective efforts to turn the recently enhanced coordination between monetary and fiscal policies into a sustained and systematic structure are expected to support the achievement of price stability. Moreover, continued structural steps focusing on reducing rigidity and volatility in inflation will contribute to price stability and therefore social welfare.