Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.
Hybrid – 3 October 2023
Michele Bullock (Governor and Chair), Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
						Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Elana Rubin AM,
						Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Brad Jones (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor,
						Financial Markets), Marion Kohler (Acting Assistant Governor, Economic)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Andrea Brischetto (Head, Financial Stability Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International
						Department), Tom Rosewall (Acting Head, Economic Analysis Department), Carl Schwartz (Acting
						Head, Domestic Markets Department), Meredith Beechey Osterholm (Deputy Head, RBA Future Hub)
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by observing that high inflation remained the key
						challenge facing central banks around the world. While core inflation had gradually moderated in most
						advanced economies in year-ended terms, monthly observations had edged higher in the United States and
						Canada. The persistence in core inflation had been driven by core services prices; core goods price
						inflation had moderated, and prices had declined in the United States and the United Kingdom over
						preceding months. Rising energy prices had seen headline inflation pick up in a number of countries over
						the prior couple of months, including in Australia. Members discussed the recent increase in oil prices,
						which were almost 30 per cent higher than at the end of June. The increase had occurred mainly
						in response to the decision by Russia and Saudi Arabia to extend supply cuts to the end of the year.
						Refined fuel prices had risen even more, owing to an increase in refinery margins following production
						disruptions in some markets.
Members noted that output growth in advanced economies had slowed in response to contractionary monetary
						policy settings and cost-of-living pressures. Conditions in the manufacturing sector remained weak. While
						conditions in the services sector had been more positive for much of the year, they had eased in some
						advanced economies over prior months. By contrast, the US economy had shown considerable resilience,
						including in household consumption. Across advanced economies, slower output growth had been reflected in
						a gradual easing of tight labour market conditions. Unemployment rates had edged up but remained low, and
						job vacancies remained at high levels.
In China, the most recent indicators of economic activity had been somewhat more positive than in prior
						months. Members observed that the property market remained the key exception; real estate investment, new
						housing starts and housing prices had all declined further over the preceding month. In response, Chinese
						authorities had implemented further modest policy stimulus measures targeted at the property and
						household sectors as well as infrastructure investment. A material slowdown in the Chinese economy
						remained a key risk to the global outlook.
Despite the weakness in the property sector, Chinese steel demand had been resilient owing to ongoing
						demand from infrastructure and manufacturing investment. This had helped to support iron ore and coking
						coal prices. Coking coal prices had also benefited from solid demand from India and some supply
						disruptions in Australia.
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that inflation had continued to moderate from its peak late
						in 2022. However, as was the case abroad, progress on reducing headline inflation had been temporarily
						delayed by higher fuel prices. The monthly CPI indicator had picked up in August. Nonetheless, headline
						inflation was still expected to decline over the second half of 2023, given the earlier slowing in growth
						in demand – particularly in the household sector – and the further decline in goods price
						inflation.
Excluding volatile items and holiday travel, inflation had continued to ease in year-ended terms. That
						said, inflation remained high across a range of services. This reflected a still-high level of demand and
						a range of domestic cost pressures, including for labour (given both solid wages growth and recent poor
						productivity outcomes). Electricity prices increased to a smaller extent than had been expected in
						August, partly due to the contribution from the large increases in default market offers that came into
						effect in July being less than expected.
Members noted that the monthly pace of increases in rents had been broadly stable over preceding months,
						though rent inflation had continued to pick up in year-ended terms. Conditions in the rental market
						remained very tight but had eased somewhat; rental vacancy rates had increased in some capital cities,
						but remained at very low levels, and growth in advertised rents for new leases had slowed, particularly
						in regional areas. Together with the current low level of new housing starts and completions, relative to
						population growth, the still-tight conditions in the rental market suggested that rents would be an
						ongoing source of inflationary pressure over the year ahead.
Members discussed recent developments in wages and the associated risks. Timely indicators suggested that
						the large increases in minimum and award wages were flowing through to aggregate wages as expected and
						had at least partly been offset by some moderation in growth in non-award wages. Members noted that there
						were few signs of the risk of a price-wage spiral materialising. Some moderation in wages pressures for
						certain occupations was consistent with an easing in labour market conditions, though the labour market
						remained tight overall. Even so, aggregate labour costs had increased strongly over the prior year;
						combined with poor productivity outcomes, this had resulted in strong growth in unit labour costs.
						Measured labour productivity had declined and was back to its level recorded in 2015.
Members observed that the labour market had reached a turning point as labour supply had picked up and
						labour demand had moderated. The unemployment rate remained at 3.7 per cent in August, slightly
						above the 50-year low of 3.5 per cent. Underemployment had risen a little more noticeably, as
						had the youth and medium-term (those unemployed for 1–12 months)
						unemployment rates. It was noted that these measures of spare capacity tend to be more responsive to
						economic activity than the aggregate unemployment rate. Members also discussed hours-based measures of
						spare capacity in the labour market, as hours worked by current employees are often a key margin of
						adjustment as conditions in the labour market soften. Hours-based unemployment and underemployment rates
						had both ticked up in recent months from their lows reached in late 2022. Business surveys and
						information from firms in the Bank’s liaison program had showed an improvement in labour
						availability. Voluntary turnover rates had also declined, though finding suitable workers continued to be
						difficult. Similarly, job vacancies had fallen from their peak in 2022 but remained high.
Members noted that the Australian Government had released its employment white paper, outlining the
						Government’s objective for ‘sustained and inclusive full employment’.
						‘Sustained’ full employment referred to employment being as close as possible to the current
						maximum sustainable level of employment without causing inflation to rise. This is consistent with the
						Bank’s existing mandate to maintain full employment. The white paper emphasised the importance of
						monitoring a broader set of indicators beyond the unemployment rate, which is also consistent with the
						Bank’s existing approach to analysing conditions in the labour market.
Output growth in the first half of the year had been more resilient than expected. GDP expanded by
						0.4 per cent in the June quarter, though GDP and household consumption both continued to
						decline in per capita terms. Domestic demand had been stronger than expected, as strong growth in
						business investment and public investment had more than offset weak growth in household consumption in
						the quarter. There had also been modest upward revisions to GDP in the preceding few quarters, leaving
						year-ended GDP growth around ½ percentage point higher than forecast in August. Timely indicators
						suggested that output had continued to grow modestly in the September quarter.
Strong growth in business investment had been underpinned by rapid population growth and high capacity
						utilisation. Members noted that non-mining business investment had again surprised on the upside in the
						June quarter, and growth over the first half of 2023 was the highest since 2007 (excluding the COVID-19 pandemic rebound period). Members discussed how deepening the capital
						stock should, over time, help to lift labour productivity. Even so, some of the recent strength in
						investment represented catch-up from earlier supply chain disruptions that had been resolved.
Real household disposable incomes had declined by 3 per cent over the preceding year, as strong
						growth in nominal aggregate labour income had been more than offset by high inflation and rising tax and
						net interest payments. This had resulted in a period of weak growth in household consumption, including a
						decline in per capita terms. Despite the uneven effects of higher interest rates on disposable incomes,
						disaggregated data on spending by income and mortgagor status suggested that the consumption response had
						been broadly comparable across most groups. Timely indicators of household spending suggested that
						consumption growth remained weak in the September quarter.
Members observed that the turnaround in the established housing market had continued in recent months.
						Upward revisions to earlier data meant that nationwide housing prices were only slightly below their
						April 2022 peak. New listings had also picked up in Sydney and Melbourne, though they remained low in
						most other areas. Members noted that the stronger-than-expected recovery in the established housing
						market might provide some support to household consumption in the period ahead.
Members commenced their discussion of international financial markets with an assessment of monetary
						policy settings in advanced economies. Most central banks had communicated that policy rates were
						restrictive and that future decisions about policy tightening would depend on incoming data and the
						outlook for economic activity and inflation. A number had highlighted that lags in the transmission of
						monetary policy meant that the full effects of previous policy tightening on economic activity and
						inflation were yet to be seen. Several had noted that the risks to the outlook had become more balanced
						with policy rates at current levels. Market participants now assessed that policy rates in advanced
						economies were close to their peaks but their expectations for rate cuts had been pushed back until
						mid-2024 at the earliest. Markets also expected smaller rate cuts from that point, given the ongoing
						resilience in economic activity and labour market conditions.
Longer term government bond yields had increased further in most advanced economies, to reach levels not
						seen since prior to the global financial crisis. Yield curves had also become less inverted, and in
						Australia the yield curve had steepened slightly. Members noted that the increase in longer term
						government bond yields had been driven by real yields, while market-based inflation expectations remained
						steady between 2 and 3 per cent in most advanced economies. Members observed that longer
						term yields had risen by more than could be explained by changing expectations for policy rates and that
						estimates of term premia had therefore increased, particularly for the United States. Factors that were
						potentially contributing to increased term premia included uncertainty around the economic and policy
						outlook, expectations of a larger effective supply of US Government bonds associated with increased debt
						issuance in the United States, and reductions in asset holdings by central banks.
Changes in private sector financial conditions in advanced economies had been mixed over the preceding
						month. Corporate credit spreads had risen slightly but remained around their long-run average in Europe
						and the United States, and corporate bond issuance had increased, consistent with expectations of a
						‘soft landing’ for economic activity. However, equity prices in major markets and in Australia
						had declined alongside higher government bond yields. While equity prices had generally remained higher
						than at the start of the year, price gains had been concentrated among technology stocks.
In China, private property developers remained under extreme financial stress, and their bond and equity
						prices had fallen further in September despite stronger-than-expected economic data and the announcement
						of additional support measures. The authorities had continued to take measures to stem the pace of
						depreciation of the renminbi, which had reached levels close to multi-decade lows.
The Australian dollar had depreciated against the US dollar in preceding months, alongside a
						broad-based appreciation of the US dollar as US Government bonds yields had risen. Concerns about
						the outlook for China’s economic growth had also continued to weigh on the Australian dollar.
						However, on a trade-weighted basis, the Australian dollar was only slightly lower than at the start of
						the year. Members observed that the trade-weighted exchange rate is the relevant measure for imported
						inflation in Australia.
Members noted that total credit growth had stabilised around its post-global financial crisis average,
						having declined from its recent peak. While total credit growth was around average, the stock of credit
						had declined as a share of nominal GDP by around 10 percentage points since early 2021. Accounting
						for household offset accounts, the household credit-to-GDP ratio was at its lowest since the early 2000s,
						as was the ratio of business credit to GDP.
Required mortgage payments had increased to 9.9 per cent of household disposable income in
						August, a little above the previous estimated historical peak. Members noted that required mortgage
						payments were expected to continue to increase as borrowers with fixed-rate loans roll off onto higher
						rates. Since the start of the year, cumulative extra mortgage payments into offset and redraw accounts
						had been below the pre-pandemic average and well below pandemic levels, consistent with pressures on
						disposable incomes from higher interest rates and the rise in the cost of living.
Members noted that repayment of the first tranche of the Term Funding Facility (TFF) had passed smoothly.
						This comprised around $80 billion due by the end of September, out of total funding of
						$188 billion under the scheme. There had been an earlier rise in short-term money market interest
						rates as issuance by banks had picked up for a time to facilitate this process, but the rise had been
						transient.
Members observed that market expectations for the cash rate had risen a little in September but remained
						lower than a few months prior. Prevailing pricing implied that the cash rate was assessed to be near its
						peak; in particular, market participants expected no change in the cash rate in October, and potentially
						one further rise in the cash rate by early 2024. By contrast, pricing in July had implied an expectation
						of as many as three further increases in the cash rate. Market economists’ expectations had also
						declined since July, with most expecting either no change over coming months or, at most, one further
						increase.
Members discussed the Bank’s regular half-yearly assessment of financial stability risks. They noted
						that global financial stability risks were high. However, the core of the international banking system
						remained well placed to deal with the challenging environment, given low levels of overall loan arrears
						and high levels of capital and liquidity, particularly among large global banks.
Members discussed the stress in China’s property sector, particularly among private developers. They
						acknowledged the potential for this to interact with other long-running macro-financial imbalances, most
						notably high debt levels, which could thereby adversely affect the economy and financial system. Members
						noted that, as potential growth in China slowed over time, high levels of debt would become more
						difficult to service. More broadly, the policy environment in China had also become increasingly complex.
						However, members observed that because most debt in China was held domestically and policy
						decision-making was centralised, Chinese authorities had more scope than some other emerging economies to
						manage the pace of deleveraging in parts of the economy. In view of the limited extent of China’s
						direct financial linkages with Australia and other advanced economies, members noted that the effects of
						financial stress in China – were they to materialise – would be felt mostly via trade
						linkages and an increase in risk aversion in global financial markets.
Members discussed two other risks to global financial stability, outside of China, that were relevant to
						Australia. The first was the risk of a further substantial tightening in global financial conditions,
						accompanied by a disorderly repricing in markets for financial assets. Potential catalysts for this
						included persistently high global inflation, which would require interest rates to remain high for longer
						than currently expected, and/or a sharp downturn in the global economy. Events over preceding years
						illustrated that it was possible that vulnerabilities in non-bank financial institutions in key global
						financial centres could amplify abrupt adjustments in financial markets. If these adjustments were
						sufficiently severe, they could affect funding costs and access to credit in Australia.
Members also considered the implications of continued weak conditions in commercial real estate markets
						globally. The outlook for commercial real estate prices appeared challenging, given higher interest rates
						and ongoing weakness in rental demand. The office sector was assessed as being most vulnerable to further
						repricing. While stricter lending standards and banks’ strong capital positions meant international
						banking systems were more resilient than previously to such a deterioration, high exposures remained a
						concern among smaller US banks and some banks in northern Europe. There was also potential for stress in
						overseas commercial real estate markets to contribute to lower valuations in Australia through common
						ownership and funding sources, given the increased presence of international lenders and investors in
						Australian commercial real estate markets over the preceding decade or so. However, members noted that
						the risks to the domestic financial system were limited by Australian banks’ low commercial real
						estate exposures and conservative lending practices.
Members agreed that while the effects of inflation and interest rates were challenging for Australian
						households and were falling unevenly across the community, most households and businesses were managing
						to adjust. Strong labour demand and sizeable savings buffers accumulated during the pandemic had helped
						households to adapt to the increase in interest rates and inflation. Mortgage and business loan arrears
						had picked up, but only slightly. Most borrowers who had recently rolled off very low fixed-rate loans
						appeared to be adjusting to higher variable-rate loans. However, members noted that the outlook for the
						labour market remained critical to the resilience of households; more borrowers would encounter financial
						difficulties if the unemployment rate increased, particularly those with low savings buffers.
Economic conditions were also having an uneven effect on businesses in Australia. Ongoing cost pressures
						and the recent softening in demand had put pressure on some businesses’ profits and liquid reserves,
						most notably in the construction sector and the arts and hospitality sector. Corporate insolvencies had
						increased to around pre-pandemic levels, although most had tended to be small firms with little debt,
						limiting the wider effect on the economy and financial system.
Members observed that Australian banks remain well positioned to continue supplying credit to the economy.
						Banks are profitable and hold capital and liquid assets well above regulatory requirements, which puts
						them in a strong position to absorb increased loan losses if there were to be a substantial slowing in
						growth and an increase in unemployment. Only a very low share of housing borrowers are in negative equity
						on their loans, further protecting banks against credit losses, and the return of housing prices to
						around their peak has reduced this share even further. Members agreed that APRA’s regulatory regime
						means that Australian banks are well placed to manage the effects of interest rate volatility on their
						balance sheets. Banks have adjusted well to the roll-off of funding from the TFF, and their increased
						reliance on domestic deposits for funding since the global financial crisis has left them better placed
						to weather disruptions to international funding market conditions.
Members noted the importance of financial institutions continuing to strengthen their financial and
						operational resilience to threats arising from outside the financial system. Such threats include
						cyber-attacks, the potential for an escalation in geopolitical tensions that cause severe disruptions to
						trade and international capital flows, and the effects of, and responses to, climate change.
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that inflation remained well above target and was
						expected to do so for some time. Services price inflation remained sticky, and fuel prices were adding to
						headline inflation. At the same time, members observed that the labour market had reached a turning point
						and output growth had slowed, albeit more gradually than previously expected. The tightening of monetary
						policy since May 2022 was still permeating through the economy and it would take some time for the full
						effects of this to be observed in the data. Market economists and financial markets were anticipating
						that the cash rate would be increased further, but not at the current meeting. Members also observed
						that, while there were clear risks to financial stability, these risks did not have a bearing on monetary
						policy at this meeting.
In light of these observations, members considered two options for monetary policy at this meeting:
						raising the cash rate target by a further 25 basis points; or holding the cash rate target steady.
					
The case to raise the cash rate target further centred on the outlook for inflation and the associated
						risks. Members noted that core services inflation remained persistent internationally. Domestically, the
						monthly CPI indicator suggested that progress in lowering services price inflation remained slow. It was
						noted that the rise in retail petrol prices would continue to underpin inflation over coming months and
						could influence households’ inflation expectations. Members acknowledged that upside risks were a
						significant concern given how long inflation is likely to remain above target.
Members also considered the implications of developments in asset prices for monetary policy. They noted
						that while rising housing prices alone would not warrant tighter policy, the associated rise in household
						wealth could support consumption by more than currently assumed, especially if housing turnover were to
						pick up more quickly than expected. The rise in housing prices could also be a signal that the current
						policy stance was not as restrictive as had been assumed, although there was other evidence that monetary
						conditions were tight. Similarly, members observed that developments in the exchange rate over prior
						months had eased monetary conditions, though only at the margin.
The case to hold the cash rate target unchanged at this meeting centred on the observation that interest
						rates had been increased significantly in a short period, and that the effects of tighter policy would
						not be fully evident in the data on economic activity and inflation for some months. At the same time,
						inflation had abated from its peak in December 2022, consumption growth was weak and households’
						real disposable incomes were still falling. Also, the labour market had reached a turning point and the
						challenges in the Chinese economy could lead to slower growth in Australia if not contained. Members
						noted that these observations meant there remained a risk that output growth slows more sharply than
						expected; if so, it would bring inflation back to target more quickly than expected.
In weighing up these two options, members agreed that the case to leave the cash rate target unchanged at
						this meeting was the stronger one. They concluded that there had not been sufficient new information over
						the preceding month from economic data or financial markets to necessitate an adjustment in the stance of
						monetary policy. Members observed that, prior to the November meeting, they would receive additional data
						on economic activity, inflation and the labour market, as well as a set of revised staff forecasts.
In reaching their decision, members noted that some further tightening of policy may be required should
						inflation prove more persistent than expected. The Board has a low tolerance for a slower return of
						inflation to target than currently expected. Whether or not a further increase in interest rates is
						required would, therefore, depend on the incoming data and how these alter the economic outlook and the
						evolving assessment of risks. Members reaffirmed their determination to return inflation to target within
						a reasonable timeframe and their willingness to do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.1 per cent, and the interest rate
						on Exchange Settlement balances at 4 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				