Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.
Hybrid – 5 December 2023
Michele Bullock (Governor and Chair), Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
						Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Elana Rubin AM,
						Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Marion Kohler (Acting Assistant
						Governor, Economic), Carl Schwartz (Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Penelope Smith (Head, International Department), Tom Rosewall (Acting Head, Economic Analysis
						Department)
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the information
						on global inflation had been a little more encouraging over the prior month. Headline inflation rates had
						declined, driven by a fall in oil prices, while core inflation had continued to ease. Goods prices had
						declined in some countries in preceding months. However, inflation in the services sector had declined
						only gradually, reflecting still-tight labour markets, and housing inflation remained strong in a number
						of countries. Central banks generally expected inflation to return to their targets in late 2024 or 2025.
					
Members observed that output growth in several advanced economies had slowed noticeably in response to
						tighter monetary policy and cost-of-living pressures, particularly in Europe. In the United States,
						output growth had held up better than expected, helped by resilient consumption. Labour markets remained
						tight, but conditions had clearly eased in response to the slowing in economic activity. Job vacancies
						had fallen and unemployment rates, while still very low, had increased over preceding months, including
						in the United States. The pace of wages growth remained above levels considered consistent with central
						banks’ inflation targets for some economies, but they had generally moderated in response to the
						gradual easing in labour market conditions and inflation. As a result, core inflation was expected to
						continue to moderate.
Turning to developments in China, members observed that the latest indicators of activity had generally
						been positive, and growth in retail sales and industrial production in October had remained strong.
						Activity had been supported by the continued recovery in services consumption after the pandemic, along
						with a range of supportive fiscal policy measures. There had, however, been little sign of improvement in
						the property sector. Real estate investment had continued to decline because of weak demand and liquidity
						constraints facing property developers.
Nonetheless, the continued positive information about the Chinese economy outside the property sector had
						supported iron ore prices, which had increased a little over the prior month and remained at high levels.
						Coking coal prices had fallen as supply disruptions in Australia had been resolved. Oil and gas prices
						had declined further over the prior month, as demand had eased in line with slower global growth and amid
						signs that the Hamas–Israel conflict seemed not to be spreading more widely
						across the region. Oil prices were around 15 per cent lower than their recent peak in late
						September.
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that inflation had continued to moderate. The monthly
						CPI indicator for October showed that annual inflation had eased, with declines in the prices of petrol
						and holiday travel. Inflation excluding volatile items had also eased, largely reflecting the
						flow-through of declines in global goods price inflation. Rents had declined in October, but this owed
						entirely to an increase in Commonwealth Rent Assistance, which offset pressure from very tight rental
						markets in the capital cities. Tight rental markets were likely to be an ongoing source of inflationary
						pressure for some time. There had been little new information on inflation in other parts of the services
						sector. Firms in the Bank’s liaison program expected price increases to moderate over the coming
						year, due to subdued demand and stronger competition among retailers, though many firms had also reported
						persistent cost pressures. Members noted some measures of inflation expectations had moved a little
						higher over preceding months but generally remained consistent with the inflation target.
Wages growth had picked up significantly over the preceding year or so. The Wage Price Index had recorded
						its highest quarterly growth rate since the series commenced in the late 1990s, reflecting the
						implementation of the Fair Work Commission’s decision to significantly increase minimum and award
						wages. However, on the evidence available, spillovers to non-award wages did not appear to be larger than
						usual. Year-ended growth in wages was a little stronger than had been expected but the most recent
						forecasts had wages growth peaking at around 4 per cent by the end of the year. The wages
						growth outcome for the September quarter was still consistent with these forecasts, but members noted
						that the balance of risks had shifted a little to the upside. Conversely, there was some evidence of
						slowing in wages growth in those parts of the labour market where conditions had eased. In liaison, firms
						had reported that they generally expect wages growth to ease over the year ahead.
Members observed that labour market conditions remained tight, but less so than earlier in the year, as
						the demand for labour had adjusted to slower economic growth and labour supply had increased. Employment
						growth had eased to be a little below the rate of growth in the working-age population over the preceding
						few months, with the unemployment rate drifting up to 3.7 per cent. Members noted that the
						shifting composition of employment growth towards more part-time jobs and a decline in average hours
						worked over preceding months were consistent with hours worked being a key margin of adjustment to slower
						growth in demand. Forward-looking indicators, such as hiring intentions reported in business surveys and
						information from the Bank’s liaison, pointed to a further easing in the demand for labour in coming
						months.
Output growth in Australia had slowed over the prior year to a rate below trend. The national accounts,
						which were scheduled to be released the day after the meeting, were expected to show that GDP growth had
						remained at a below-trend rate in the September quarter. Members discussed the implications for
						productivity of below-trend growth in economic activity and potential explanations for this outcome.
						While growth in household consumption had been weak, and was negative in per capita terms, overall demand
						had been supported by strong business investment and public demand.
Members noted that growth in household consumption was expected to have remained subdued in the September
						quarter, as higher interest rates and cost-of-living pressures weighed on real household disposable
						incomes and household spending. Timely indicators suggested that growth in consumer spending had also
						remained subdued into the December quarter. The increased importance of the November ‘Black
						Friday’ sales had distorted usual seasonal spending patterns and would make it difficult to obtain a
						clear reading of the underlying momentum in retail spending. Housing prices had increased further in
						November and had more than fully recovered their earlier declines. If sustained, higher household wealth
						would support consumer spending in the period ahead.
Despite slow growth in consumption, survey measures of business conditions had remained steady over prior
						months and were generally around average levels. The level of capacity utilisation had trended down over
						the prior year but remained high. Members noted that shortages of labour and materials remained a
						challenge in parts of the construction sector. Firms in the liaison program reported that investment
						intentions remain positive, reflecting solid cashflows and a large pipeline of construction and other
						projects, which was broadly in line with the results of the most recent ABS Capital Expenditure Survey.
					
Most advanced economy central banks had left policy rates unchanged since September, with most judging
						financial conditions to be restrictive. Central banks had continued to emphasise that policy rates may
						still need to rise further, but most noted that the risks to the outlook had become more balanced as
						inflation eased and labour market conditions became less tight. Market participants’ expectations
						for policy rates in many advanced economies had been revised lower over the preceding months, with
						reductions in policy rates priced in by the middle of 2024. However, central banks had emphasised that it
						was too early to consider the timing of rate reductions.
Government bond yields in advanced economies had declined since the previous meeting, reversing most of
						the substantial increase over preceding months. The decline in bond yields had resulted from lower real
						yields, which reflected changing market expectations for policy rates as well as a decline in
						market-implied inflation expectations. Estimated term premia for sovereign bonds had also declined.
Conditions in private funding markets had loosened a little since the previous meeting. Equity prices had
						risen strongly as longer term interest rates fell and investors gained confidence that inflation could be
						returned to central banks’ targets without significant declines in corporate profits, economic
						activity or employment. Corporate bond yields had declined alongside the fall in government bond yields
						and a narrowing of credit spreads.
In China, government bond yields had increased slightly alongside better-than-expected economic data and
						the announcement of further government bond issuance to support investment. Equity prices in China were
						little changed. Prices of securities issued by property developers remained at severely distressed
						levels, but had been supported in November by reports that authorities had established a list of
						developers eligible for additional funding.
The Australian dollar had appreciated by around 2 per cent against the US dollar and around
						1 per cent on a trade-weighted basis since the previous meeting. Members observed that the
						trade-weighted Australian dollar was trading near early-2022 levels.
Members noted that financial conditions in Australia were restrictive. Total household debt payments as a
						share of disposable income had increased significantly during the tightening phase. Although scheduled
						mortgage payments had increased to an all-time high of 10 per cent in October, estimated
						payments for personal credit were low relative to history because households’ use of personal credit
						had declined significantly since 2008. As a result, total household debt payments remained below their
						estimated historical peak. Scheduled mortgage payments will continue to rise as borrowers with expiring
						fixed-rate loans roll off onto higher mortgage rates and lenders pass on the cash rate increase in
						November to lending rates.
New housing loan commitments had increased further, driven largely by investors and first home buyers.
						Commitments were 17 per cent above the February 2023 trough, though they were still almost
						25 per cent below their peak in January 2022 and at low levels as a share of housing credit.
						Total extra payments into borrowers’ mortgage offset and redraw accounts were still positive but
						were running lower in 2023 than the pre-pandemic average. This was consistent with pressures on
						disposable incomes from increases in interest rates and the broader rise in the cost of living.
Market participants’ expectations for the path of the cash rate, as implied by market pricing, were a
						little lower than just prior to the November meeting. Markets were pricing in a 40 per cent
						chance of a further increase in the cash rate at future meetings. Markets were then pricing in some
						chance of a reduction in the cash rate by late 2024. This was broadly consistent with the views of market
						economists, most of whom expected no further rate increases and that the first reductions in the cash
						rate would be later in 2024.
Members discussed a paper that reviewed the Bank’s approach to reducing its holdings of government
						bonds that had been purchased during the pandemic to support markets and provide economic stimulus. The
						current approach – endorsed by the Board in May – was to hold these bonds until maturity
						rather than selling them prior to maturity. This approach recognised, among other considerations, that
						the Bank’s balance sheet was already set to decline rapidly as loans under the Term Funding Facility
						matured.
Members decided that the approach of holding the bonds to maturity remained appropriate but agreed to keep
						this under active consideration, including because of the Bank’s exposure to interest rate risk and
						given the relatively gradual decline in the Bank’s portfolio of bonds compared with some other
						advanced economy central banks. The initial tranche of Term Funding Facility maturities in September had
						passed smoothly, with the larger remaining tranche of maturities to occur through to mid-2024. These
						flows would continue to provide information on how financial markets respond as the Bank’s balance
						sheet declines. Members discussed the importance of considering the decline in the Bank’s balance
						sheet in the context of the broader operational framework for implementing monetary policy, given that it
						will affect the size and composition of the balance sheet over the longer term.
Members discussed whether any decision to sell some of the Bank’s holdings of Australian Government
						securities would best be implemented by selling to the market or, in the case of mutual agreement, to the
						Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM). While selling directly to the AOFM would have several
						practical benefits, either approach would involve working closely with the AOFM to avoid market
						disruption.
Turning to the policy decision, members noted that the limited economic data received over the prior month
						had been broadly in line with expectations. Inflation had continued to decline but remained high. Wages
						growth had reached 4 per cent a little sooner than had been expected but the staff judged that
						wages growth was unlikely to rise much further. Output growth had continued below trend and the labour
						market was tight but easing gradually. Members agreed that financial stability considerations were not a
						constraint on monetary policy at the current meeting.
Members noted that market expectations for policy rates in other countries had eased significantly over
						the prior month, while being little changed for Australia. Longer term bond yields had declined notably,
						perhaps signalling that markets were more confident that central banks would be able to reduce inflation
						back to their targets in a reasonable timeframe with current policy settings. Members also noted that, in
						Australia, households’ required interest payments as a share of disposable income were much higher
						than in recent years but still below the level recorded in 2008.
In light of these observations, members considered whether to raise the cash rate target by a further
						25 basis points or to hold the cash rate target steady.
The case to raise the cash rate target by a further 25 basis points was centred on the observations
						that inflation was expected to remain above target for a prolonged period and that there were risks this
						period could be extended. Members noted that inflation was increasingly being driven by domestic demand.
						They also observed that underlying inflation was higher in Australia than in several other countries.
						Furthermore, domestic demand was judged still to be running above the level consistent with the inflation
						target and growth could be supported in the year ahead by a recovery in real household disposable income
						as inflation declined. Members noted that the staff’s most recent forecasts, which were predicated
						on a lift in productivity growth, would see inflation return to the top of the target band by the end of
						2025, rather than the midpoint of the band.
The case to hold the cash rate target constant reflected the view that the data over the prior month did
						not warrant a material revision to the outlook and that there is the possibility of a larger rise in the
						unemployment rate than anticipated. Members observed that monetary policy was working to bring aggregate
						demand and supply into closer alignment. They noted that the risk that it takes longer than expected to
						return inflation to target was balanced by the risk that aggregate demand slows more quickly than
						anticipated. Members acknowledged that consumption growth had been quite weak, as many households are
						experiencing a painful squeeze on their finances, with inflation and higher interest rates weighing on
						real disposable incomes. Members also noted that the pace of disinflation in some other countries over
						recent months had accelerated. If emulated in Australia, this would be helpful in bringing inflation back
						to target.
After weighing up these two options, members agreed that the case to leave the cash rate target unchanged
						at this meeting was the stronger one. Members agreed there was sufficient value in waiting for further
						data to assess how the balance of risks was evolving and how best to balance these risks when setting
						policy. They noted that there had been encouraging signs of progress towards the Board’s objectives
						and that this needed to continue. Members also discussed the importance of preventing inflation
						expectations from drifting away from the inflation target and committed to monitoring this closely. At
						the time of the meeting, they agreed that inflation expectations remained consistent with the inflation
						target.
Members agreed that whether further tightening of monetary policy is required to ensure that inflation
						returns to target in a reasonable timeframe will depend on how the incoming data alter the economic
						outlook and the evolving assessment of risks. In making its decisions, the Board will continue to pay
						close attention to developments in the global economy, trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for
						inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to
						target and will do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent, and the interest
						rate on Exchange Settlement balances at 4.25 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				