The chairman first provided the following explanation for calling an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting. (1) There seemed to be an increased risk that recent international financial developments and foreign exchange market instability might adversely affect economic activity through an impact on such factors as business sentiment. (2) Given this situation, the chairman decided to call an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting, in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 3 of the Bank of Japan Act, to receive the staff's report on recent developments in financial markets and consider how money market operations should be implemented. Some instability had recently been observed in global financial markets. European stock prices had declined substantially due to the effects of Dubai's debt crisis, and currency values and stock prices had fallen significantly in some emerging economies. In foreign exchange markets, the yen had strengthened further since the occurrence of Dubai's debt crisis. Partly due to these developments in global financial markets, Japanese stock prices, particularly of firms in export-related manufacturing industries such as electrical machinery and automobiles, continued to decline. There were growing concerns among market participants about possible deterioration in business sentiment reflecting the instability in financial markets. With a view to further spreading the effects of monetary easing and encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates in the money market, the staff proposed that the Bank introduce a new funds-supplying operation whereby funds would be provided at a fixed rate against pooled collateral. In this new operation, conditions such as eligible counterparties, the form of loans, and eligible collateral would be the same as in the existing funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral -- whereby the interest rates to be applied were determined by a multiple-rate competitive auction -- and funds with a term of three months would be provided at a fixed interest rate equivalent to the target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate. This new operation, should it be introduced, would for the time being provide funds amounting to 800 billion yen once a week, with the amount outstanding of funds provided to reach approximately 10 trillion yen. Members discussed recent developments in financial markets and their impact on economic activity. Many members expressed the view that, while Japan's economy was picking up, the pace of economic improvement was likely to remain moderate until around the middle of fiscal 2010. These members continued that, in this situation, there was an increased risk that recent international financial developments and foreign exchange market instability might adversely affect economic activity through an impact on such factors as business sentiment. One member expressed the concern that the recent widespread discussions about deflation might have negative effects on household and business confidence and in turn could intensify the downward pressure on economic activity. Based on these observations, members shared the view that the Bank should implement an additional monetary policy measure to provide support for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Many members said that, specifically, given that the overnight call rate had been virtually at 0 percent, encouraging a further decline in interest rates on term instruments in the money market would be most effective in further supporting the economic recovery from the financial side. Some members said that, to this end, the new funds-supplying operation proposed by the staff -- whereby funds with a term of three months would be provided at an extremely low interest rate -- could be introduced to further spread the strong effects of monetary easing. One member expressed the opinion that, in addition to the new funds-supplying operation's potential effect of encouraging a decline in interest rates on term instruments, clearly presenting the Bank's stance of enhancing easy monetary conditions in response to the increased downside risks to economic activity might have its own effect of alleviating economic entities' anxiety. A different member, referring to the fact that the government had been formulating an economic policy package, commented that the implementation of an additional measure by the Bank would be effective, together with the government's efforts, in bolstering business and household confidence. Based on the above discussion, members agreed that, in supporting the economic recovery from the financial side, it was most effective at present to further spread the strong effects of monetary easing and encourage a further decline in longer-term interest rates in the money market through provision of ample longer-term funds at an extremely low interest rate, by introducing the new funds-supplying operation, whereby funds would be provided at a fixed rate. One member commented that the Bank should take measures that would be most appropriate on each occasion, in view of the degree of likelihood that its baseline scenario for economic activity and prices would be realized, as well as factors posing upside or downside risks. Members discussed issues that should be duly taken into account in the Bank's communication to the public when introducing the new operation. Many members noted that some market participants were speculating that the Bank might introduce a quantitative easing policy. On this point, many members, referring to the fact that the Bank had already made clear its stance of fully satisfying financial institutions' liquidity demands, expressed the opinion that the Bank should clearly show to the market that it was determined to continue providing ample funds, by making use of various tools including the new operation. These members said that the Bank should present this stance in a manner that would not cause any misunderstanding. One member said it was necessary, in the Bank's communication to the public, to make clear the intention of the new operation of encouraging a decline in interest rates on term instruments, and to avoid the misunderstanding that the new operation was a measure targeting a specific quantitative indicator. A different member expressed the view that, in a broad sense, the term quantitative easing could be applied to a policy that provided a massive amount of funds to meet demand from the market and created a situation in which the amount of funds provided by the Bank did not constrain financial institutions' activity. Regarding the guideline for money market operations until the next meeting to be held on December 17 and 18, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) The government welcomed the measure proposed at this meeting as an appropriate and swift response to recent changes in economic conditions, to be made in parallel with the formulation of an economic policy package by the government. (2) The government expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while working together with the government. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) The Japanese economy was in a mild deflationary phase, and recent volatile movements in currency markets might exert a detrimental influence on trends toward economic recovery. The government approved today the formulation of a new economic policy package, while closely monitoring movements in the currency markets. It anticipated that the Bank would support the economy from the financial side, in a manner consistent with the government's efforts. (2) The government considered the Bank's introduction of a new funds-supplying operation as an important measure to support the economy. It expected the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while working together with the government, in order to facilitate the return of the Japanese economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.