The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on January 21 and 22, 2009.[8] The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent. To ensure market stability in Japan, the Bank increased the provision of funds maturing over the fiscal year-end and actively purchased Japanese government securities (JGSs) and CP under repurchase agreements. The Bank continued to conduct special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing and U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. Moreover, on January 30, 2009, the Bank commenced outright purchases of CP, and on February 2, it started outright purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) based on a revised framework whereby it set the amounts of JGBs to buy annually according to their types and residual maturities. Japan's money market had been nervous. The general collateral (GC) repo rates had been susceptible to changes in the stance of funds providers. Yields on government bills rose temporarily with market concerns about the deterioration in the supply-demand balance caused by an increase in their issuance, but had decreased somewhat recently. The risk premium on Euroyen rates remained at an elevated level. Interest rates on CP with high ratings had declined to below their levels immediately before the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., but those on CP with low ratings had remained at relatively high levels. Japanese stock prices had been unstable at low levels, mainly reflecting a significant decrease in corporate profits. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had declined to around 7,500 yen recently. Long-term interest rates had been unstable both at home and abroad, affected by both the deterioration in the outlook for the world economy and concerns about the increasing fiscal deficit. The benchmark rate in Japan had recently The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. been moving at around 1.25 percent. The yen had been volatile against the U.S. dollar reflecting concerns over a possible prolongation of the U.S. recession on one hand and expectations about the U.S. government's economic stimulus plan and financial stabilization measures on the other. It had recently depreciated to the range of 93-94 yen. housing investment continued, and home prices continued to fall. With business fixed investment contracting noticeably and private consumption also falling, industrial production had been decreasing and the number of employees had been declining considerably. Funding conditions for firms and households had remained tight. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had declined significantly, to close to 0 percent, due to a fall in energy prices and a leveling-off of increases in food prices; that in the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had also declined. Economic conditions in the euro area had deteriorated significantly. Exports had declined sharply, while private consumption, business fixed investment, and housing investment had decreased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had been declining. Economic conditions in the United Kingdom had also deteriorated significantly, mainly reflecting the considerable adjustments in the housing market and a decrease in private consumption. The Chinese economy had decelerated significantly: although domestic demand continued to show high growth, exports had declined. Economic growth in India had decelerated, and economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been deteriorating. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had declined in many Asian economies. Global financial markets generally remained under strain, although there was a slight improvement in some, such as money markets. Although Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads and credit spreads on CP had narrowed to close to their levels immediately before the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., credit spreads on corporate bonds, particularly those with low ratings, had remained relatively wide. U.S. and European stock prices had been more or less unchanged, with downward and upward factors - deterioration in economic indicators and somewhat weak corporate results on one hand, and expectations about economic stimulus plans on the other -- canceling each other out. U.S. long-term interest rates had trended upward due to concerns about a possible increase in the issuance of government bonds, while European long-term interest rates had been more or less unchanged, albeit with some fluctuations. Exports had decreased substantially. They were expected to continue decreasing for the time being, due to the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen. With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had declined substantially, mainly due to the faster decrease in corporate profits. It was likely to continue declining significantly for the time being, given the ongoing decrease in corporate profits, the continuing deterioration in firms' funding conditions, and the increase in the number of firms that saw their capital stock as excessive. Private consumption had weakened, as the employment and income situation had become increasingly severe. The decrease in the number of new passenger-car registrations had accelerated. Sales at department stores had softened further, since consumers had further curtailed their purchases. Consumer sentiment had deteriorated further, mainly due to the drop in stock prices and growing employment uncertainty; indicators of consumer sentiment had fallen below their levels at the time of the previous economic downturn. Private consumption was likely to continue weakening for the time being, as the employment and income situation would become increasingly severe. Housing investment had been more or less flat. The number of housing starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, had recently begun decreasing again. Housing investment was expected to weaken somewhat for the time being, given the sluggishness in housing starts. Production had decreased at a much faster pace. It was likely that production would continue to decrease for the time being, since the weakness in domestic and external demand had become more evident and inventory adjustment pressures had increased. Inventories had risen noticeably, while shipments had decreased substantially; the shipment-inventory balance had therefore deteriorated rapidly. The employment and income situation had become increasingly severe, as the labor market had slackened and household income had been relatively weak. Household income was likely to continue declining for the time being in response to the decrease in corporate profits and production. On the price front, commodity prices, which peaked in summer 2008 and dropped substantially thereafter, had recently been essentially flat at low levels. The three-month rate of decrease in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had been large and the CGPI was likely to continue decreasing for the time being, mainly due to the declines in commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had moderated to around 0 percent, mainly reflecting the declines in the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. It was expected to become negative by the spring, mainly due to the above factors and also to increasing slackness in supply and demand conditions in the overall economy. Financial conditions had remained tight. The overnight call rate had been at an extremely low level, but the stimulative effects from this had become increasingly limited given the significant deterioration in economic activity. It seemed that funding costs had declined compared to their levels around the end of 2008, mainly reflecting the reductions in the policy interest rate, although credit spreads on corporate debt had generally remained wide. In response to various policy measures, some firms had increased issuance of CP, and the amount outstanding of bank lending, particularly to large firms, had continued to increase rapidly. However, the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued by firms with low credit ratings had been below the previous year's level, and an increasing number of firms, especially small firms, had reported that their financial positions were weak and lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. The year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had been around 2 percent. Given that government-guaranteed dematerialized CP would start to be issued soon, the staff would like to propose, with a view to further facilitating the Bank's money market operations, that the Bank take the necessary steps to include government-guaranteed dematerialized CP as eligible collateral for the Bank's provision of credit and to add such CP to the list of CP eligible to be purchased with repurchase agreements. Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public. With a view to further facilitating the Bank's money market operations and contributing to smooth settlement of both JGSs and funds, the staff would like to propose that the Bank broaden the range of JGSs that it offered under the securities lending facility by adding 30-year bonds, floating-rate bonds, and inflation-indexed bonds. Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public. In accordance with the decision made at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 21 and 22, 2009 to introduce outright purchases of corporate bonds, the staff would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps, such as establishment of Principal Terms and Conditions for Outright Purchases of Corporate Bonds. As for the various temporary measures regarding money market operations that had been introduced since autumn 2008, the staff would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps to extend the effective periods of these measures, with a view to further strengthening their effects in order to ensure stability in financial markets and facilitate corporate financing through the fiscal year-end and also with a view to ensuring that the measures would produce similar effects through September 30, 2009, the end of a semiannual book closing period for many firms. With a view to facilitating a decline in longer-term interest rates, the rates actually applied when firms raised funds, and to relieving firms' funding concerns, the staff would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps to expand special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing. Members shared the view that overseas economies had been slowing markedly as a whole in a situation where the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity had been intensifying further on a global basis. Many members expressed the view that the plunge in recently released GDP growth rates of various countries for the October-December quarter of 2008 was clear evidence of a simultaneous and rapid downturn in economies around the world. One member said that world trade and the cross-border flow of funds were contracting and economies worldwide were decelerating, and that the continued contraction of financial and economic activity was a cause for concern. Another member expressed the opinion that a downward spiral of declining production, income, and spending had been developing on a global scale and any appreciable recovery in the world economy was therefore unlikely for the time being. Members then discussed, from a longer-term perspective, the mechanism whereby overseas economies might move out of their deceleration phase. One member's view was that, on a global basis, large-scale production adjustments were being made and aggressive monetary and fiscal measures were being taken, and this was likely to diminish extremely high uncertainties gradually. However, some members including this member were of the opinion that, although it was likely that the policy measures in individual countries would produce positive effects, it would be some time before they would be seen clearly and it was very uncertain how great they would be. Members agreed that global financial markets generally remained under strain, although there was a slight improvement in some, such as money markets. Some members expressed the view that, in a situation where policy measures involving a fiscal burden were being implemented worldwide, concerns about a possible increase in the issuance of government bonds were gradually pushing up long-term interest rates, particularly in the United States, and that attention should be paid to the risk that the upward trend in long-term interest rates might depress economic activity. A few members, however, added that the rise in long-term interest rates might be in part a correction of their decline in late December 2008 due to a flight to quality. Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had deteriorated significantly as the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity worsened amid the significant fall in the risk-taking capacity of financial institutions and investors. With regard to the housing market, one member was of the opinion that the recently observed developments -- such as an increase in existing home sales and a decrease in housing inventories -- amid a decline in mortgage rates supported the view that adjustments in the housing market were making progress. A different member, however, said that the U.S. housing market was unlikely to move out of its adjustment phase for the time being, because the number of housing starts and sales prices of homes had not begun bottoming out yet despite the launch of a comprehensive policy package for housing. Regarding private consumption, one member expressed the view that, although retail sales for January were higher than the previous month, consumption indicators in general had deteriorated, with car sales showing no signs of improvement. The member continued that this and the rapid deterioration in the employment and income situation suggested that U.S. consumption would likely continue decreasing for the time being. With regard to successive policy measures of the U.S. government, many members said that, while they expected the measures would produce positive effects, it remained uncertain when they would be implemented and how great their effects would be. A few of these members said in relation to the financial stabilization measures that they would pay close attention to specifics to be announced, such as how prices for purchasing nonperforming assets would be determined and how contributions by the private sector would be encouraged. With regard to the economy of the euro area, some members expressed the view that economic conditions had deteriorated significantly, as exports had declined sharply and domestic demand, especially private consumption and business fixed investment, had also decreased. A few members pointed out as background to these developments that, as in the U.S. economy, the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity had been intensifying further, as seen in the tightening of financial institutions' lending standards leading to weak domestic demand. Meanwhile, one member noted that there were further downside risks to the outlook for the economy of the euro area, because the economies of its major export destinations, such as Central and Eastern European countries and Russia, had been slowing further. Members concurred that the Chinese economy had decelerated significantly due to a decrease in exports and production. Some members expressed the view with regard to domestic demand that the large-scale economic stimulus package and successive monetary easing measures had succeeded in encouraging an increase in bank lending, progress in the adjustment of materials inventories, and an increase in iron and steel production. A few members said that it seemed highly uncertain whether the economy would recover soon in view of the continued deterioration in real estate prices and the employment situation, and close attention should therefore be paid to developments. Based on the above discussion on economic and financial conditions abroad, members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They shared the view that economic conditions had deteriorated significantly and were likely to continue deteriorating for the time being given the following factors: (1) exports had been decreasing substantially reflecting the slowdown in overseas economies; (2) domestic demand had become weaker against the background of declining corporate profits and the worsening employment and income situation in the household sector; and (3) financial conditions had remained tight. Members agreed that the drop in real GDP for the October-December quarter of 2008 -- the annualized quarter-on-quarter decline of more than 10 percent -- was severe and was in line with the above assessment. As background to the sharp economic deterioration in Japan, worse than that in the United States and Europe, which were more directly affected by the financial crisis, many members raised the following factors: (1) Japan's industrial structure was susceptible to a downturn in the world economy, due to the predominance of industries that were vulnerable to a decrease in exports, such as transport equipment, electrical machinery, and general machinery; and (2) the real effective exchange rate of the yen had appreciated rapidly. As for the outlook, members agreed that, assuming that expectations about medium- to long-term growth would remain generally unchanged, the economy was likely to start recovering, at the earliest, from the latter half of fiscal 2009 as global financial markets regained stability and overseas economies moved out of their deceleration phase, although it was highly uncertain whether developments in the economy would be in line with this projection. With regard to risk factors to the economy, one member noted that the large-scale production adjustments and the consequent significant decline in the economic growth rate might cause a downward revision of expectations about medium- to long-term growth, which in turn might further increase pressures to adjust capital stocks and employment. Some members said that, given the recent substantial decline in business fixed investment, the possibility that growth expectations of firms had already weakened warranted careful examination. One member, however, expressed the view that it was too early to conclude at this point that firms' expectations about medium- to long-term growth had weakened, as many in corporate management continued to take an active stance on research and development and mergers and acquisitions. A different member commented that, given the current industrial structure in Japan, future economic recovery would continue to depend largely on developments in overseas economies, and therefore uncertainty regarding the outlook for Japan's economy was high. With regard to developments in each demand component, many members expressed the view that exports had decreased substantially, and were likely to continue decreasing for the time being. In relation to this, some members said that the economic stimulus plans being launched in countries around the world included some measures with protectionist characteristics, and this might reduce to some extent the positive effects on Japan's exports of any recovery in overseas economies. One of these members added that, depending on developments in exchange rates, there might be an accelerated shift of manufacturers' production to overseas locations, which might further limit growth in Japan's exports. Some members expressed the view that business fixed investment was likely to continue declining significantly for the time being, mainly due to the slowdown in overseas economies, the decrease in corporate profits, and the deterioration in firms' funding conditions. Some members said that an increasing number of firms had started to cancel their investment projects aimed at expanding production capacity and had also started to consolidate production facilities. A few members expressed the view that private consumption was likely to continue weakening for the time being, as firms, which had been reducing overtime working hours, were likely to start adjusting wages and the number of employees. Members agreed that production had decreased at a much faster pace, and was likely to continue to decrease for the time being since the weakness in domestic and external demand had become more evident and inventory adjustment pressures had increased. Some members said that firms, in response to the rapid decrease in demand at home and abroad, were trying to reduce their inventories by cutting production significantly, but thus far the decrease in demand had exceeded the pace of reduction in production, giving rise to a risk of protracted adjustments. Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had moderated recently, due to the declines in the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices, and was likely to become negative by the spring for the same reasons and due also to increasing slackness in supply and demand conditions in the overall economy. Members then discussed risks to the outlook for prices. Some members said that the risk of a decline in firms' and households' expectations about medium- to long-term inflation would warrant attention when the rate of change in prices became negative. A few members noted that, although items whose prices had risen still outnumbered those whose prices had declined, the difference between the two figures had narrowed and the increase in a wide range of prices had slowed. One member said that, given the ongoing severe economic conditions, increased awareness of the cost of living - and a consequent preference for inexpensive goods and services and reduced spending - and intensified competition among firms in the distribution sector might exert further downward pressure on prices. A different member expressed the view that, from a longer perspective, attention should be paid to the risk that a worldwide monetary easing might cause a speculative inflow of funds to the commodity markets and in turn a recurrence of rising commodity prices. Another member said that inflationary risks had not dissipated, as evidenced by, for example, the recent rise in crop prices due to the recovery in China's imports and adverse weather in major producing areas. Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan had remained tight. Many members said that, although bank lending rates and CP issuance rates had declined, interbank rates on term instruments had remained at high levels and credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds had remained wide on the whole, weakening the effects of the policy interest rate reductions. Many members expressed the view that, due partly to the effects of the Bank's outright purchases of CP, some firms had increased issuance of CP. Some members said, however, that firms had continued to face difficulties in issuing corporate bonds, as seen in the fact that the amount outstanding of corporate bonds had been below the previous year's level. A few members were of the view that availability of funds had declined, as shown by, for example, a significant increase in the number of firms reporting that lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. These members continued that the significant deterioration in economic activity had worsened business performance and had reduced financial institutions' risk-taking capacity, and this in turn had led to the tightening of their lending standards. Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. Many members expressed the view that, given that the overnight rate had already declined to an extremely low level, it was important to facilitate a decline in longer-term interest rates, the rates actually applied when firms raised funds, and to relieve firms' funding concerns. Members discussed how to work upon longer-term interest rates. Some members expressed the view that it was difficult to directly affect the TIBOR rates -- which provided a basis for the rates applied to spread lending -- given that (1) the TIBOR rates were not actual trading rates and the volume of uncollateralized short-term money transactions was small, and (2) credit risks incorporated in the TIBOR rates could not be directly controlled through money market operations. A few members said that the Bank's special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing commenced in January 2009 had already provided about 4 trillion yen of funds, an amount that exceeded initial expectations, and this suggested that the operations had been effective in improving conditions for corporate financing. Some members said that the Bank should affect interest rates on term instruments, by making more effective use of the special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing and also by conducting its daily money market operations -- including operations with relatively long maturity as necessary -- while maintaining the proper functioning of the market mechanism. Based on the above discussion, members shared the view that it was appropriate for the Bank to expand the special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing and at the same time to make use of its existing liquidity provision measures, thereby encouraging interest rates on term instruments overall to decline. Members then discussed details concerning expansion of special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing. They shared the view that it was appropriate to (1) standardize the duration of all such loans to three months, the long end of the previous range (one month to three months) and (2) increase the frequency of the operations (previously twice a month) to once a week. They also agreed that it was appropriate to offer such loans (previously to be offered through the end of March 2009) through the end of September 2009. A few members added that, given that financial markets remained nervous, it was necessary that the Bank continue to conduct money market operations flexibly through the fiscal year-end, giving due consideration to firms' financial positions and market developments. Members next examined outright purchases of corporate bonds, which the Bank decided to introduce at the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 21 and 22, Instruments. One member expressed the view that the corporate financing situation did not fulfill the necessary conditions for implementation of outright purchases of corporate bonds because (1) there had not been a decline in the functioning of the corporate bond market severe enough to lead to overall tightness in corporate financing, judging from the fact that the amount of corporate bonds issued was only slightly smaller than in the past and credit spreads on them had not generally widened significantly; and (2) outright purchases of corporate bonds with a residual maturity of up to one year could only be expected to have a limited effect as a means of facilitating corporate financing. Against this view, most members said that it was appropriate for the Bank to conduct outright purchases of corporate bonds for the following reasons: (1) the functioning of the corporate bond market had declined so significantly that it seemed to be leading to overall tightness in corporate financing, as evidenced by the fact that credit spreads on corporate bonds continued to widen and the issuance of corporate bonds with low ratings remained difficult; and (2) outright purchases of corporate bonds even with a residual maturity of up to one year would be able to contribute to facilitating corporate financing by encouraging securities companies and investors to trade corporate bonds, thus supporting a recovery in market functioning, and by boosting financial institutions' capacity to extend loans. These members then expressed their view regarding the specifics of outright purchases of corporate bonds as follows. First, the upper limit of the total outstanding amount of corporate bonds to be purchased should be 1 trillion yen, given that (1) the amount should be sufficiently large to support a recovery in the functioning of the corporate bond market, and (2) on the other hand, excessive intervention by the Bank in markets should be avoided. Second, corporate bonds to be purchased should be those with a residual maturity of up to one year at the end of the month of purchase, in view of the fact that corporate bonds were usually actively traded just before their residual maturities became less than one year. And third, such purchases would be conducted as a temporary measure through September 30, 2009, the day to which the effective periods of some other temporary measures would be extended, since the purchasing period should be sufficiently long. Members then discussed the possible extension of the effective periods of the various temporary measures regarding money market operations. With a view to ensuring stability in financial markets and facilitating corporate financing through September 30, for corporate financing remained severe -- it was appropriate to extend the effective periods of various temporary measures so that the Bank would be able to provide funds with a maturity of up to three months maturing after September 30, 2009. Many members were of the opinion that firms' anxiety about possible difficulties in rolling over their borrowings after the turn of the fiscal year might make funding over the fiscal year-end even more difficult, and, to avoid such a situation, it was appropriate to decide on the extension at this meeting rather than to wait until the next Monetary Policy Meeting in March. Some members expressed the view that retaining such exceptional measures for a long time would make market participants take them for granted and consequently terminating them smoothly might become difficult, and it was therefore necessary to carefully consider an exit strategy in advance. A few members pointed out the risk that losses incurred on financial instruments purchased might impair the soundness of the Bank's assets, which provided the backing for the currency, and consequently undermine confidence in the neutrality of the central bank and in the currency in the long run. They said that due attention should be paid to this risk, which tended to be disregarded in a situation where policy responses to the financial crisis and the economic downturn demanded priority. Following the staff reports on the financial environment, the representative from the Ministry of Finance said that the government had been making swift preparations for the issuance of government-guaranteed dematerialized CP since the passing of the second supplementary budget for fiscal 2008. Following the submission of policy proposals on the guideline for money market operations, the representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) The Bank seemed to assess Japan's current and future economic conditions as very severe. (2) The government also regarded Japan's economic conditions as severe, and had announced economic measures amounting to about 75 trillion yen in total. With the aim of overcoming the economic downturn ahead of other affected countries, the government would continue to implement various measures. (3) Recent financial market developments reflected increased uncertainty, as suggested by the fact that market participants had been holding extra funds due to growing concerns about difficulties in funding over the fiscal year-end on March 31. In this situation, the government would like the Bank to support the economy from the financial side by providing funds more actively. The government would also like the Bank to take particular care in its communication in order to further enhance the effects of the Bank's various measures. Regarding outright purchases of corporate bonds, the government would like the Bank to consider expanding the scope of the measure. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) Japan's economy had worsened rapidly as seen in the very substantial decrease in exports and production. Looking ahead, it was likely to continue worsening for the time being, and the possibility that the rapid reduction in production might result in a significant employment adjustment was a cause for concern. Furthermore, attention should be paid to risk factors that might make economic conditions more severe, such as the possibility of a further slowdown in overseas economies. (2) The government would conduct economic and fiscal policies through a three-step approach: economic stimulus in the near term, fiscal consolidation in the medium term, and economic growth enhancement through reforms in the medium to long term. With a view to stimulating the economy as the top priority, the government would steadily implement economic measures amounting to about 75 trillion yen in total. The government would make an effort to ensure that the initial budget for fiscal 2009 was approved by the Diet soon, and considered that it was necessary to swiftly put the measures into action from the beginning of fiscal 2009. (3) Given the recent severe economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, the government would like to request the Bank to support the economy by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, taking account of the government's policy efforts, and sharing the basic perspective on macroeconomic management with the government. (4) In the most severe economic downturn since World War II, firms' financial positions were weakening, causing concerns about a possible rise in corporate bankruptcies and unemployment. Therefore, the government would like the Bank to appropriately conduct the measures the Bank had introduced thus far, such as outright purchases of corporate bonds. The government would also like the Bank to closely examine the situation in corporate financing and flexibly consider any possible enhancements of these measures as necessary. Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to the vote.