By sector, _supermarkets, food products, beverage and tobacco was the_ segment responsible for most of the decrease in sales for the second consecutive month, reflecting the decline in workers real incomes due to higher prices of food and cleaning and personal hygiene products.
These declines suggest the reversal of the optimistic sentiment seen immediately after the presidential elections, due to concerns over unemployment, inflation and the international scenario.
Of note in this area is the growth of ACC operations, which have been favored by the normalization of external bank-to-bank trade lines.
Investment indicators improved slightly in January, after the downward trend observed in the second half of 2002 due to the uncertainties that marked the period.
This behavior in the mineral extraction sector was a consequence of the normalization of activities in Brazils oil and gas fields, after prescheduled maintenance interruptions in the last two months of Regarding the evolution of the manufacturing sector, the January result confirms the signs of a slowdown in industrial activity, with the exception of the sectors closely linked to external trade.
Data for the automobile sector up to February also confirm that exports are contributing strongly to the improvement in the trade balance.
This rise repeated the normal seasonal pattern for January, when there are more unemployed workers seeking for jobs.
The expansion of exports resulted mainly from the continuous growth of sales to the US and China, and the recovery of trade with Argentina, in addition to the increase in prices of important export commodities.
Summing up, economic activity lost momentum at the end of 2002 and in the beginning of this year, even though exports have continued to grow.
There are signs that domestic demand has weakened due to the drop in real income as a consequence of higher inflation, a trend only partly attenuated by extraordinary disbursements from the FGTS.
Additionally, consumer expectations have shown a reversal of the optimism seen during the governmental transition.
The uncertainty regarding the possibility of a military confrontation in Iraq was the major development in the international economic scenario.
This environment contributed to volatility in the financial markets.
In recent days, with the war coming closer after the US ultimatum, stock prices rose, oil prices declined and the US dollar appreciated, reversing previous trends.
Notwithstanding these short-term developments, recent indicators have shown that the main economies are facing difficulties in consolidating their fundamentals, mainly with worsened fiscal accounts and less room to maneuver monetary policy.
Consumer confidence indicators worsened significantly while those related to business expectations are barely above the indifference level.
The Euro area continues to grow slowly, led by the weak performance of the German economy.
The fiscal deficit in Germany surpassed the limit set by the European Union, which may lead to fiscal tightening.
European consumer confidence has been hurt by expectations of war in Iraq and increasing unemployment.
Prices In February, inflation decelerated to its lowest rates since last October.
This increase reflected the unfavorable contribution of grains and exporting commodities, and higher increases in the prices of legumes and fruits.
Of the most heavily weighted segments, only the prices of chemical products decelerated less sharply, due to increases in the prices of fuel and lubricants, fertilizers and plastic.
In March, inflation measured by the main price indices will continue to fall although it will remain at high levels compared to the average for this month in previous years.
Considering the IPCA, regulated and monitored prices will decelerate strongly, due to the end of the impacts of the recent readjustments.
Regarding free market prices, increases in the prices of medicines will be the main source of pressure, while clothing will contribute favorably for seasonal reasons.
With respect to wholesale prices, agricultural products will contribute to the reduction of the indices, mainly as the result of lower price increases for grains and some vegetables.
In the period after the Copom decision in February, the reduction of country risk, the appreciation of the exchange rate and the deceleration of inflation contributed to consecutive and significant reductions in the slope of the yield curve.
The improvement in country risk and capital inflows contributed to the progressive reduction of the interest rates in these auctions.
The Treasury has resumed the offer of LTNs, which had not occurred since last November.
The average tenor rose as a result of higher demand for longer-term LFTs, due to the significant reduction in the price discount of shorter tenor securities.
In the same period, the Central Bank intervened in the money market through repo operations ranging from 7 to 30 days, and through daily liquidity management operations with maturities of 2-working days, with the aim of reducing the need for daily interventions and withdrawing excess liquidity through longer-term operations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Considering the adjustments up to February, this hypothesis assumes the price of gasoline remains stable until the end of the year.
This forecast is 2.2 p.p.
The projection for the 6-month spread over the Selic rate, following a new specification of the VAR model using the variables Selic rate and swap rate in levels, was 70 b.p.
In the last 12 months, free market prices contributed 9.4 p.p. to inflation, while regulated and monitored prices contributed 6.4 p.p.
Results for the current account, which were roughly balanced in the first two months of the year, point to the consolidation of the external sector adjustment.
There are signals of improvement in the capital account, and new issues abroad have been announced, most of which are shorter than 1 year.
Rollover rates continue to recover, although they are at a reduced level, which contributed to negative FX flows in the first days of March.
The financial markets improved significantly between the February and March meetings.
Sovereign risk fell to 1,067 b.p. from 1,333 b.p.
Demand for public securities remained high.
The Treasury resumed placements of LTNs.
Discounts on short term LFTs fell.
There are signs that inflation is falling.
The fall of inflation in free market prices is even clearer.
According to this new forecast, the primary effect of the shock of regulated and monitored prices on overall inflation was revised, implying a 1 p.p. rise in the adjusted inflation target for 2003, according to the methodology described in the Open Letter of the Governor of the Banco Central do Brasil to the Ministry of Finance of January 21, However, the Copom considers it premature to modify the adjusted target at this time due to the high volatility of international oil prices, and believes it is preferable to wait for more information about the adjustments that could affect regulated prices.
The downward trend for inflation was maintained in some inflation measures that consider the first weeks of March, such as the first estimate for the IGP-M and the four-week Fipe indices.
Additionally, price surveys in the first two weeks of March confirm the expectations of a decrease in inflation, especially in the food and beverage, education and transport categories, which produced the largest pressures in February.
Notwithstanding these developments, there are some significant ongoing price increases, such as in the prices of perishable food in greater So Paulo, alcohol-based auto fuel, and medicines.
This expectation incorporates the results of the two first months of the year, both high and strongly affected by the increases in regulated prices.
The focus on the forward inflation rate is important, since it highlights the perception of a downward trend.
Monetary policy is concerned about the future trajectory of inflation.
First, the Copom considers that monetary policy has been able to bring inflation to a trajectory compatible with the one outlined in the Open Letter to the Ministry of Finance from the second quarter of this year on.
Second, it is premature to evaluate the full effect of the monetary policy actions implemented in recent months.
Alternative scenarios with inflation trajectories close to the adjusted target for 2003 were also evaluated by the Copom.
Notwithstanding this decision, the Copom understands that there are considerable risks to the realization of more favorable inflation trajectories, including those associated with external uncertainties due to the war in Iraq.
There are doubts about the speed of the disinflation and the degree of inflationary inertia.
A slower fall of inflation has a chance of interrupting the convergence of the inflation to its target, since future readjustments of prices and wages may be based on accumulated inflation instead of on current and expected inflation.
As a result, the Copom decided to adopt an upward bias.
