Wholesale prices posted a negative change for the second consecutive month, both in agricultural and industrial prices.
The increased supply of grains, vegetables and fruits continued to contribute to the decrease of the prices of these products.
The result was influenced by further decreases in the prices of chemical products, particularly fuel, lubricants and fertilizers, and negative changes in important segments such as food products, plastic, metallurgical and electronic materials, paper and corrugated paper, fabric and clothing.
On the other hand, increases in the prices of industrial mineral products, beverages, furnishings, wood, rubber and non-metallic minerals should be highlighted.
In this case core inflation is also influenced by the higher inflation in the second half of In July, the effect of the exchange rate depreciation on wholesale prices will decline, with agricultural and industrial prices likely to register less deflation.
Agricultural prices may also reflect increasing pressures in meat, milk and dairy products prices due to seasonal effects.
Only the prices of the products in the sugarcane derivatives industry may continue to decline.
Consumer price indices will be impacted by the increase in regulated prices, particularly the readjustment of electricity tariffs in So Paulo and telephone tariffs around the country.
The negative contribution of fuel and food prices will decrease in July.
Regarding clothing, the recently seen pressures are expected to reverse due to early winter sales.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projections for bottled cooking gas for 2003 remained almost stable, with a 0.1 p.p. reduction between the June and July meetings.
These forecasts include price readjustments that have occurred up to the current date; b.
This drop in the projection continues to be a consequence of the exchange rate appreciation observed in recent months.
Gasoline, alcohol-based auto fuel and household electricity tariffs were the major prices responsible for the decrease in the projection for the increase in overall regulated prices in 2003; d.
For 2003, it is assumed that the readjustment of regulated prices will follow the endogenous determination model of regulated prices, which considers the change in the exchange rate, free price inflation and the change in the IGP price index, as well as seasonal factors.
This positive outcome is mainly the result of monetary initiatives that impeded the propagation of the shocks that occurred at the end of 2002, and to consistency in fiscal policy.
These factors, together with a more favorable international environment, led to an exchange rate appreciation in the period and to a convergence of inflation expectations to the path of the targets.
The significant drop of inflation illustrated by the results of the IPCA in June and the IPCA-15 in July provides evidence of the effectiveness of monetary policy in reducing inflation persistence, and preventing its continuation at high levels.
Additionally, these results strengthen the perception that the convergence of inflation to the targets is occurring more rapidly than had been observed up to April.
These numbers benefited from several conjunctural and seasonal factors, such as declines in gasoline, alcohol-based auto fuel and food prices.
Though such factors should be taken under consideration, market prices show a clear deceleration of inflation.
Several measures of core inflation dropped between May and June, as described above.
A similar trend was seen in other price indices, such as the IPC-Fipe, which showed a drop in inflation for the fifth consecutive month.
The rollover rates for private securities and external loans continue to increase.
In June, the IPA, which is strongly related to the exchange rate, posted deflation.
This was the second consecutive month of deflation in the case of the industrial subcomponent of the IPA, and the third consecutive month in the case of the agricultural subcomponent of the IPA.
However, the effects on tradable goods prices of the exchange rate appreciation that has occurred since the beginning of 2003 have so far been less intense than expected.
As the behavior of wholesale prices have a partial and delayed effect on consumer prices, there is still room for the exchange rate appreciation that has occurred since the beginning of 2003 to affect the IPCA, even though the exchange rate has remained stable around current levels for the past month.
As a result, although tradable goods prices do not yet embody all of the exchange rate appreciation that has occurred, it is reasonable to expect that they will adjust further in the absence of additional upward pressures.
The deceleration in economic activity has continued, with a decline in retail sales, an increase in inventories, and zero growth in industrial production.
Because it is based upon a new methodology, the May unemployment rate is not directly comparable to the value observed in the same month of past years.
Both the Central Banks inflation forecasts and market inflation expectations have been converging to the inflation targets.
However, during periods of disinflation, nominal interest rates are expected to fall gradually, and therefore forecasts for relatively long time horizons based on constant nominal interest rates tend to overestimate the downward trajectory of inflation.
The Copom remains concerned about the risks to setting inflation on a path consistent with the trajectory of the targets, especially with respect to the degree of inflation persistence and to the speed of disinflation.
The Copom has compared its inflation forecasts from the model currently in use with an alternative model that adopts a higher degree of inflation persistence.
The inflation forecasts for the second quarter of 2003 adopting the current model were more precise, which provides more evidence that the degree of inflation persistence is converging towards its historical mean.
If the recent trend of inflation persists, real interest rates should converge to lower levels in the future.
The gradual convergence of interest rates towards the new equilibrium levels in the medium term will preserve the recent success in fighting inflation and will be compatible with a sustained recovery in the level of economic activity.
Considering the forecasts for inflation in the next twelve months and 2004, the recent rates for the IPCA and the evidence that inflation persistence may be returning to its historical levels, the Copom believes that additional loosening of monetary policy will not compromise the recent success in reducing inflation.
On the other hand, the sales of durable consumer goods and raw materials for construction increased in June Data on sales with checks and credit purchases released by the ACSP show increases in June.
The monthly FecomrcioSP survey of consumer confidence showed a decrease of 5 percentage points in July, explained mainly by a percentage point decline in consumers current intentions, while the decline in future intentions of 3 percentage points was smaller.
The main investment indices improved slightly in May, with increases in production, in exports, in capital goods imports and in the production of construction inputs.
However, the accumulated results in the first five months of 2003 remain in negative territory on a year-on-year basis, still reflecting the difficult economic environment.
Sectors posting notable performance in May include food and beverages and fuel, especially alcohol-based fuel production, which was influenced by the sugar cane harvest and the increase in the share of alcohol added to gasoline.
Regarding capital goods, once again sectors related to agriculture, such as production of agricultural machinery made positive contributions.
This behavior reflects the positive influence on industrial production of agribusiness, the petroleum extraction industry, and exports.
It should be highlighted that this result may in part be influenced by the recent exchange rate appreciation, which reduced the exports revenue measured in domestic currency.
This result continued to reflect the deceleration of economic activity, with small increases in domestically funded credit to companies and individuals being offset by decreases in dollar-indexed lending to companies.
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit operations fell in June, following the reduction in interest rates in the futures market.
Projections for global economic growth in 2003 have been marked down since the beginning of the year.
The most recent economic indicators in the US signaled a more favorable economic environment, but nevertheless have still not corroborated a strong recovery.
The European economy continues to stagnate.
In Asia, economic activity has shown signals of returning to normal after the negative effects of SARS, mainly in China.
Labor markets in the industrialized economies remain weak, with unemployment rates at high levels.
Business expectations are positive in the US and have been increasing modestly in Europe and Japan.
In June, inflation increased in the major economies, although it remains at low levels.
In the United Kingdom, inflation is slightly above the official inflation target.
According to the Fed, the risk of deflation in the US is very low.
Policy interest rates in the major economies continue to decline.
In Japan, the policy rate has remained roughly zero since In the international financial markets, North American and Japanese Treasury bonds fell following the Feds statement that it is less worried about deflation and that the prospects for the level of activity are better in the second half of the year.
The major stock exchanges have been rallying since the end of the war in Iraq, especially the Tokyo stock exchange with improvements in the prospects for the Japanese economy.
These increases occurred mainly due to higher export volumes and a wider variety of exported products, demonstrating a higher level of competitiveness and diversification in exports.
In relation to export markets, accumulated data up to May show exports increasing to all regions.
The yield curve shifted downwards and became further inverted, particularly at the short end.
More favorable inflation readings contributed to this movement.
During the month, placement rates remained roughly stable relative to the previous period.
The significant demand for these securities and the movement in the domestic yield curve allowed the Treasury to place these securities at lower rates than in the previous period.
The Central Bank intervened in the open market on a weekly basis with 2-week repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations with maturities of 2 working days.
