Inflation of both market and regulated prices in the IPCA slowed in May.
Among tradable goods, there was a deceleration in the price increases of medicine, cleaning and personal hygiene products, furniture and utensils and electronics.
In addition to electricity tariff hikes in 9 regions, urban bus and water and sewage tariffs contributed 0.08 p.p. and 0.03 p.p., respectively, to the increase in the May IPCA.
Together gasoline and alcohol-based fuel contributed 0.20 p.p. to the change in the IPCA last month.
It is important to highlight that even after the most recent reductions in petroleum products, domestic prices are still higher than international prices.
Regarding the evolution of wholesale prices, one should highlight the effects of the exchange rate appreciation on both agricultural and industrial prices.
However, the behavior of industrial prices at the wholesale level was not uniform, with a deceleration of price increases in some sectors, outright price declines in others - mainly chemicals, paper and cardboard and power lines - and higher pressures in sectors such as machinery, transportation, fabric, clothes and footwear, beverages and food products.
Core measures of inflation with this index are also being influenced by the exchange rate shock last year.
In June, wholesale prices will continue to reflect the exchange rate appreciation, registering additional declines as already signaled in the partial results for June inflation.
Consumer price indices will come under some upward pressure from the prices of rice, milk and dairy products and clothing prices.
However, this pressure will be lower than observed in May.
Also, expected declines in the prices of fresh food, beef and fuel will facilitate a further deceleration of monthly inflation.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The scenario considered in the simulations assumes the following hypotheses.
There are three basic factors explaining this recent behavior.
First, the high inflation rates observed at the beginning of the year resulted from the delayed effects on prices of the strong exchange rate depreciation observed last year and the increase of inflation persistence, with more agents adjusting prices and wages based on past inflation.
Second, the recent exchange rate appreciation has reduced pressures on companies costs and wholesale prices.
Although there is still some resistance among the retail prices of tradable goods to pass-through from the recent exchange rate appreciation, consumer prices have tended to stabilize without additional readjustment pressures.
Third, monetary policy has been successful in reducing inflation expectations and inflation pressures by controlling aggregate demand.
Inflation persistence contributed to the continuation of high inflation in the initial months of the year.
Higher inflation persistence was caused by an increase in the practice of backward-looking prices readjustment, and a corresponding decline in price readjustments based on future inflation.
This behavior, aimed at improving profit margins in the initial months of the year, led to a significant decrease in sales in an environment of lower demand and a monetary policy committed to preventing price readjustments from perpetuating high inflation.
Similar behavior has been observed when analyzing the trend of market prices.
On the other hand, the exchange rate appreciation has contributed to a reduction of cost pressures on inflation.
The maintenance of appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, as well as the recent increase in international liquidity, contributed to the continuation of the exchange rate appreciation.
The rollover rates for private securities and direct loans continue to increase.
Economic activity continues to decelerate.
The intensity and duration of this deceleration are similar to those observed in other recent periods of Brazilian history.
However, due to the change in relative prices, especially regarding the prices of tradable goods compared to the prices of non-tradables, the deceleration of activity is not uniform.
The sectors related to exports, including agribusiness, and the mineral extraction industry are expanding.
On the other hand, the durable goods sector for internal consumers, which depends on domestic credit conditions, is the most depressed compared to the same month of last year.
According to the factors explained above, monthly inflation remains on a downward trend.
The decrease of 0.4 p.p. in IPCA inflation in May was strongly influenced by the 0.6 p.p. reduction in non-tradable goods prices, which resulted mainly from the normalization of the supply of perishable foods.
Nevertheless, other groups also showed a reduction of inflation pressures.
The decrease of the prices of gasoline and alcoholbased auto fuel was the main factor contributing to the reduction in regulated price inflation.
The decline of consumer price inflation was followed by deflation in wholesale prices, both agricultural and industrial.
Core inflation is also declining.
Under this methodology, the readjustments of some items, which are concentrated in a few short periods of the year, are smoothed to avoid their exclusion from the core.
When inflationary shocks occur, the core tends to be affected by past pressures and shows some resistance to falling.
Another way to measure trimmed-mean core inflation, which avoids the influence of exchange rate shocks, is to substitute the current periods smoothed values with the corresponding values observed in the past 12 months.
Both the Central Banks inflation forecasts and market inflation expectations have been converging to the inflation targets.
Nonetheless, inflation in the second quarter of the year registered results compatible with those presented in the Open Letter sent by the Central Banks Governor to the Ministry of Finance on January Market inflation expectations surveyed by Gerin have also been converging to the 12-month ahead inflation targets.
The Copom inflation forecast for the same period is below this figure.
However, there are still risks to setting inflation on a path consistent with the target trajectory, especially with respect to the speed of disinflation.
The Copom has continuously evaluated the degree of inflation persistence in recent months.
One of the analytic methods consists of comparing the models that are currently used with other specifications that adopt a higher degree of persistence.
It was observed that the current models forecasted May inflation with more accuracy, which may be the first hint that the degree of inflation persistence is returning to the historical average.
The asymmetrical impact on prices of the exchange rates appreciation and depreciation was analyzed in the same way.
The conclusion was that the models that incorporate less impact due to exchange rate appreciations, compared to exchange rate depreciations, signaled market price inflation above the one that was effective in May.
Due to the recent slowdown in inflation, the Copom believes that the stance of monetary policy should ensure that the recent disinflation trend is sustained.
The negative performance was generalized, and hit all the retail sectors and 24 out of Brazils 27 states.
After consecutive falls in recent months, data on sales with checks and credit purchases, released by the ACSP, stabilized in May, although at a low level.
Despite the negative retail sales results, the monthly FecomrcioSP survey showed a recovery in consumer confidence for the third consecutive month in June, signaling better prospects for the sector.
The main investment indices showed weak performance in April, still highlighting that the difficult economic scenario and the government transition postponed investment decisions, both in the public and the private sectors.
Medium and long term financing provided by the BNDES, another indicator of the evolution investment expenditures, was below the level observed in the same period last year.
Both the month-on-month and year-on-year results for April should be judged with caution however.
The number of working days in March 2003 was lower than normal due to the Carnival holidays.
Data on manufacturing and real industrial sales released by the CNI showed a reduction in industrial activity in the first four months of the year.
The fall in interest rates charged by financial institutions was driven mainly by a decline in rates on fixed-income credits, which was partially offset by an increase in rates for dollar-indexed credits.
Projections for economic growth in 2003 continue to be reduced.
In the US, the latest indicators reinforce the hypothesis of a slow economic recovery, and there are risks that the recovery may not be sustainable.
In Japan and Germany, the recessionary scenario continues, with zero growth and disinflation.
Labor markets in the industrialized economies continue to weaken with unemployment rates at high levels.
The lack of dynamism in the labor market is negatively influencing consumer confidence, mainly in Europe.
In the US, although economic indicators have improved, consumer confidence showed signs of falling, according to the University of Michigan.
Business expectations are recovering in the US, but not in the other industrialized countries.
Inflation continues to fall in the main economies.
However, according to the Federal Reserve Bank, the risk of deflation is very low.
Oil prices registered new increases in mid-April, signaling an upward trend due to the adjustment of the market to the new conditions of supply and demand.
The ECB reduced its benchmark interest rate by 50 b.p.
Stock exchanges registered significant recoveries, not only in the developed economies but also in the emerging countries.
More favorable indicators of inflation, the appreciation of the exchange rate, a decline in sovereign country risk, and the approval of the social security reform project by the specific commission of the Lower House contributed to this movement.
Lower placement rates, as compared to the previous period, were due to the fall in the dollar-linked interest rate curve as a result of a better perception of sovereign risk and new bond issues abroad.
The significant demand for these securities and the movement in the domestic yield curve allowed the offer of longer average tenors and lower rates than in the previous period.
