Regarding the evolution of wholesale prices, one should highlight the effects of the exchange rate appreciation and the normalization of the supply of perishable foods.
In May, the positive effects of the exchange rate appreciation on inflation are likely to increase, particularly on wholesale prices, as signaled by recent previews of the IGP-M. With respect to consumer prices, tradable goods will also benefit from the exchange rate appreciation, and in conjunction with the fall of perishable food and fuel prices will contribute to the downward trend of inflation.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Wholesale price inflation has been decreasing more than consumer price inflation.
There is evidence that the dynamics of the two groups of prices have been different.
At the wholesale level, the exchange rate appreciation and the normalization of the supply of perishable food have been the main factors underlying the decrease in inflation.
However, the deceleration of consumer price inflation has not been as significant.
Regulated prices increased by 0.34 p.p.
Market price inflation declined, largely due to smaller price increases in services and items linked to the exchange rate.
GDP may close the first quarter of 2003 roughly stable in comparison to the previous quarter.
On the one hand, manufacturing output fell.
On the other hand, the mineral extraction industry, the agricultural sector and the tradable goods sector registered positive performance.
The resistance to a more rapid decline in consumer price inflation points to the existence of increased inflation persistence in the economy.
The prices of important groups in the consumption basket have increased significantly, although at a decelerating rate, including beverages, canned products, cleaning and personal hygiene products and furniture and utensils.
Consequently, core inflation still remains at a high level.
This persistence is due to wage and price readjustments that have occurred since the beginning of the year and that have been based on the high inflation rate accumulated in the last twelve months, rather than assessments of future inflation.
Also, businesses have made an effort to regain profit margins in a scenario of falling aggregated demand.
This behavior resulted in a significant decrease in sales.
The Copom believes that monetary policy should not ratify price and wage readjustments based on past inflation, due to the risk of perpetuating higher inflation.
There are initial signs that monetary policy is curbing inflation.
The Copom as well as market participants expect inflation to maintain a declining trend towards its target.
Since inflation remains relatively high, it is still premature to conclude that inflation persistence is definitively decreasing and that the effect of the exchange rate appreciation on prices is significant.
Thus, the Copom concludes that the decrease of inflation depends on the maintenance of its current effort.
The March 2003 results are underestimated the same way that data in February was overestimated.
Data on sales with checks and credit purchases, released by the ACSP, confirmed the downward trend of the retail market in March and in the first quarter of this year.
The monthly FecomrcioSP survey showed an improvement in consumer confidence in May.
The main investment indices declined in 1Q2003.
The difficult economic scenario and the governmental transition period contributed to a postponement of investment decisions, both in the public and the private sectors.
By sector, it is important to note the continuous expansion in the production of machinery and agricultural equipment, due to the increase in the income of the agricultural sector and the significant decrease in energy generating equipment.
This decrease was a consequence of the high figures registered last year, when investment in this area was stimulated by the energy crisis.
The data shows that the behavior of the industrial sector in March was consistent with developments that have been observed since mid-2002, with the best performance in the intermediate goods sector, relating to the expansion of exports, and the agricultural and oil extraction sectors.
The consumer goods sector showed significant declines.
Data on real sales and hours worked in the manufacturing sector released by the CNI also indicated a decrease of industrial activity during the first quarter.
The IBGE also verified an increase in informal work in the last twelve months.
The results indicate that companies have been choosing short-term debt in order to recompose cash flows.
In the month, fixed rate loans fell in some segments, mirroring the reduction in the slope of the yield curve as a result of the improvement in the sovereign-risk premium and the expectations of falling inflation.
Regarding default rates on retail credit, there was a slight improvement in April.
Business confidence in industrialized countries points to a contraction in economic activity.
Regarding consumers, pessimism persists in Europe.
However, there was a slight improvement in the US.
In addition to the weak performance of industrialized economies, the spread of SARS is a new concern for the world economy, and growth in China and the countries of Southeast Asia may be significantly damaged.
The volatility of oil prices remains high, and the downward trend in prices was partially reversed after the approval of the cut in production by OPEC countries, and the disturbance caused by a new wave of terrorist attacks.
The inflation shows signs of falling in the main economies.
In the US, consumer price indices in April registered the largest fall in nineteen months, fostering the perception that deflation risks are increasing.
The weakening of the dollar may decrease this perception, and contribute to an improvement in the activity and a reduction of the US trade deficit.
However, the appreciation of the euro increases the risks of deflation and recession in Europe.
Central banks decided to keep interest rates unaltered in their last meetings.
A decline in sovereign country risk, appreciation of the exchange rate, deceleration of inflation and market expectations of a larger reduction of inflation in the second half of the year contributed to this movement.
Lower placement rates, as compared to the previous period, were due to the overall reduction in the dollar-linked interest rate curve.
The significant demand for these securities and the movement in the domestic yield curve allowed the offer of increasing amounts, longer average tenures, and lower rates than in the previous period.
In the same period, the Central Bank intervened weekly in the open market through 1-week, 2-week, and 1month repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations with maturities of 2 working days.
