This result is a consequence of the decrease in the expectation of 2004 IGP-M. e.
The_ current results indicate a higher degree of inflation persistence, which is key for the disinflation outlook.
In March, free market prices increased as a result of price increases in items that are sensitive to past exchange rate changes, such as medicines and cleaning and hygiene products, as well as increases in perishable food prices.
The slower decline in inflation indicates a higher degree of inertia in the formation of prices in the economy, although this may be a temporary phenomenon.
The degree of inflation inertia depends directly on the link between price and wage readjustments.
There is a risk of future price and wage readjustments being based on accumulated inflation instead of on future inflation.
Other factors that impact consumer price inflation, such as the exchange rate and economic activity, have been contributing to a more rapid convergence of inflation to its targets.
Recent figures on economic activity, when adjusted for the distortions provoked by the timing of the Carnival holiday this year, show signs of a downturn in the first quarter of This trend has materialized despite the increase of exports and domestic production of import-substituting goods.
The decline in activity can be attributed to the decrease in real wages and tightening of credit conditions for consumers.
Leading indicators for March suggest that the level of activity will remain weak.
The trade surplus increased, and the current account registered a surplus in 1Q03, indicating a deepening of the external adjustment of the Brazilian economy.
The sustainability of this trend, however, is dependent on a reduction of inflation, which is needed in order to preserve the change in relative prices that has occurred in the last year.
External funding conditions have improved.
Indeed, in April, new issues were announced with a slight lengthening of tenors.
Demand for domestic securities has also increased, allowing the Treasury to issue LTNs and LFTs with longer maturities.
These factors contributed to an improvement in the inflation outlook, even taking into consideration the failure of inflation to fall more sharply in recent months.
The Copom also decided to withdraw the upward bias, which allowed the Governor to increase the Selic rate anytime between regular Copom meetings.
Although there are doubts about the speed of the decline in inflation and questions regarding the extent to which the increase in inflation inertia is temporary or permanent, they will not be clarified between the monthly meetings, but over the longer term.
The major segments responsible for the negative results were hypermarkets, supermarkets, food products, beverage and tobacco.
These declines reflect decreases in workers real incomes due to higher prices of food and cleaning and personal hygiene products.
Investment expanded again in February, mainly due to increased production and imports of capital goods.
This recovery, after two months of decreases, was due to the improvement of expectations about unemployment, inflation and the political scenario, despite increasing concerns about the external front.
Moreover, the fall in real income is contributing to an increase in household indebtedness, particularly with short term credit.
The delinquency rate on non-earmarked bank credits increased 0.6 p.p.
External Environment After the beginning of the war in Iraq, uncertainties on the external front subdued with indications that the war would be short and that there would be no significant damage to Iraqi oil fields.
However, after some initial improvement in the international financial scenario, uncertainties about the future performance of the global economy resumed.
The recovery of the global economy continues to depend on a recovery of growth in the U.S.
So far this year, the degree of this recovery has been unclear, as the most recent indicators were influenced by the uncertainties related to the war in Iraq.
With the end of the war, consumer and business expectations may improve in the short-run, allowing some recovery in retail sales, reduction in inventories and resumption of industrial production, which may help the labor market.
The stabilization in oil prices may revert inflationary pressures recently observed in the OECD economies, although it is premature to infer a trend for petroleum prices, given the recent announcement of cuts in output from OPEC members, and uncertainties about the rhythm of exports from Iraq.
The increase in the value of imports was mainly due to the rise in oil prices.
The significant demand for these securities allowed higher offers and the lengthening of tenures up to 15 months.
Moreover, the reduction in the slope of the yield curve opened up room for placements at lower rates than those observed in the previous period.
Longer term LFTs were also issued.
In the same period, the BCB intervened in the money market with 1-week and 1-month repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations with maturities of 2 working days.
