The members of the Copom analyzed the recent performance and the prospects for the Brazilian economy and for the international economy, under the monetary policy framework, which is designed to comply with the inflation targets established by the government.
In short, available information partially reflects the more persistent dynamics of prices in the services sector but already showing some deceleration -, the realignment process of relative prices and temporary supply shocks in the food and beverages group.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
In short, the set of available data confirm intensification of the process of distension in the labor market.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators point to moderation trend in the horizon relevant for the monetary policy, with growth rates relatively more homogeneous in advanced economies, despite being low and below potential growth.
Particularly about Europe, despite recent monetary policy actions, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements restraining investments and growth.
In the United States, the trend is of economic recovery; however, some cooling in the dynamics of growth is anticipated.
In the emerging economies, the activity pace has been constantly revised downwards, in a scenario surrounded by uncertainties regarding the loss of strength in China and their implications for the global economy.
Regarding the monetary policy, in general, accommodative stances prevail in advanced and emerging economies, reinforced by signs of a more gradual process of normalization of monetary conditions in the US.
The inflation rates remain at low levels in the advanced economies and relatively high in the emerging ones.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some components of global demand, accentuated by the effects of the slowdown of the Chinese economy, and of supply, influenced by the reduction of investments in the production process.
The structural primary surplus is considered as the fiscal indicator.
It also bears emphasizing that, in a given period, the fiscal impulse corresponds to the variation of the structural result in comparison to the observed in the previous period.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over the households confidence and consumption.
As a consequence, high inflation rates reduce the potential of economic growth, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this sense, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to the BCBs projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect, in a more long-lasting manner, the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Committee considers that the external environment remains especially complex.
However, despite the occurrence of episodes of higher volatility affecting important emerging economies, the Committee also identifies low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets.
For the Committee, global activity tends to grow more slowly throughout the monetary policy relevant horizon.
Recent prospects indicate modest activity recovery in the advanced economies, while important emerging economies experience a transition period.
In this context, of reduction in the activity pace, it bears highlighting the ongoing concern regarding the Chinese economy and its developments over other economies, coupled with the uncertainties regarding the US economy outlook.
Still regarding international financial markets, the Copom highlights moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices, despite some recent increases.
Regarding oil, the Committee highlights that, regardless of the behavior of the domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international prices tends to be transmitted to the domestic economy through productive chains, such as the petrochemical.
In addition, it should be noted the increased uncertainty generated by low oil prices and their implications for oil companies and producing countries, as well as for financial markets in general, with risks to global financial stability.
The Copom reaffirms that, in accordance to the macroeconomic adjustment process underway, the available indicators show that domestic absorption and GDP growth rates continue to adjust, indicating low domestic activity expansion pace this year.
This process has been especially intensified by the uncertainties arising from the effect of non-economic events.
In particular, investment has retreated, mainly influenced by the occurrence of these events, and private consumption also decreases, in line with credit, employment and income data.
However, for the Committee, after a necessary period of adjustments, which has been more intense and longer than anticipated, as companies and households confidence strengthen, the activity pace tends to intensify.
Moreover, the Committee evaluates that, in the medium term, important changes should take place in the aggregate supply and demand composition.
Consumption tends to grow at a moderate pace and investments tend to gain momentum.
These changes, coupled with other ones currently underway, anticipate an aggregate demand growth composition in the medium term more favorable to potential growth.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the depreciation of the BRL contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economic growth.
Regarding the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in longer horizons, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry, agriculture and livestock emerge.
The services sector, on its turn, tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
However, the speed of materialization of these changes and of the gains resulting from them depends, fundamentally, on a path of primary surpluses that strengthens the perception of the public sector balance sustainability, in addition to the reduction of uncertainties surrounding the domestic and international environment.
It is worth mentioning the importance of ensuring a primary results trajectory that enables stabilization and further reduction of public debt to GDP ratio, which is a crucial measure to reinforce the positive perception regarding the economic environment, to improve the confidence of agents and to contribute to the anchoring of inflation expectations.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the recently assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
Relative to the structural fiscal result and depending on the economic cycle, the Committee considers that the balance of the public sector stands in expansionary zone.
The Committee hightlights that the lack of definitions and the significant changes in the trajectory of primary surpluses generation, as well as in its composition, impact the hypotheses considered for inflation projections.
Concerning inflation control, the Committee highlights that the literature and the best international practices recommend a consistent and sustainable fiscal policy framework, in order to allow the monetary policy actions to be fully transmitted to prices.
The Copom highlights that the main scenario considers credit moderation, which had already been observed and tends to persist.
Regarding this issue, it is important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong 5 expansion, consumer credit has moderated, so that, over the last quarters, there were, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks and, on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, as illustrated by actions that have been implemented, the Committee considers as opportune to continue to reinforce the initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, as anticipated by previous Minutes, the Copom observes that the idleness margin in the labor market is high, with data confirming the acceleration of the expected distension in this market.
However, a significant risk still prevails related, particularly, to the possibility of concession of high nominal wages increases, with negative impacts over inflation.
In spite of the recent occurrence of real wage changes consistent with the estimates for the labor productivity gains, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating cost inflationary pressures.
The Copom considers that the still elevated twelve-month inflation level reflects the relative prices adjustment processes occurred in 2015, as well as the recovery process of the fiscal revenues observed at the federal and state levels, at the start of the year, in addition to the temporary supply shocks in the food segment, and which cause inflation to show resistence.
Although the Committee recognizes that these processes have direct impact on inflation, it reaffirms its view that the monetary policy can, should and is containing the second-order effects stemming from them.
The Committee recognizes the progress in disinflation policy, especially the containment of second-order effects stemming from relative price adjustments.
However, it considers that the high level of inflation in twelve months and the distance between inflation expectations and the inflation targeting regime objectives do not allow monetary policy easing.
The Copom reaffirms that the aggregate demand will continue to be moderate in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to be influenced by factors such as employment, income and credit; on the other hand, the concession of public services and the expansion of agricultural income, among other factors, tend to benefit investments.
On its turn, net exports show better results, either by increasing exports, benefited by the depreciation of the BRL, or by the ongoing import substitution process.
Moreover, the uncertainties regarding the behavior of the global economy remain.
