Forecasts for 2016 and 2017 GDP fell, and the process of recovery of expectations components of confidence indices was interrupted.
After breaking a long sequence of negative prints in the second quarter, the measure of investment in the national accounts fell again in the third quarter.
The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indices and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
After the decline in economic activity indicators for August, the absence of a reversal in the following months makes it less likely that these movements reflect natural fluctuations in economic activity around stabilization periods.
There is a higher probability, therefore, that the recovery of economic activity will be slower and more gradual than previously anticipated.
The global outlook is particularly uncertain.
The increase in asset price volatility indicates the possible end of the benign period for emerging economies.
There is a high probability of resumption of the process of normalization of monetary conditions in the United States in the short term, as well as uncertainty over the future course of its economic policy.
Returning to the domestic economy, recent inflation figures came in more favorably than expected, partly due to the reversal of food price increases, but also with signs of more widespread disinflation.
The market scenario considers the paths for the policy rate and the exchange rate extracted from the Focus survey.
Over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, the Copoms conditional forecasts fluctuated around the previous levels due to factors with opposing effects.
The inflation rate of these components has been retreating in 12-month windows, but the pause persists, at the margin, according to seasonally adjusted monthly measures of underlying inflation.
This could reflect greater inflation resilience, despite the high level of economic slack.
On the other hand, the continuous softening of the labor market and the significant deceleration of economic activity tend to produce disinflation that can be more intense than the one reflected in inflation expectations measured by the Focus survey and in the conditional projections produced by the Copom.
In fact, the more favorable inflation dynamics in the recent period show signs of more widespread disinflation.
It is, therefore, reasonable to expect softer economic activity in the short run and the prospect of a further delayed and more gradual recovery to reinforce this process.
In particular, this expectations in the short term.
Forecasts for reflect natural fluctuations in economic activity 2018 inflation in the reference and market scenarios around stabilization periods.
The inflation rate of these components has economic policy.
Another likely outcome of this outlook would be an earlier end to the pause and resumption of disinflation, at 1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Extended Consumer Price Index.
The steps toward approval of fiscal reforms have been positive so far, which suggests greater timeliness and higher probability of approval.
On the other hand, the process is lengthy and carries uncertainty.
The reduction of uncertainty would enhance the effects of monetary policy, and reduce the costs of the ongoing disinflationary process.
The possible end of the benign period for emerging economies might make disinflation more difficult.
It is possible, however, that its effects be mitigated by favorable movements in commodity prices that are relevant to the countrys terms of trade, which would be a stabilizing factor.
Furthermore, the end of the benign period may imply tighter external financial conditions, which would contribute a disinflationary component.
Therefore, there is no direct relationship between the global outlook and the conduct of monetary policy.
They all agreed that the economy continued to show signs of weakness past August.
September releases and indicators available for October and November failed to show a reversal that should be expected in a scenario of natural fluctuations of economic activity around stabilization periods.
This increases the likelihood that the resumption of economic activity may be further delayed, and be more gradual than previously anticipated.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members pointed out the risks associated with the possible end of the relatively benign environment for emerging economies of late.
They all agreed that the process of normalization of monetary policy in the United States should be resumed in the near term, and that the course of its economic policy became a source of uncertainty.
The Copom evaluated that part of this uncertainty should dissipate in the coming months.
They also agreed that by the end of the year the Committee should have a more accurate assessment of the possible impacts of the resumption of the process of monetary policy normalization in the United States.
The members of the Committee argued that, in face of expectations that global economic activity will strengthen, movements in the terms of trade may the margin, of the aforementioned IPCA have mitigating effects.
They also considered that, components that are most sensitive to the business should a change in the global outlook produce cycle and monetary policy.
In a context of anchored inflation been positive so far, which suggests greater expectations, these effects tend to be mitigated by timeliness and higher probability of approval.
On the the high degree of economic slack.
In this context, the Copom considered that the recent monetary policy stance contributed to the anchoring of inflation expectations, and to create more leeway for the easing of monetary policy.
The discussion turned then to the pace of easing.
Other Copom members argued that the evolution of some inflation components that are more sensitive to the business cycle and to monetary policy continue to indicate a pause, at the margin.
These same members reasoned, nevertheless, that if economic activity fails to show clearer signs of recovering, it is reasonable to expect an intensification of the pace of monetary easing, since in this case inflation forecasts should decrease.
The members of the Committee discussed the path for regulated prices and its effects on the prospective scenario for inflation.
In this context, the members of the Committee emphasized, once again, that the environment with anchored inflation expectations would enable the Copom to focus on preventing second-round effects of these relative price adjustments.
The reduction of uncertainty would The Committee analyzed its conditional enhance the effects of monetary policy, and reduce forecasts for inflation in different scenarios, the the costs of the ongoing disinflationary process.
In this context, the Copom difficult.
They also argued that the uncertainty over The Committee members discussed the the possible end of the benign global environment evolution of economic activity in the short term, in for emerging economies should decrease until the light of the most recent releases.
The combination of such that the economy continued to show signs of factors recommended waiting until the next Regarding the global outlook, the Committee path for regulated prices and its effects on the members pointed out the risks associated with the prospective scenario for inflation.
In became a source of uncertainty.
The Copom this context, the members of the Committee evaluated that part of this uncertainty should emphasized, once again, that the environment with economy, especially with respect to fiscal reforms.
The members of the Committee emphasized that these efforts are crucial for the stabilization and the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee should monitor these efforts closely, since they have important implications for the disinflation process.
The Committee understands that the pace of monetary easing will be calibrated, taking into account its inflation projections and its determinant factors, in order to pursue a path that allows the inflation targets for 2017 and 2018 to be met.
The Committee judges that currently there is no incompatibility between these two objectives.
Inflation forecasts for both years have improved, especially in the market scenario.
This suggests that there may be more room for monetary easing than previously perceived.
The Committee discussed the factors determining the pace and magnitude of monetary easing.
In particular, it was pointed out that the palpable risk that a timely recovery of economic activity fails to materialize should allow the intensification of the pace of monetary easing.
The magnitude of monetary easing and the speeding up of its pace will depend on inflation forecasts and expectations, and on the evolution of the aforementioned risk factors.
In that respect, the Copom emphasizes that the pace of disinflation in its forecasts might intensify if the economic recovery is delayed further, and occurs more gradually than anticipated.
This intensification of the disinflation process relies on an adequate global environment.
There is no mechanical relationship, however, between the global outlook and monetary policy.
The Committee understands that the pace of monetary easing will be calibrated, taking into account its inflation projections and its determinant factors, in order to pursue a path that allows the inflation targets for 2017 and 2018 to be met.
The Committee judges that currently there is no incompatibility between these two objectives.
Inflation forecasts for both years have improved, especially in the market scenario.
In that respect, the Copom emphasizes that the pace of disinflation in its forecasts might intensify if the economic recovery is delayed further, and occurs more gradually than anticipated.
This intensification of the disinflation process relies on an adequate global environment.
