In particular, the measure of investment in the national accounts showed the first increase after ten consecutive quarters of decline.
The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, reflected in industrial capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
Regarding the external outlook, the scenario still presents a benign period for emerging economies, reflected in the behavior of asset prices.
However, the dynamics of the global economic recovery remain fragile, with uncertainty regarding growth and deflationary risks in major developed economies.
Returning to the domestic economy, price indexes showed inflation exceeding expectations in the short term, due to food price increases and, perhaps, to more persistent inflation.
The market scenario considers the paths for the policy rate and the exchange rate extracted from the Focus survey.
Despite this revision, the Committees baseline scenario continues to contemplate disinflation in the Brazilian economy in the upcoming years.
One of the factors that contributed for this reduction was the favorable evolution of inflation expectations compiled by the Focus survey.
In prices is 0.5 p.p. higher than the forecast in the last The economy continues to operate with a high paths for the policy rate and the exchange rate level of economic slack, reflected in industrial extracted from the Focus survey.
One of the factors that the short term, due to food price increases and, contributed for this reduction was the favorable perhaps, to more persistent inflation.
These results evolution of inflation expectations compiled by the contributed to an additional increase in Focus survey.
The Copom uses the term relevant horizons for the conduct of monetary policy to refer to the period of time 3 Federal Open Market Committee.
Given the uncertainties involved in these estimates, this expression should not be perceived as 5 The Copom uses the term "conditional forecast" to referring to a rigid horizon.
The increase in food prices persists.
However, wholesale prices already show some signs of fading.
With the transmission of wholesale into retail prices, it is possible that a reversion of these prices at the consumer level occurs, decreasing risks of secondround effects of this shock on other prices in the economy.
Additionally, on the one hand, prolonged periods of high inflation and above-target expectations, such as in the recent Brazilian experience, tend to reinforce inertial mechanisms and make the disinflation process slower and costlier.
In this context, greater inflationary persistence requires greater monetary policy persistence.
On the other hand, the continuous softening of the labor market and the significant deceleration of economic activity can, in principle, produce faster disinflation - for example, in the services sector - than the one reflected in the inflation expectations measured by the Focus survey and in the conditional projections produced by the Copom.
The implementation of the necessary adjustments in the economy, including those of fiscal nature, presents itself as both a risk and an opportunity for the ongoing disinflationary process.
The risks would materialize if there were a perception that adjustments would be abandoned or postponed significantly.
In this scenario, the disinflationary process would tend to be slower, increasing the costs of bringing inflation to target.
On the other hand, the necessary adjustments in the economy can be approved and implemented more quickly, enabling confidence gains and falling inflation expectations.
In this case, the reduction of uncertainty would boost the effects of the ongoing monetary adjustment process.
Moreover, there are signs of possible gradual pickup in economic activity.
This perspective is corroborated by the improvement in forwardlooking indicators of economic activity, and by industrial production and investment data.
Regarding inflation, the Committee members mentioned results that printed above expectations in the short term, and the increase in projections for In this sense, they reasoned that the ongoing disinflation process has been evolving at a speed that is below the one pursued by the Committee.
Nevertheless, all agreed that there was progress with regards to expectations and projections over longer horizons.
However, the recent increase in uncertainty regarding the process of normalization of monetary policy in the United States increases the risk of interruption of this benign period.
In this context, all Committee members agreed on the need to monitor the pace of monetary policy normalization in the United States and its possible implications for the speed of inflation convergence.
There was also consensus on the continuation of the medium and long term risks in the external environment, associated with the fragility of the global economic recovery.
All members of the Monetary Policy Committee emphasized that the continuation of efforts for approval and implementation of adjustments in the economy, especially with regard to fiscal reforms, is essential to the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee should monitor these efforts closely, since they have important implications for the disinflation process.
There was no consensus on the speed of these adjustments, which suggests that they constitute, at the same time, both a risk and an opportunity.
All members agreed that the implications of the adjustment process in the economy for inflation dynamics depend not only on the impact of short term measures on aggregate demand, but also on the perception of improved dynamics of public finances in the medium and long term.
The members of the Committee highlighted that the fiscal adjustment process may involve measures with unfavorable direct effects on inflation, which is a risk to be monitored.
However, that is below the one pursued by the Committee.
In this context, greater inflationary relatively benign environment for emerging assets, persistence requires greater monetary policy which may continue.
However, the recent increase in persistence.
On the other hand, the continuous uncertainty regarding the process of normalization softening of the labor market and the significant of monetary policy in the United States increases the deceleration of economic activity can, in principle, risk of interruption of this benign period.
In this produce faster disinflation - for example, in the context, all Committee members agreed on the services sector - than the one reflected in the need to monitor the pace of monetary policy inflation expectations measured by the Focus survey normalization in the United States and its possible or postponed significantly.
In this scenario, the All members of the Monetary Policy Committee disinflationary process would tend to be slower, emphasized that the continuation of efforts for increasing the costs of bringing inflation to target.
The Committee should monitor these inflation expectations.
In this case, the reduction of efforts closely, since they have important uncertainty would boost the effects of the ongoing implications for the disinflation process.
There was monetary adjustment process.
The debate on the balance of risks to inflation looking indicators of economic activity, and by also focused on the degree of confidence regarding industrial production and investment data.
For shorter horizons, the emphasis fell on higher-than-expected inflation in the short term, and on the increase in conditional forecasts for the current year produced by the Copom.
For longer horizons, the Committee members discussed the effects of the level of spare capacity in the economy.
In particular, they highlighted the possible implications of the current scenario for the sensitivity of services inflation to the economic activity.
The Committee also discussed the implications of specifying economic conditionalities for monetary policy going forward, in contrast to the communication currently in place, which might be understood as involving a time dimension.
The Committee concluded that, for a given monetary policy stance, conditioning the future evolution of monetary policy on factors that matter for inflation can better transmit the economic rationality that guides the Committees decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and to improve Copom communication.
All Committee members showed satisfaction with the progress in the prospects for disinflation in the Brazilian economy in the relevant horizons for monetary policy.
The Committee will assess the evolution of the combination of such factors.
The Committee anticipates that the assessment of the impacts stemming from the evolution of these factors on the prospects for inflation will involve judgement based on available evidence.
There is no factor that is by itself determinant for monetary policy decisions.
In other words, neither of these factors is a necessary nor sufficient condition for an easing of monetary conditions.
For longer horizons, the Committee factors on the prospects for inflation will involve members discussed the effects of the level of spare judgement based on available evidence.
There is no capacity in the economy.
In particular, they factor that is by itself determinant for monetary highlighted the possible implications of the current policy decisions.
In other words, neither of these scenario for the sensitivity of services inflation to factors is a necessary nor sufficient condition for an the economic activity.
This contributes to increase transparency and to improve Copom communication.
All Committee members showed satisfaction with the progress in the prospects for disinflation in the Brazilian economy in the relevant horizons for monetary policy.
The Committee will assess the evolution of the combination of such factors.
