The market scenario considers the indicators for August came in below expectations.
Fluctuations at the current stage of the business cycle are common and probably explain the recent For 2016, the Copoms projections under the results.
Overall, the available evidence is consistent reference and market scenarios retreated since the with recent stabilization of the Brazilian economy.
Under the market the dynamics of global economy remain fragile, scenario, the forecast for 2017 remained essentially with uncertainty regarding its growth.
In this context, greater inflationary persistence requires greater The path of regulated prices, which enters the monetary policy persistence.
The process of approval and implementation of 4 the necessary adjustments in the economy, Extended Consumer Price Index. including those of fiscal nature, presents itself as both a risk and an opportunity for the ongoing room for the beginning of a process of gradual and disinflationary process.
The first steps in this moderate easing of monetary policy.
On Regarding current inflation, the Committee the other hand, the process is long and involves members mentioned the favorable results in the uncertainties.
The reduction of uncertainty would short run and the drop in forecasts for The enhance the effects of monetary policy.
Inflation forecasts for 2016, as measured by the Focus survey, have retreated in monetary policy a way that is compatible with this assessment.
The Committee members discussed the The conditional forecasts for inflation produced evolution of economic activity in the short term, in by the Copom assume a path for regulated prices the light of the most recent statistics, and agreed that is close to the one used in the latest IR.
A that indicators for August came in below number of factors may lead to changes in these expectations.
Nevertheless they reasoned that such forecasts.
The Copom analyzed service price inflation and its components.
The Committee members Regarding the international context, the highlighted the progress obtained in the members of the Committee pointed out the disinflation process of this IPCA component.
However, uncertainties regarding argued that, to some extent, the recent fall owes to the process of normalization of monetary policy in the reversion of earlier movements in more volatile the United States remain.
All Committee members items, and to the evolution of components that are agreed on the need to monitor the pace of sensitive to the recent food price disinflation.
There was also consensus on the monetary policy, the Committee members continuation of the medium- and long-term risks in concluded that there are signs of a recent pause in the external environment, associated with the the disinflationary process that had been observed fragility of global economic activity.
They also noted that this pause occurs at a The Committee analyzed its conditional level that, if maintained, would produce disinflation forecasts for inflation in different scenarios.
The at a slower pace than the one assumed in the Copom concluded that the evolution of the Copoms baseline scenario.
This scenario assumes a forecasts in the reference scenario over the gradual disinflation path going forward.
As a relevant horizon, which covers the calendar years consequence, the Committee members highlighted 2017 and 2018, indicate that there is room for a the need to monitor the resumption of this path.
On the other hand, forecasts under the market All members of the Committee recognized the scenario suggest that there are limits to the progress and the efforts for approval and magnitude of easing in the same horizon.
The The members of the Monetary Policy Committee members emphasized that these Committee pointed out that, besides the analysis of efforts are crucial for the stabilization and the conditional inflation forecasts, the favorable development of the Brazilian economy.
All Committee members agreed that the process of consideration of the favorable evolution of factors that allow greater proposed reforms has been faster than expected.
The Committee reaffirmed its goal of The Committee will assess the evolution of the conducting monetary policy in order to achieve the combination of such factors.
Hence, the Committee judges that currently there is no incompatibility between these two objectives.
In this context, the Copom members also discussed the implications of spelling out economic conditionalities for the pace and magnitude of the monetary easing just initiated.
The Committee concluded that conditioning the future evolution of monetary policy on factors that matter for inflation can better transmit the economic rationality that guides the Committees decisions.
The Committee judges that convergence of inflation to the 2017 and 2018 target is compatible with a moderate and gradual easing of monetary conditions.
