The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
In short, the set of available data confirm intensification of the process of distension in the labor market.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators point to moderation trend in the horizon relevant for monetary policy, with growth rates relatively more homogeneous in advanced economies, although low and below potential growth.
Particularly about Europe, despite recent monetary policy actions, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements restraining investments and growth.
In the United States, the trend is of economic recovery; however, some cooling in the dynamics of growth is anticipated.
In the emerging economies, the activity pace has been constantly revised downwards, in a scenario of uncertainties regarding the loss of strength in China and their implications for the global economy.
Regarding the monetary policy, in general, accommodative stances prevail in advanced and emerging economies, reinforced by signs of a gradual process of normalization of monetary conditions in the US.
The inflation rates remain at low levels in the advanced economies and relatively high in the emerging ones.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some components of global demand, accentuated by the effects of the slowdown of the Chinese economy, and of supply, influenced by the reduction of investments in the production process.
The structural primary surplus is considered as the fiscal indicator.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over the households confidence and consumption.
As a consequence, high inflation rates reduce the potential of economic growth, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to the projected inflation by the BCB and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect, in a more long-lasting manner, the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Committee considers that the external environment remains complex, and that the uncertainties increased.
However, despite the occurrence of episodes of higher volatility affecting important emerging economies, the Committee also identifies low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets.
For the Committee, the trend for global activity shows more moderation throughout the monetary policy relevant horizon.
The recent prospects indicate modest activity recovery in the advanced economies, while important emerging economies experience a transition period.
In this context, of reduction in the activity pace, it bears highlighting the growing concern regarding the Chinese economy and its developments over the other economies.
Regarding oil, the Committee highlights that, regardless of the behavior of the domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international prices tends to be transmitted to the domestic economy through productive chains, such as the petrochemical.
It should also be noted the increased uncertainties generated by low oil prices and their implications for sectoral companies and producing countries, as well as for the financial markets in general, with risks to global financial stability.
The Copom reaffirms that, in accordance to the macroeconomic adjustment process underway, the available indicators show that the domestic absorption and GDP growth rates have continued to adjust, pointing to domestic activity expansion pace this year lower than the previously expected.
This process has been especially intensified by the uncertainties arising from the effect of non-economic events.
In particular, investment has retreated, mainly influenced by the occurrence of these events, and private consumption also shows contraction signals, in line with data regarding credit, employment and income.
However, for the Committee, after a necessary period of adjustments, which has been more intense and longer than anticipated, as companies and households confidence strengthen, the activity expansion pace tends to intensify.
Moreover, the Committee evaluates that, in the medium term, important changes should take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
Consumption tends to grow at a moderate pace and the investments tend to gain momentum.
These changes, coupled with other ones currently underway, anticipate a composition for aggregate demand growth in the medium term more favorable to potential growth.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the depreciation of the BRL contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economic growth.
Regarding the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in longer horizons, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry, agriculture and livestock have emerged.
The services sector, on its turn, tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
However, the speed of materialization of these changes and of the gains resulting from them depends, fundamentally, on a path of primary surpluses that strengthens the perception of the public sector balance sustainability, in addition to the reduction on uncertainties surrounding the domestic and international environment.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
Relative to the structural fiscal result and depending on the economic cycle, the Committee considers that, during the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, the balance of the public sector tends to shift to the neutral zone, and does not rule out the hypothesis of migration to the fiscal restraint area, even if more slowly and with lower intensity than previously antecipated.
However, the Committee observes that the lack of definitions and the significant changes in the trajectory of primary surpluses generation, as well as in its composition, impact the hypotheses considered for inflation projections and contribute to create a negative perception regarding the macroeconomic environment and have negatively impacted inflation expectations.
Concerning inflation control, the Committee highlights that the literature and the best international practices recommend a consistent and sustainable fiscal policy framework, in order to allow the monetary policy actions to be fully transmitted to prices.
The Copom highlights that the main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion, which had already been observed and tends to persist.
Regarding this issue, it is important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong expansion, consumer credit has moderated, so that, over the last quarters, there was, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks, and, on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, as illustrated by actions that were implemented, the Committee considers as opportune to continue to reinforce the initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, as anticipated by previous Minutes, the Copom observes that the idleness margin in the labor market has increased at a stronger pace, with data confirming the acceleration in the process of distension in this market.
However, there is still the prevalence of significant risk related, particularly, to the possibility of concession of high nominal wages increases, with negative impacts over inflation.
In spite of the occurrence of real wage changes more consistent with the estimates for the labor productivity gains, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
For the Copom, the fact that inflation stands at high levels reflects, in large part, the occurrence of two important relative prices adjustment processes underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices relative to market prices.
The Committee also considers that, over 2015, these relative prices ajustments in the economy, among other factors, have made the balance of risks to inflation unfavorable.
In this context, as anticipated in previous Minutes, these price adjustments caused inflation to rise in 2015, requiring determination and perseverance to prevent its transmission to longer horizons.
While recognizing that these relative prices adjustments have direct impacts over inflation, the Committee reaffirms its view that the monetary policy can, should and is containing the second order effects stemming from them.
Given the above, assessing the macroeconomic scenario and the inflation prospects, the Copom considers that uncertainties surrounding the balance of risks remain, mainly on the speed of the fiscal results recovery process and its composition, and that the relative price realignment process has been slower and more intense than the previously anticipated.
In addition, the uncertainties regarding the external scenario increased, with highlights to the growing concern with the performance of the Chinese economy and its developments and with the evolution of prices in the oil market.
Part of its members argued that it would be appropriate to adjust, immediately, the monetary conditions, in order to reduce the risks of non-compliance of the inflation targeting regime objectives and reinforce the process of anchoring the inflation expectations.
The Copom reaffirms that the aggregate demand will continue to be moderate in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to be influenced by factors such as employment, income and credit; on the other hand, the concession of public services and the expansion of agricultural income, among other factors, tend to benefit investments.
On its turn, the net exports show better results, either by increasing exports, benefited by the depreciation of the BRL, or by the ongoing import substitution process.
Moreover, the uncertainties regarding the behavior of the global economy increased.
