The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Copom's baseline scenario assumes that this recovery will occur at a gradual pace.
The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The outlook remains uncertain, however, and risks of a more pronounced slowdown in global growth persist.
This includes the components that are Policy most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Copom members discussed the evolution of economic Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022 activity in light of available information and indicators.
Copom members also discussed factors that could affect is true for the scenario with interest rate and exchange rate economic activity, in the context of the deep adjustments paths extracted from the Focus survey.
In this scenario, the that the Brazilian economy requires, notably those of fiscal conditioning factors have opposite effects on inflation for nature.
In a context of limited fiscal space, they emphasized On the one hand, additional monetary stimulus from the importance of the continuation of the process of reforms lower interest rates contributes to increasing inflation over and adjustments that contribute to the sustainability of fiscal the relevant horizon.
On the other hand, the scenario policy.
By reducing fundamental uncertainties about the considers exchange rate appreciation in the short run, which Brazilian economy, these reforms tend to stimulate private constitutes a vector in the opposite direction.
This potential expansionary effect should the aforementioned currency appreciation become clear in counterbalance the impact of current fiscal adjustments on the hybrid scenario with interest rate path from the Focus economic activity, as well as mitigate the risk of episodes of survey and an agnostic hypothesis of constant exchange rate, large increase in risk premia.
These efforts are fundamental for the balance of risks around the baseline inflation scenario.
All resumption of economic activity and development of the members emphasized the importance of continuing the Brazilian economy.
They also assessed that while the process.
On the one hand, central banks of several economies some major economies included have Copom members assessed that economic conditions with provided additional monetary stimuli, which contribute to anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation easing global financial conditions.
On the other hand, the measures at comfortable levels, scenarios with 2020 inflation Copom judges that the risks associated with a slowing global projected below or slightly below target, and high level of economy remain and that economic policy and geopolitical slack in the economy prescribe stimulative monetary policy, uncertainties notably trade disputes and geopolitical i.e., interest rates below the structural interest rate level.
The tensions may contribute to even lower global growth.
Committee members expressed the view that the current Uncertainties in the external scenario imply risks to assets level of _ex-ante real interest rates provides stimulus to the_ whose pricing hinge heavily on a scenario with low global economy.
In this context, the Copom members once The structural interest rate is a reference for the conduct again highlighted the capability of the Brazilian economy to of monetary policy.
The latter measures are deemed to be at appropriate level, considering all factors that affect the comfortable levels.
Short-term projections indicate that 12- evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the month inflation is expected to decline in the coming months balance of risks, and economic activity.
Under the and to revert, at the end of the year, to levels around those aforementioned circumstances, this implies evaluating observed until August.
This short-term trajectory reflects, whether the degree of monetary stimulus is adequate.
It is among other factors, the benign behavior of some volatile worth highlighting that the provision of monetary stimulus inflation components and the dynamics of imported inflation, requires an environment with anchored inflation whose upward drivers have been moderated by the path of expectations.
The same reforms and perseverance in the necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy are essential for the reduction of its this agenda is fundamental for the consolidation of the structural interest rate, for the full operation of monetary benign scenario for prospective inflation.
The Committee also stresses that the perception of continuation In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the baseline of the reform agenda affects current expectations and scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes adjusting the macroeconomic projections.
In particular, the Committee degree of monetary stimulus, lowering the Selic rate by 0.50 judges that concrete progress in this agenda is fundamental percentage point.
The Committee deems that the for the consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective inflation inflation.
The Copom also discussed the advisability of providing The following members of the Committee voted for this some perspective on possible monetary policy scenarios.
Given the decision to clarify conditionalities for the Paulo Srgio Neves de Souza. conduct of monetary policy, which best conveys the economic rationality that guides its decisions, the Copom deemed it essential to emphasize that the communication of this assessment does not constrain its next decision, and to reiterate that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on in the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation projections and expectations.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom sees progress in the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy, but emphasizes that persevering in this process is essential for the reduction of its structural interest rate and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee also stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
