Recent data on economic activity suggest that the The Copoms baseline scenario for inflation encompasses risk factors in both directions.
The global outlook remains challenging.
On the other hand, the risks associated with a slowdown in global growth remain.
The Committee judges that, although the risk associated with economic slack has increased at the margin, the balance of risks is symmetric.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running at appropriate levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Committee members discussed the evolution of economic activity in light of available data.
In growth, as collected by the Focus survey.
Although they tend to decay over time, their effects on economic activity persist even after their direct impacts have ceased.
Brazilian economy would have experienced otherwise, over the course of 2019 and The Committee and that some of their effects still persist.
Copom members communication was interpreted in regard to the need emphasized, however, that the consolidation of this to observe the Brazilian economy in order to produce favorable scenario with inflation on target in the an assessment of its performance in recent quarters.
It medium and long terms depends on the pace of is worth noting that, in addition to the shocks already necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian discussed, uncertainties about fundamental aspects of economy, which are essential for the sustainability of the future economic environment notably fiscal the environment with anchored inflations sustainability have adverse effects on economic expectations.
Although the assessment that the risk Copom members also discussed other factors that associated with economic slack has increased at the could hinder economic growth, given the need for deep margin, all members agreed that the balance of risks is adjustments in the Brazilian economy, notably those of symmetric.
They concluded that the persistence of uncertainties regarding fiscal sustainability tend to be Copom members assessed that caution, serenity, contractionary.
Reforms that lead to sustainability of and perseverance in conducting monetary policy fiscal policy have expansionary potential, which can decisions, in the face of uncertainties regarding offset the effects of short- run fiscal adjustment on economic scenarios, is the best way of keeping inflation economic activity, in addition to mitigating the risks of on a trajectory towards the targets.
They then bouts of instability with increased risk premia, as discussed the advisability of ceasing to repeat this witnessed in message in their communication, since it is a matter of principle that should already be well assimilated.
These efforts are fundamental Copom members assessed that economic for the resumption of economic activity and the conditions with anchored inflation expectations, development of the Brazilian economy.
Although developed economies and the communication of major estimates of this rate involve a high degree of central banks, Copoms baseline scenario deem the uncertainty, Committee members expressed the view risks associated with normalization of interest rates in that the current _ex-ante real interest rates provide_ some advanced economies to be low in the short and stimulus to the economy.
Copom members judge that risks associated with a slowing global economy remain and The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that uncertainties about economic policies and of that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy.
All geopolitical nature may contribute to even lower members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus global growth.
In this context, Copom members once depends on the outlook conditions, particularly again highlighted that the Brazilian economy is capable inflation expectations, and the level of slack in the of withstanding a setback in the international scenario, economy, balance of risks and inflation projections.
Committee members discussed recent inflation The Copom stresses that the continuation of projections and the levels of various measures of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian underlying inflation.
They assessed that those economy is essential to the reduction of its structural measures are at appropriate levels, and that inflation interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess projections indicate convergence of inflation to target the estimates of this rate over time.
Committee members then discussed the monetary interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
They unanimously decided to expectations and macroeconomic projections.
In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the Committee members reiterated their preference baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The of monetary policy, which better transmits the Committee deems important to observe how the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This Brazilian economy will behave over time, without the contributes to increase transparency and enhance remaining effects of the various shocks that hit the Copoms communications.
The Copom deems economy last year and, especially, with reduction of the important to observe how the Brazilian economy will degree of uncertainty to which the Brazilian economy behave over time, without the remaining effects of the remains exposed.
The Copom judges that this various shocks that hit the economy last year and, assessment takes time and should not be completed in especially, with reduction of the degree of uncertainty the short run.
The Copom emphasizes that the next to which the Brazilian economy remains exposed.
The steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to Committee judges that this assessment takes time and depend on the evolution of economic activity, the should not be completed in the short run.
The Copom balance of risks, and on inflation projections and emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of expectations.
The Committee also Maurcio Costa de Moura, Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, stresses that the perception of continuation of the Paulo Srgio Neves de Souza, and Tiago Couto Berriel.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, to a greater extent, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
