The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Copom's scenario assumes that this recovery will occur at a gradual pace.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running at appropriate levels.
This includes the components that are more sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Copom members discussed the evolution of economic activity in light of the available information The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario and indicators.
In this context, the Copom members once Copom members also discussed factors that could again highlighted the capability of the Brazilian affect economic activity, in the context of the deep economy to withstand a setback in the international adjustments that the Brazilian economy requires, scenario, given its robust balance of payments, notably those of fiscal nature.
In a context of limited anchored inflation expectations, and prospects of fiscal space, they emphasized the relevance of the continuing structural reforms and of economic approval of the Social Security Reform by the National recovery.
Congress, but reinforced the importance of the continuation of the reforms and adjustments that The Committee members discussed recent contribute to the sustainability of fiscal policy.
By inflation projections and the levels of various measures reducing fundamental uncertainties about the Brazilian of underlying inflation.
The latter measures are economy, these reforms tend to work in the same deemed to be at comfortable levels.
Estimates and direction as the monetary policy and, therefore, to short-term projections indicate that the 12-month stimulate private investment.
This potential inflation most likely retreated in October to levels near expansionary effect should counterbalance the impact the lows observed during the inflation targeting of current fiscal adjustments on economic activity, as regime, and should rise again over the last months of well as mitigate the risks of large increases in risk the year.
This short-term trajectory reflects a lower premia.
These efforts are fundamental for the economic recovery and development of the Brazilian In the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the economy.
Some Copom contributed to increasing inflation over the relevant members pointed out that changes in the credit market horizon.
On the other hand, some administered price and financial intermediation, such as the greater role adjustments were brought forward to 2019, and, played by non-earmarked credit and capital markets, together with the decline in the Focus survey inflation may affect the monetary policy transmission channel.
Given that monetary than-expected 2020 inflation and the revision of policy operates with lags in the economy, especially to administered prices.
On the one hand, central banks policy, and high level of slack in the economy prescribe of several economies some major economies included stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below have provided additional monetary stimuli, which the structural level.
The Committee members contribute to easing global financial conditions.
On the expressed the view that the current level of ex-ante real other hand, the Copom judges that the risks associated interest rates provides stimulus to the economy.
Uncertainties in the external The Copom reiterates its view that the continuity The Copom sees progress in the process of reforms of reforms and perseverance in the necessary and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy, adjustments in the Brazilian economy are essential for but emphasizes that persevering in this process is the consolidation of the reduction of the structural essential to allow for the consolidation of the reduction interest rate, for the full operation of monetary policy, of the structural interest rate and for a sustainable and for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee also stresses that Committee also stresses that the perception of the perception of continuation of the reform agenda continuation of the reform agenda affects current affects current expectations and macroeconomic expectations and macroeconomic projections.
They unanimously the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage point.
The Copom judges providing some perspective on possible monetary that the current stage of the business cycle policy scenarios.
The Committee decided to express its recommends caution when considering possible new assessment that the consolidation of the benign changes in the degree of stimulus.
The Committee scenario for prospective inflation should permit an reiterates that communicating this assessment does additional adjustment, of the same magnitude, to the not restrict its next decisions, and emphasizes that the degree of monetary stimulus.
The members of the Copom decided to stress activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation that the current stage of the business cycle projections and expectations.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2020 and, to a lesser extent, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
