The Copom members analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Junior Executive Secretariat Arnildo da Silva Correa Head of the Economic Advisors Office Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Senior Advisor to the Board Eugnio Pacceli Ribeiro Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policys Office Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho Deputy Head of the Research Department Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha Head of the Department of Statistics Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan Financial System Monitoring Department economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Recent data on economic activity continue to The Copoms baseline scenario for inflation indicate a gradual recovery of the Brazilian economy.
The global outlook remains challenging, despite some decline in risks and a change in composition.
On the one hand, short-term risks associated with the normalization of interest rates in some advanced economies have receded.
On the other hand, there was an increase in risks related to a slowdown in global growth, as a result of several uncertainties, such as trade conflicts and Brexit.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running at appropriate or comfortable levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
In particular, the members discussed evidence of some slowdown in activity in the fourth quarter of 2018, when compared to the previous quarter.
Taking into account the shocks that occurred during 2018, they concluded that the evolution of the economic activity is consistent with the Copoms baseline scenario of a gradual recovery of the Brazilian economy.
The Copom members pointed out that an acceleration in the pace of the economic recovery will depend on the decrease in uncertainties regarding the approval and implementation of reformsnotably those of fiscal natureand adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
They also stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and the development of the Brazilian economy.
The global outlook remains challenging, despite some decline in risks and a change in composition.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee discussed the contrasting scenarios for the evolution of the US economy.
The first possible scenariowhich seems to have affected the US yield curve and stock markets in the last months of 2018involves risk of a significant economic slowdown.
The second scenario assumes continuity of the vigorous economic growth.
The two scenarios have opposite effects on the conduct of the monetary policy by the Fed.
Copom members concluded that, at least until one of the scenarios becomes more likely, risks associated with the normalization of monetary policy in the US have reduced.
In addition, they recognized that, given the slowdown in activity in some relevant economies, the risks associated with a weakening in the global economy have intensified.
The Committee also noted that uncertainties, such as those associated with the continued expansion of international trade and Brexit, could contribute to lower overall growth.
In this context, the Copom members once again highlighted the capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its robust balance of payments and the environment of anchored inflation expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
The members of the Committee discussed the recent inflation projections and the levels of various measures of underlying inflation.
They assessed that those measures are at appropriate or comfortable levels, and that inflation projections indicate a convergence of inflation to target over the course of 2019 and This path is consistent with inflation expectations, which remain anchored.
The Copom members emphasized, however, that the consolidation of this scenario in the medium and long terms depends on the pace of necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
However, the members highlighted that upside risks to inflation remain significant, and with larger weight on their balance of risks.
Therefore, the Committee concluded that the balance of risks remains asymmetric, albeit to a lesser degree.
The members of the Committee discussed the best way monetary policy should be conducted in the face of uncertainties regarding economic scenarios.
They concluded that caution, serenity, and perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the face of volatile scenarios, is the best way to keep inflation on path towards the targets.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to the economy.
The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus depends on economic conditions, inflation expectations, the balance of risks and inflation projections.
Importantly, the provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment with anchored inflation expectations.
The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess the estimates of this rate over time.
The Copom then discussed the advisability of signaling the future evolution of monetary policy.
All members considered that the current environment prescribes retaining greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which requires refraining from providing indications of its next steps.
The members of the Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing their commitment to conducting monetary policy in order to maintain the path for prospective inflation in line with inflation targets.
The Committee members reiterated their preference for communicating the conditionalities in the conduct of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to transparency and enhances Copoms communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
The Committee discussed the targets for 2019 and 2020, and high level of slack in contrasting scenarios for the evolution of the US the economy prescribe accommodative monetary economy.
The first possible scenariowhich seems policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural interest to have affected the US yield curve and stock markets rate level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a in the last months of 2018involves risk of a high degree of uncertainty, the Committee members significant economic slowdown.
The second scenario expressed the view that the current ex-ante real assumes continuity of the vigorous economic growth.
In this context, reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian the Copom members once again highlighted the economy is essential to the reduction of its structural capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess setback in the international scenario, given its robust the estimates of this rate over time.
The members of terms depends on the pace of necessary reforms and the Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
The Committee members reiterated their However, the members highlighted that upside risks to monetary policy decisions, even in the face of volatile All Committee members once again emphasized scenarios, is the best way to keep inflation on path that the approval and implementation of reforms towards the targets.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and is consistent with the convergence of inflation to target over the horizon relevant for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, with a smaller and gradually increasing weight, The Committee reiterates that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for maintaining low inflation in the medium and long runs, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the baseline scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Copom asserts that caution, serenity, and perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the face of volatile scenarios, have been instrumental in pursuing its primary objective of keeping the inflation path towards the targets.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of baseline scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Copom asserts that caution, serenity, and perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the Couto Berriel.
