The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running at comfortable levels, including the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
They concluded that the conditions are favorable, despite some volatility The hybrid scenario with a constant exchange rate at inherent to those measures.
This easing of financial conditions has been more clearly reflected in the dynamics of non-earmarked credit and capital markets, which are growing at robust rates in this stage of the economic cycle.
The Committee members beginning of a gradual process of financial expressed the view that the current level of ex-ante real disintermediation.
Copom members also Committee judges that this decision reflects its conjectured about the sensitivity of macroeconomic baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the variables to monetary policy, since there are no associated balance of risks, and it is consistent with historical precedents in the Brazilian history for the convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant current degree of stimulus.
Copom members judge horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which that changes in the credit and capital markets tend to includes 2020 and, to a lesser extent, bolster the power of monetary policy.
The Copom reiterates that economic conditions Copom members also reflected on the level of prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest economic slack.
Some members argued that the latest rates below the structural level.
On the other hand, the and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
The Committee stresses that the perception of the continuation of the Regarding the global outlook, the Committee reform agenda affects current expectations and members deemed the scenario as relatively favorable macroeconomic projections.
Central banks of several economies some major economies included have provided monetary stimuli, which contribute to easing The Copom judges that the current stage of the global financial conditions.
The Copom emphasizes that its next steps will continue to depend on the evolution of In the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation scenario with the interest rate path from the Focus projections and expectations.
The projections consider a direct effect Barros, Fabio Kanczuk, Fernanda Feitosa Nechio, Joo more concentrated in the last two months of this year, Manoel Pinho de Mello, Maurcio Costa de Moura, constituting the main factor that increased 2019 Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, and Paulo Srgio Neves de projections.
Regarding administered prices, benign Souza.
This process has been occurring in recent months and will probably continue over the next quarters.
