Nevertheless, the risks associated with a slowdown in reversal of the benign outlook for emerging global growth remain.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running The Committee acknowledges that the balance of at comfortable levels.
The Committee attributes this movement basically to the expectations of adjustment in the degree of monetary policy accomodation, to the benign evolution of financial conditions in global markets, and to the prospects for improving the fundamentals of the Brazilian economy.
The latter, a result of the progress in the agenda of reforms and necessary adjustments in the economy.
They stressed that the persistence of uncertainties regarding fiscal Committee members then discussed the evolution, sustainability tends to be contractionary.
All members agreed that the balance of risks require greater predictability of future scenarios.
In a has evolved favorably.
In particular, they underlined the context of limited fiscal space for public investment, importance of concrete progress in the process of they emphasized the importance of the continuation of reforms and adjustments required by the Brazilian the process of reforms and adjustments that economy, which are fundamental for maintaining the contribute to the sustainability of fiscal policy.
By benign environment for prospective inflation, with reducing fundamental uncertainties about the Brazilian anchored expectations.
The Committee considers that economy, these reforms tend to stimulate private the risk of a possible frustration of expectations investment.
This potential expansionary effect should, regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary to some extent, offset the impact of current fiscal adjustments in the Brazilian economy is still the main adjustments on economic activity, as well as mitigate factor in its balance of risks.
The Committee members expressed business environment.
These efforts are fundamental the view that the current level of ex-ante real interest for the resumption of economic activity and rates provides stimulus to the economy.
When this policy yields a process.
As the structural rate is not members considered that it evolved in a benign way.
Nonetheless, the Copom judges Copom assesses whether the Selic rate is at an that the risks associated with a slowing global appropriate level, considering all factors that affect the economy remain and that economic policy and evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the geopolitical uncertainties notably trade disputes and balance of risks, and economic activity.
Under the geopolitical tensions may contribute to even lower aforementioned circumstances, this implies evaluating global growth.
Given the risks still present in the whether the degree of monetary stimulus is adequate.
Reforms and other changes to the economic environment may affect The Committee members discussed recent the structural rate in different ways, depending on inflation projections and the levels of various measures their effects on these two components.
The risk-free of underlying inflation.
The latter measures are component depends on the structural determinants of deemed to be at comfortable levels.
In the horizon consumption and savings, on the one hand, and relevant to monetary policy, which includes the investments, on the other hand.
Through this component, factors that persistently increase the rationality that guides its decisions, the Copom willingness to invest push the economy's structural deemed it essential to emphasize that the interest rate upward.
However, these same factors may communication of this assessment does not constrain contribute to the reduction of the structural rate by its next decision, and to reiterate that the next steps in lowering its risk premium component, if they imply an the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend increase in the economy's growth potential and, on in the evolution of economic activity, the balance of therefore, greater fiscal policy sustainability.
The Committee judges that retirement.
Through these channels, the reform this decision reflects its baseline scenario for contributes to reducing the risk-free component of the prospective inflation and the associated balance of structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy.
Additionally, the reform induces an increase in labor The Copom reiterates that economic conditions supply and tends to stimulate private investment by prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest reducing uncertainties about fundamental aspects of rates below the structural level.
Taking into account only the last two channels, the reform would tend to increase the structural interest rate.
Notwithstanding the The Copom recognizes progress in the process of complexity of the channels through which the Pension reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian reform may influence the structural interest rate of the economy, but emphasizes that the continuation of this Brazilian economy, when only its net effect is process is essential for the reduction of its structural considered, the Copom understands that the reform interest rate and for sustainable economic recovery.
In particular, the Committee judges that concrete The Copom reiterates its view that the progress in this agenda is fundamental for the continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective the Brazilian economy is essential for the reduction of inflation.
The Committee also stresses that the In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the perception of continuation of the reform agenda baseline scenario and, especially, of the balance of risks affects current expectations and macroeconomic prescribes adjusting the degree of monetary stimulus, projections.
In particular, the Committee judges that lowering the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage point.
The concrete progress in this agenda is fundamental for the Committee deems that the consolidation of the benign consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective scenario for prospective inflation should permit inflation.
The Committee decided to express its Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Fernanda Feitosa assessment that the consolidation of the benign Nechio, Joo Manoel Pinho de Mello, Maurcio Costa de scenario for prospective inflation should permit Moura, Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, and Paulo Srgio Neves additional adjustment of the degree of stimulus.
