The Committee members discussed the evolution of economic activity in light of available data.
They The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario with confirmed the slowdown in activity during the last quarter interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted from the of 2018, which ran below the expected pace.
In this scenario, so-called "statistical carry-over.
Committee members judge that these shocks agreed that the balance of risks is symmetric. must have significantly reduced the growth that the Brazilian economy would have experienced in their Copom members assessed that caution, serenity, absence.
They also point out that an acceleration in the and perseverance in conducting monetary policy pace of economic recovery to more robust levels will decisions, in the face of uncertainties regarding depend on a reduction of uncertainties regarding the economic scenarios, is the best way of keeping inflation approval and implementation of reforms notably those on a trajectory towards the targets.
Moreover, they stress the importance The Copom members assessed that economic of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, conditions with anchored inflation expectations, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and underlying inflation measures at appropriate or improvements in the business environment.
These comfortable levels, inflation projected to move toward efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic targets for 2019 and 2020, and high level of slack in the activity and the development of the Brazilian economy.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of members considered that it remains challenging for uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the emerging economies.
The Committee discussed the view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide contrast of different scenarios for the evolution or the US stimulus to the economy.
The first scenario comprises a significant deceleration of economic activity.
The second scenario The Committee also discussed the conditionalities assumes continuity of the strength exhibited in recent that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy.
These two scenarios have opposite implications members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus for the conduct of monetary policy by the Fed, which depends on the outlook conditions, particularly inflation signaled that it intends to wait for the resolution of this expectations, and the level of slack in the economy, uncertainty over time.
In addition, Copom members balance of risks and inflation projections.
Importantly, the recognized that, given the slowdown in activity in some provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment relevant economies, the risks associated with a with anchored inflation expectations.
Europe is showing signs of a significant economic The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms slowdown and uncertainty drivers can contribute to even and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is slower global growth.
In this context, the Copom essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
They assessed that those measures are at appropriate or comfortable levels, and that inflation The Committee members reiterated their preference projections indicate convergence of inflation to target for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct of over the course of 2019 and The Committee monetary policy, which better transmits the economic foresees an increase in inflation during the next months, rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to which should lead twelve-month inflation to reach a peak increase transparency and enhance Copoms around April or May.
The Committee deems important to inflation should recede and close the year at the levels observe how the Brazilian economy will behave over projected in paragraphs 6 and The Copom members time, with lower uncertainty and without the effects of the emphasized, however, that the consolidation of this various shocks that hit the economy last year.
The favorable scenario in the medium and long terms Committee judges that this assessment takes time and depends on the pace of necessary reforms and should not be completed in the short run.
The Copom adjustments in the Brazilian economy, which are emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of essential for the sustainability of the environment with monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution anchored inflations expectations.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, with gradually increasing weight, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the baseline scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Committee deems important to observe how the Brazilian economy will behave over time, with lower uncertainty and without the effects of the various shocks that hit the economy last year.
The Copom judges that this assessment takes time and should not be completed in the short run.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
The Copom asserts that caution, serenity, and perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the face of volatile scenarios, have been instrumental in pursuing its primary objective of keeping the inflation path towards the targets.
