Various measures of underlying inflation are running at appropriate levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
The Committee members discussed the evolution of economic activity in light of available data.
The The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario members concluded that the process of economic with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted recovery came to a halt in the past quarters.
In addition, financial conditions which had tightened significantly between the second and fourth quarters of 2018 have already moved into more stimulative territory.
In this context, the Copom's baseline scenario assumes resumption of the process of economic recovery ahead, in a gradual fashion.
In particular, inflation around the target.
All members agreed that the balance to future sustainability.
By reducing fundamental of risks has evolved favorably.
Nevertheless, the uncertainties about the Brazilian economy, these Copom members stressed that the consolidation of the reforms tend to stimulate private investment.
This benign scenario reflected in inflation expectations and potential expansionary effect should, to some extent, in the aforementioned conditional projections depends offset the impact of short-term fiscal adjustments on on the pace of necessary reforms and adjustments in economic activity, as well as mitigate the risk of the Brazilian economy, which are essential for the episodes of large risk premium increases, as witnessed sustainability of the environment with anchored in inflations expectations.
A possible frustration of expectations regarding the continuity of these reforms The Copom stressed the understanding that an and adjustments may affect risk premia and increase acceleration of the pace of recovery of the economy to the path for inflation over the relevant horizon for the more robust levels will also depend on other initiatives conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee judges aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, that, at this time, this factor prevails in its balance of greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements risks.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity The Copom members assessed that economic and development of the Brazilian economy.
Major central target, and high level of slack in the economy prescribe banks clearly indicated a willingness to provide stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below additional monetary stimuli in case of need, which the structural interest rate level.
The structural interest contributed to easing global financial conditions.
In light of evidence of inflation.
As the structural rate is not observable and economic slowdown in several countries, some Copom economic activity and inflation depend on several other members considered that the global environment may factors, estimates of this rate involve a high degree of be more relevant to the dynamics of economic activity uncertainty and are continually reassessed by the than previously anticipated.
In this context, the Copom Committee.
Nevertheless, the Committee members members once again highlighted the capability of the expressed the view that the current _ex-ante real_ Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the interest rates provide stimulus to the economy.
This international scenario, given its robust balance of assessment is not inconsistent with recent lower-than- payments, anchored inflation expectations, and expected economic performance, since economic prospects of future structural reforms and resumption activity is influenced by several other factors, as of economic recovery ahead.
The Committee members discussed recent The Committee also discussed the conditionalities inflation projections and the levels of various measures that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy.
The latter measures are members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus deemed to be at appropriate levels.
With regard to the depends on the outlook, particularly on inflation shorter-term projections, they pointed out that the fall expectations, the level of slack in the economy, the of food inflation and recent favorable movements in balance of risks, and inflation projections.
Importantly, fuel and electricity prices tend to produce lower the provision of monetary stimulus requires an inflation than previously predicted.
These revisions environment with anchored inflation expectations.
In reduction of the degree of uncertainty to which it particular, the Committee judges that concrete remains exposed.
This baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes contributes to increase transparency and enhance keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom Copoms communications. emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the The Copom reiterates its view that the continuity of evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian on inflation projections and expectations.
In de Mello, Maurcio Costa de Moura, Otvio Ribeiro particular, the Committee judges that concrete Damaso, Paulo Srgio Neves de Souza, and Tiago Couto progress in this agenda is fundamental for the Berriel. consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective inflation.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, mainly, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Committee deems important to observe how the Brazilian economy will behave over time, with reduction of the degree of uncertainty to which it remains exposed.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for the reduction of its structural interest rate and for sustainable economic recovery.
