Underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB, in general, have performed similarly to headline inflation.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on inflation for consumers will depend on the current and prospective conditions of the demand and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation trend.
The index in April was 0.4 p.p.
The slower growth of the economically active population in the recent period has contributed to the maintenance of low employment rates, despite the moderation in the pace of job creation.
In short, the set of available data indicates that, although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current outlook and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
In April, the index evolved positively by the second consecutive month, boosted by the improvement in expectations.
In the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the improvement in the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
Still according to the FGV, the difference between the share of companies that reported excess inventories and those which reported insufficient inventories showed an increase in May, according to the seasonally adjusted series, after four consecutive falls.
These risks are evidenced, for example, in private liquidity shifts among countries in the Euro Area, as well as in high assets prices in economies with solid fundamentals.
High rates of unemployment for a long period, coupled with fiscal adjustment needs, the limited scope for countercyclical policy actions and political uncertainty are translated into projections of low growth in mature economies.
In China, activity indicators for April, in particular industrial production and total external trade, indicate slowdown during the second quarter.
Regarding monetary policy, mature economies have persisted with strongly accommodative stances.
Core inflation remained at moderate levels in the US, Euro Area and Japan, considering the relatively moderate prospects for the activity level in these regions.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with additional countercyclical policies.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the reduction of growth targets in China, coupled with the fragility of the global economy, should generate some impact over commodities prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
The main scenario also considers the estimated effects stemming from the current deterioration of the international scenario over the Brazilian economy, but without the observance of extreme events.
It is noteworthy that part of this estimated impact is already being observed in recent economic activity and price indicators.
For 2013, the inflation projection remained stable in the reference scenario and declined in the market scenario, but still stands above the midpoint target in both cases.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the 5 transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that, in general, the restrictions to which several mature economies were exposed have changed little.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited leeway for monetary policy actions, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, in important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, as a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand, through the external trade channel.
In specific cases, changes in the growth pattern are anticipated, a development that tends to be permanent.
Therefore, until now, the Committee evaluates that the international scenario has shown disinflationary bias.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, moderation of total trade, moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
Another transmission channel of great importance is the impact over businessmen confidence.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment added up to those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity.
In other words, the moderation process the Brazilian economy was already experiencing in the first half of last year was intensified by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates, however, that although domestic demand expansion has also been moderate, prospects for economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters are favorable, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply both for individuals and corporate; and by the fact that consumers and businessmens confidence, stands at high levels.
The Copom understands, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter of 2011, tends to continue the decline and, therefore, to move towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the economic agents expectations, especially price setters, about the inflation dynamics of in this and in the upcoming quarters.
Additionally, the Committee understands that this improvement in the sentiment tends to be boosted by the moderation observed in the last quarters in the producer prices dynamic.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has stabilized and is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Copom considers that the deceleration of the Brazilian economy in the second half of 2011 was deeper than expected, and that recovery has materialized in a very gradual way.
Moreover, it also notes that recent events indicate the postponement of a final solution for the European financial crisis, and that the risks related to the deleveraging process stemming from banks, households and government - under way in major economic blocks remain elevated.
These and other elements, therefore, constitute an economic environment in which a much above-than-usual uncertainty level prevails.
The Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, the inflation rate stands around the target in In short, the Copom considers that, at the present moment, the risks to the inflation trajectory remain limited.
The Committee also notes that, until now, due to the global economys fragility, the external sector contribution has been disinflationary.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
On the other hand, the Committee considers that recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Another important factor to curb aggregate demand is the still fragile international scenario.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, even considering that the activity recovery has occurred more slowly than anticipated, the Committee believes that, given the cumulative and lagged effects of policy actions implemented so far, any additional monetary easing movement should be conducted with parsimony.
The monthly result reflected acceleration in market and regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA-15 change was mainly due to the increase in the prices of food and beverages, main driver of the index increase in May, which contributed 0.14 p.p., compared to 0.07 p.p. in April, personal expenses and housing, with respective contributions of 0.13 p.p. and 0.12 p.p..
Three out of the five IPCA-15 core measures calculated by the BCB accelerated in the month, while in the twelve months through May, the deceleration trend, recorded in the last months for all criteria, was observed in three out the five measures.
The monthly result stemmed from the elevation in all use categories, highlighting the respective increases of 0.7 p.p. and 0.6 p.p.
The average tenure on reference credit operations reached 500 days in April, retreating one day.
The tenure related to individuals increased one day, reaching 606 days, while the one related to corporate segments decreased two days, reaching 402 days.
In this context, the assessment of purchase managers, expressed by the global PMI, fell for the second consecutive month, reaching 52.2 points in April, the lowest value of the last five months.
In the labor market, it bears noticing the continuity of the deceleration process in job creation in the US, which retreated to 115 thousand jobs in April, in net terms, below expectations.
In China, the deceleration trend for activity indicators remained, mainly for foreign trade, but also for gross fixed capital formation and industrial production.
In the financial markets, high risk aversion is observed, driven by the risks associated to the scenario of fiscal restraint and the deepening of the European crisis.
In Europe, the debt crisis remains with the political stalement in Greece and with the fragility signs of the banking system in Spain, which increased the risk premiums in this country, hampering the access to the sovereign debt market.
Under this scenario, the US dollar valued against the euro and the currencies of emerging countries, while the US and German ten-year securities yields reached, in May, the record lows of the respective time series.
Among the main emerging economies, except for India, consumer price inflation also followed a downward trend.
The fall in the rates in this period was influenced, at the local scenario, by the prospect of continuity of the monetary easing cycle and by the release of economic indicators showing low dynamism of the economy.
At the external scenario, the worsening of the outlook, mainly due to the deterioration in the Euro Zone, has also contributed to this movement.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years decreased by 0.59 p.p., 0.65 p.p. and 0.65 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 30 very short-term operations.
