Underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB, in general, have performed similarly to headline inflation.
In general, the recent evolution of the wholesale and producer price indices signals reduction of inflationary pressures in these segments.
Indicators on credit conditions, based on quarterly survey carried on by the BCB with institutions representative of each segment of the credit market, evidence, in general, more flexible conditions in the second quarter of 2012, quarter-over-quarter.
For micro, small and medium-sized companies, the indicators show increase in credit approval in the second quarter, quarter-overquarter, with moderately stronger demand and still moderately restrictive supply, but with lower intensity.
Regarding credit for consumption, the expectation for the second quarter indicates reduction in the share of credit approval, compared to the observed in the last quarter.
For housing credit, despite the supply at levels similar to those observed between January and March 2012, the expectation of demand expansion tends to confirm scenario with elevation in the share of approval.
The February rate was 0.7 p.p. below the rate recorded in the same month last year.
In short, the set of available data indicates that, although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current state and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
In March the index evolved positively, after five negative figures, boosted by the improvement in expectations for the future.
In the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the improvement in the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
It is 3 worth noticing that the difference between the proportion of companies that reported excess inventories and those which reported insufficient inventories fell in March for the third consecutive month.
Global economy continues to face a period of above-than-usual uncertainty, despite some stability in the risk aversion level, and with prospects of low growth.
High persistent unemployment rates, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, the limited scope for anticyclical policy actions and the political uncertainty, have contributed for projections of low growth in mature economies, despite the heterogeneity among countries.
At the same time, activity in China decelerated in the first quarter, and recorded the lowest growth rate since the first quarter of Regarding monetary policy, mature economies have persisted with strongly accommodative monetary stances and, in some cases, with non-conventional policy initiatives.
Despite this fact, inflation core measures have continued at moderate levels both in the US and in the Euro Area and Japan, considering the relatively moderate prospects for the activity level.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
In the recent past, the high volatility observed for the commodities prices was strongly impacted by the abundant global liquidity, in a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations for growth and volatility in FX markets.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the Chinese authorities announcement of reduced growth targets tends to generate some impact on commodities prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
As a working hypothesis, the main scenario also considers that the current deterioration in the international scenario will have an impact on the Brazilian economy equivalent to one fourth of the impact observed during the international crisis.
It is noteworthy that part of this estimated impact is already being observed in the most recent economic activity indicators.
For 2013, the inflation projection rose in the reference scenario and remained stable in the market scenario, standing above the midpoint target in both cases.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that, in general, the restrictions to which several mature economies were exposed have changed little.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited scope for using monetary policy, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, in important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, as a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand, through the external trade channel.
In specific cases, changes in the growth pattern are anticipated, a development that tends to be permanent.
Therefore, until now, the Committee evaluates that the international scenario has shown disinflationary bias.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, moderation of total trade, moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment added up to those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity.
In other words, the moderation process the Brazilian economy was already experiencing in the first half of last year was intensified by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates, however, that although domestic demand expansion has also been moderate, prospects for economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters are favorable, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply both for individuals and corporate; and by the fact that consumers and businessmens confidence, stands at high levels.
The Copom understands, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter of last year, tends to continue the decline and, therefore, to move towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the economic agents expectations, especially price setters, about the dynamics of inflation in the upcoming quarters.
Additionally, the Committee understands that this improvement in the sentiment tends to be boosted by the ongoing process of moderation in the dynamic of producer prices and at wholesale markets.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatches between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the 6 labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has stabilized and is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Copom considers that the deceleration of the Brazilian economy in the second half of 2011 was deeper than expected, that recent events indicate the postponement of a final solution for the European financial crisis, and that the risks related to the deleveraging process stemming from banks, families and government - under way in major economic blocks remain elevated.
These and other elements, therefore, constitute an economic environment in which a much above-than-usual uncertainty level prevails.
The Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, the inflation rate stands around the target in In short, the Copom considers that, at the present moment, the risks to the inflation trajectory remain limited.
The Committee also notes that, until now, due to the global economys fragility, the external sector contribution has been disinflationary.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
On the other hand, the Committee considers that recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Another important factor to curb aggregate demand is the still fragile international scenario.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economy to currently present solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, even considering that the activity recovery has occurred more slowly than anticipated, the Committee believes that, given the cumulative and lagged effects of policy actions implemented so far, any movement of additional monetary easing should be conducted with parsimony.
The monthly result reflected the slowdown in market and regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA change was mainly due to the increase in the groups of housing, food and beverages, and personal expenses, with respective contributions of 0.07 p.p., 0.06 pp and 0.05 pp, while education was the group most responsible for the deceleration of the index in March, with a contribution of 0.02 pp, down from 0.26 pp in February.
All the five IPCA core measures calculated by the BCB decelerated in the month and in the twelve months through March.
The segments of capital goods and construction inputs retracted 1.3 p.p. month-on-month, while those regarding intermediate goods and consumer goods rose 0.5 p.p.
The average tenure on reference credit operations decreased from 499 days, in January, to 498 days in February.
The tenure related to individuals decreased two days, reaching 597 days, while the one related to corporate segments remained stable at 404 days.
Year-over-year, the delinquency rate for credit operations increased by 1.1 p.p., as a result of an increase of 1.8.p.p relative to individuals and 0.5 p.p. relative to the corporate segment.
External Environment Prospects for world economic growth continue to be subject to significant downward risks, considering the ongoing European crisis, the uncertainties regarding the deceleration pace in China and the sustainability of the US growth, in addition to the geopolitical tensions in the Middle East.
In this context, the assessment of purchase managers, after pointing to increase in the global PMI to 55.4 points in February, pointed to decrease to 54.6 points in March.
Under this scenario of increase in risk aversion, the US dollar valued against the euro and the currencies of emerging countries exporters of commodities.
This movement was influenced, at the local scenario, by the prospect of continuity of the monetary easing cycle and by the favorable trajectory of price indices.
At the external scenario, the possibility of Europes debt crisis deepening, the release of weaker economic indicators in Europe, US and China and the retreat of the North American treasuries rates have also contributed to the reduction of the future rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years decreased by 0.34 p.p., 0.38 p.p. and 0.39 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 29 very short-term operations.
The main factors that contributed to the expansion of liquidity in the period were the Central Bank intervention in the foreign exchange market, the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury and the release of reserve requirements resources.
