Underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB have performed similarly to headline inflation.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Industrial activity registered positive growth in June after three months of declines, according to the series seasonally adjusted by the IBGE.
Production grew in twelve of the 27 branches of activity.
The sectors that contributed the most to this increase in the number of formal jobs in the month, in absolute terms, were the services and the civil construction sectors.
Also according to the PME, the average real income in July fell significantly in Belo Horizonte, Recife and So Paulo, and remained stable in Porto Alegre.
In short, the set of available data indicates that, although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current outlook and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
In July, the index declined, after remaining stable in June.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the reduction in borrowing costs and by moderate credit expansion.
Also according to the FGV, the Industry Confidence Index continued a gradual recovery trajectory, reaching the highest level since July 2011 according to the seasonally adjusted series, due to improvements in perceptions of both the current situation and expectations.
Global economy faces a period of above-than-usual uncertainty, with prospects of low growth for a prolonged period.
High unemployment rates for a long period, coupled with the implementation of fiscal adjustments, the limited space for countercyclical actions and political uncertainties are translated into projections of low growth for mature economies.
Regarding monetary policy, advanced economies persist with strongly accommodative stances, which can eventually be deepened further.
Core inflation measures have remained at moderate levels in the US, in the Euro Area and in Japan.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with additional countercyclical policies.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the reduction of growth targets in China, coupled with the fragility of the global economy, tends to generate downward pressures over commodities prices in the medium run.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks, and their impacts, were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the benchmark scenario, estimates -24 bps and 23 bps spreads in the fourth quarter of 2012 and 2013, respectively.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
The main scenario does not include the occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, but considers the estimates of the impacts caused by changes in the external environment on the Brazilian economy.
In particular, it incorporates the estimated effect of the recent supply shock in agricultural commodities.
For 2013, the inflation projection remained stable in both scenarios, above the midpoint target also in both cases.
For the first half of 2014, the inflation forecast is above the midpoint inflation target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investments and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that, overall, the prospects of moderate global activity have remained unchanged, and the restrictions to which several mature economies were exposed have changed little.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited leeway for monetary policy actions, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, in important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity remained moderate.
For the Committee, this shock tends to be less intense and less lasting than the one observed in , as well as it tends to reverse in the medium term.
Therefore, despite manifesting inflationary bias in the short term, the international scenario looks disinflationary in the medium term.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, moderation of total trade, moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
Another transmission channel of great importance is the impact over businessmen confidence.
The Copom evaluates that, although domestic demand expansion has moderated, prospects for economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters are favorable, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and, to a lesser extent, businessmens confidence stands at high levels.
The Committee understands, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter of 2011, tends to move non-linearly towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the economic agents expectations, especially price setters, about the inflation dynamics in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has stabilized and is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Committee also highlights risks stemming from the instability in the prices of in natura products and grains, which manifest, for example, in the dynamics of wholesale prices.
The Committee considers that the recovery in domestic economic activity has materialized gradually; on the other hand, it highlights that the main scenario encompasses more intense pace of activity in this semester and next year.
The Committee identifies decrease in the probability of extreme events in international financial markets, but, at the same time, it argues that the external environment remains complex, given the lack of a final solution for the European financial crisis, and the risks associated to the ongoing deleveraging process of banks, households and government - in the main economic blocks.
Thus, the Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, inflation tends to move towards the target path.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession and the gradual recovery of confidence create good prospects for investment in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate scenario of neutrality of the public sector results.
The Committee also 6 notes that the fragile international scenario represents as an important factor restraining aggregate demand.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, considering the cumulative and lagged effects of policy actions implemented until the moment, which in part reflect in the ongoing recovery of economic activity, the Copom understands that, if the prospective scenario justifies an additional adjustment in monetary conditions, this movement should be conducted with extreme parsimony.
The monthly result reflected acceleration in market and regulated prices.
The sales reached 364.2 thousand units, a record high for the month of July and the second record high for the historical series, reflecting the tax exemption implemented by the federal government in the end of May.
Light commercial vehicles sales remained stable, according to this comparison basis.
The monthly result stemmed from the expansions of 4.3 p.p. in durable consumer goods, 1.6 p.p. in capital goods, and 0.2 p.p. in intermediate goods, while nondurable consumer goods and construction inputs decreased 0.4 p.p.
Compared to July 2011, the rate decreased 0.9 p.p.
Compared to July 2011, the rate also increased 0.2 p.p..
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased three days in June, reaching 503 days.
The tenure related to individuals and corporate segments increased three and five days, reaching 610 and 406 days, respectively.
The release of the GDPQ2 figures in the main economies confirmed the prospects for economic deceleration.
Housing market conditions suggest some improvement in the recent months, although the activity in this sector remains at low levels.
The regional composite PMI advanced indicator, released by _Markit Economics, reached 46.6 in_ August, indicating contraction for the seventh consecutive month.
In China, the industrial production in July increased relative to the average recorded in the second quarter, while the retail sales remained stable and the investments in fixed assets reduced, according to the same comparison bases.
In the financial markets, several indicators reported reduction in the risk perception, despite the maintenance of the uncertainties regarding the evolution of the crisis in some European economies and the recovery of economic activity in the main global economies.
Among international commodities prices, it bears highlighting the increases in the prices of corn, soybeans, wheat and oil, the first three of which reflecting strong droughts in producer regions of the US and Russia, while the prices of oil suffer the impact, among other factors, of the economic embargo to Iran, of the maintenance of platforms in the North Sea and of the reduction in the US inventories.
In the month, there were no monetary authority's interventions in the domestic spot market.
The movement in the short part of the curve reflected, mainly, the prospect of continuity in the fall of the Selic rate and the uncertainties related to the pace of recovery in domestic economic activity.
In the long part, the increase in the rates was influenced, at the domestic scenario, by the release of several current inflation indices above the expected and by the increase of inflation expectations.
At the external scenario, the increase in the prices of agricultural commodities and the expectation of announcement of the new monetary stimuli measures by the Fed also contributed for the elevation of the long-term rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years increased by 0.06 p.p., 0.23 p.p. and 0.07 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations through 36 borrowing operations, and carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of one and two working days.
The main factor that contributed to the retraction of liquidity in the period was the net revenue of the Union.
