Underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB have performed similarly to headline inflation.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective conditions of the demand and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
In short, domestic demand, boosted by moderate expansion of credit, as well as by employment and income growth, has been the main factor sustaining activity.
The production of fourteen of the 27 branches of activity decreased in May.
The slower growth of the economically active population in the recent period, compared to the occupied population, has contributed to the maintenance of low unemployment rates, despite the moderation in the pace of job creation.
In short, the set of available data indicates that, although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current outlook and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
In June, the index evolved negatively, after recording consecutive improvements in the months of March, April and May.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the high level of consumer confidence and by moderate credit expansion.
Heightened risks to global financial stability remain due to the still high level of political uncertainty and to the difficulties of implementing the recently announced measures.
High rates of unemployment for a long period, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, the limited scope for countercyclical policy actions and the political uncertainty are translated into projections of low growth for mature economies.
Core inflation measures have remained at moderate levels in the US, in the Euro Area and in Japan.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with additional countercyclical policies.
In particular, China promoted, in June and July, two consecutive cuts in the reference interest rates for deposits and loans.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the reduction of growth targets in China, coupled with the fragility of the global economy, tends to generate downward pressures over commodities prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks, and their impacts, were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
The main scenario does not include the occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, and considers the estimates of the impacts caused by changes in the external environment on the Brazilian economy.
For 2013, the inflation projection reduced in both scenarios, but still stands above the midpoint target in both cases.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investments and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that, overall, the prospects of more moderate global activity than previously anticipated have consolidated, and the restrictions to which several mature economies were exposed have changed little.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited leeway for monetary policy actions, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, in important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, as a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand.
In specific cases, changes in the growth pattern tend to be permanent.
Therefore, until now, the Committee evaluates that the international scenario has shown disinflationary bias.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, moderation of total trade, moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
Another transmission channel of great importance is the impact over businessmen confidence.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment added up to those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity.
The Copom evaluates, however, that although domestic demand expansion has also been moderate, prospects for economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters are favorable, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply both for individuals and corporate; and by the fact that consumers and, to a lesser extent, businessmens confidence, stands at high levels.
The Committee understands, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter of 2011, tends to continue the decline and, therefore, to move towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the economic agents expectations, especially price setters, about the inflation dynamics in this and in the upcoming quarters.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has stabilized and is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Committee considers that the recovery in domestic economic activity has materialized quite gradually; on the other hand, it highlights that the main scenario encompasses more intense pace of activity this semester.
The Committee identifies decrease in the probability of extreme events in international financial markets, but at the same time, it argues that recent developments indicate postponement of a final solution for the European financial crisis, and that risks associated to the process of deleveraging of banks, households and government - now under way in the main economic blocs remain high.
These and other elements, therefore, 6 constitute an economic environment in which a much above-than-usual uncertainty level prevails.
The Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, the inflation rate stands around the target in In short, the Copom considers that, at the present moment, the risks for the inflation trajectory remain limited.
The Committee also notes that, until now, due to the global economys fragility, the external sector contribution has been disinflationary.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate scenario of neutrality of the public sector balance sheet.
The Committee notes that the still fragile international scenario presents itself as an important factor restraining aggregate demand.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, even considering that the activity recovery has occurred more slowly than anticipated, the Committee believes that, given the cumulative and lagged effects of policy actions implemented so far, any additional monetary easing movement should be conducted with parsimony.
The monthly result reflected deceleration in market and regulated prices.
The transportation group was the main responsible for deceleration of the index in June, with a contribution of 0.24 p.p., compared to -0.12 p.p. in May.
The result, a record high for the month of June and the third record high for the historical series, reflected the tax cuts implemented by the federal government in the end of May.
The monthly result stemmed from the reductions of 0.3 p.p.in durable consumer goods, 0.2 p.p. in construction inputs and capital goods, and 0.1 p.p. in intermediate goods, while non-durable consumer goods increased 0.6 p.p..
The tenure related to individuals and corporate segments increased one day in May, reaching 607 and 402 days, respectively.
The average tenure on reference credit operations reached 500 days.
In this context, the assessment of purchase managers, expressed by the global PMI, fell for the fourth consecutive month, reaching 50.3 points in June, the lowest level of the last three years.
In China, the deceleration trend for activity indicators has remained.
The composed PMI showed further decline in June, mainly influenced by the performance of the manufacturing sector.
In the financial markets, despite the environment of high uncertainty, there was reduction in risk aversion in the period.
The relief in the markets favored the valuation of the euro and the currencies of emerging countries against the dollar, while the US and German ten-year securities yields increased relative to the record lows of May.
Due to the deterioration in the global macroeconomic scenario, the central banks of major economies have opted for the adoption of new quantitative easing measures.
In the month, there were no monetary authority's interventions in the domestic spot market.
The fall in the rates in this period was influenced, at the local scenario, by the prospect of continuity of the monetary easing cycle, by the release of weaker economic indicators, by the favorable trajectory of price indices and by the decreases in inflation and GPD expectations released by the Focus survey.
At the external scenario, the worsening of the economic indicators in Europe, in the US and in China, and the uncertainties stemming from the developments of the debts crisis that hits countries in the Euro Area have also contributed to the retreat of the rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years decreased by 0.67 p.p., 0.56 p.p. and 0.46 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations through 24 borrowing operations and four lending operations, and carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of two working days.
The main factor that contributed to the expansion of liquidity in the period was the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury.
