In short, the set of available information suggests a declining trend of inflation on a twelve-month accumulated basis, despite some persistence, which, in part, reflects the fact that services inflation still remains at high levels.
Underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB, in general, performed similarly to headline inflation.
While the average of monthly changes slightly increased in January, the average of twelve-month inflation fell for the fourth consecutive month.
In general, the recent evolution of these indices signals reduction of the pressures stemming from wholesale prices over consumer prices.
The January rate was 0.6 p.p. below the rate recorded in the same month last year.
Services and civil construction were the sectors that mostly contributed for formal employment increase in the month.
In short, evidences indicate that although the labor market remains robust, there are some signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current state and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
The index continued to indicate slowdown in the sector in February, similarly to what occurred in the four previous months.
In the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
Thus, capacity utilization stood 1.0 p.p. and 0.8 p.p.
The difference between the proportion of companies that reported excess inventories and those which reported insufficient inventories fell in February, similarly to what occurred in January.
The recent process of retreat in the rates of installed capacity utilization reflected, in part, the reduction in the pace of production growth and the maturity of investments.
Global economy faces a period of above-than-usual uncertainty, still showing deteriorated prospects for activity, despite some improvement, at the margin, and lower level of risk aversion.
High persistent unemployment rates, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, the limited scope for anticyclical policy actions and the political uncertainty, have contributed, in general, for the reduction of growth projections in mature countries or even of their potential growth, indicating a wider and more volatile economic cycle.
Regarding inflation, the core measures have persisted at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Area.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy bias is expansionist.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
In the recent past, the high volatility observed for the commodities prices was strongly impacted by the abundant global liquidity, in a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations for growth and volatility in FX markets.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the announcement by Chinese authorities of reduced growth targets tends to generate some impact on commodities prices.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the change in the IPCA weighting structure, which will take place in January The projections were developed and analyzed from the perspective of models that identify in a broader manner the transmission mechanisms of external developments to the Brazilian economy among others, trade, imports prices and external volatility channels.
As a working hypothesis, the main scenario considers that the current deterioration in the international scenario will have an impact on the Brazilian economy equivalent to one fourth of the impact observed during the international crisis.
Part of this estimated impact is already being observed in the most recent economic activity indicators.
For 2013, the inflation projection rose in the reference scenario and shows relative stability in the market scenario, in both cases positioned above the midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although 5 the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that the chances that the restrictions to which several mature economies are now exposed extend for a period longer than previously anticipated remain high.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited scope for using monetary policy, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, for important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, as a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand, through the external trade channel.
In specific cases, changes in the growth pattern are anticipated, a development that tends to be permanent.
Therefore, the Committee considers that the international scenario shows disinflationary bias for the relevant horizon.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, the reduction of total trade, the moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment add up to those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity, which is mirrored, for instance, in the retreat of growth projections for the Brazilian economy in this and in the upcoming year.
In other words, the moderation process the Brazilian economy was already experiencing in the first half of last year was intensified by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates that, although domestic demand expansion has moderated, prospects for economic activity are favorable.
This assessment is supported by signs that, despite showing some cooling, point to the fact that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers confidence, notwithstanding the accommodation at the margin, stands at historically high levels.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter, tends to continue the decline and, therefore, to move towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that, by itself, the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the economic agents expectations, especially those of the price setters, about the dynamics of inflation in the upcoming quarters.
Additionally, the Committee believes that this improvement in the perception will be boosted by the ongoing process of reassessment of the economic activity pace, both domestic and external, in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatches between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the adoption of initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and from its negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has stabilized and is below the long-term trend, in other works, is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Committee also observes that, in general, commodities prices in international markets have shown benign behavior.
The Copom considers that the deceleration of the Brazilian economy in the second half of 2011 was higher than expected; that recent events indicate the postponement of a final solution for the European financial crisis; and that the risks associated to the deleveraging process stemming from banks, families and government - under way in major economic blocs persist.
These and other elements, therefore, constitute an economic environment in which a much above-than-usual uncertainty level prevails.
The Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, the inflation rate stands around the target in 2012, and assess as decreasing the risks for the materialization of a scenario in which inflation timely converges to the midpoint target.
In light of this, two members of the Committee consider that it would be opportune the maintenance of the pace of adjustment of the Selic rate.
However, the majority argues that developments such as the ones mentioned in the previous paragraph recommend, at this time, the redistribution along time of the total adjustment of monetary conditions as the most appropriate strategy.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand is still robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming quarters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
On the other hand, the Committee considers that recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Another important factor to curb aggregate demand is the substantial and persistent deterioration in the international scenario.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the 7 economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions can occur and contribute for the Brazilian economy to currently present solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, and considering the values projected for the inflation and the associated balance of risks, the Copom attributes high probability for the materialization of a scenario that considers the Selic rate moving to slightly above the historic lows levels, and stabilizing at these levels.
The monthly result reflected the slowdown in market and regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA-15 change reflected, mainly, the increase in prices of education, which contributed 0.25 p.p., followed by personal expenses, 0.11 p.p., while food and beverages, transport and clothing were the main drivers of the IPCA slowdown in February.
The prices of agricultural and livestock products were mainly influenced by the prices of beans, eggs and corn, contributing 0.07 p.p., 0.06 p.p. and 0.05 p.p., respectively.
Three out of the five IPCA-15 core measures calculated by the BCB decreased in February.
All measures decelerated in the twelve months through February compared to the twelve months through January.
The monthly result was mainly driven by the increases related to machinery and equipment industry, with contribution of 0.11 p.p.; computer equipment, electronics and optical products, 0.04 p.p.; and metal products, except machinery and equipment, 0.03 p.p.; offset by negative contributions of -0.32 p.p.
In the twelve-month period ended in January, the index change reflected, in particular, the changes in the prices of food products, coke, oil and bio-fuels byproducts and automobile vehicles, shells and tows, which contributed 0.41 p.p.; 0.35 p.p. and 0.29 p.p. for the final result.
The segments of capital and consumer goods rose 1 p.p. and 0.2 p.p., 10 respectively, month-on-month, while those regarding construction inputs and intermediate goods retracted 1 p.p. and 0.6 p.p., in this order.
The new prognosis considered the prospect of bad weather in the southern region, which harms mainly the rice and soybeans crops.
Out of this total, there was the creation of 61.5 11 thousand jobs in the services sector, 42.2 thousand jobs in civil construction, 37.5 thousand jobs in manufacturing industry and 12.3 thousand jobs in the agricultural and livestock sector; while 36.3 thousand jobs in commerce were eliminated.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased to 498 days in January, representing an increase of one day, month-on-month.
The tenure related to corporate segments increased three days, while the one related to individuals decreased two days, reaching 405 and 598 days, respectively.
Compared to January 2011, the delinquency rate for credit operations with corporate changed 0.1 p.p., while the one relative to individuals increased 1.9 p.p.. External Environment Prospects for world economic growth this year are subject to significant downward risks, considering the European crisis, the deceleration in world trade and geopolitical tensions in the Middle East.
However, the assessment of purchase managers pointed to increase in the global PMI to 54.6 points in January.
In China, despite the deceleration of the external sector and the risks related to the real state sector, domestic demand continues robust.
Under this scenario, characterized by an environment of some decrease in risk aversion, the dollar devaluated against currencies of emerging countries and lost strength against the euro, the sovereign risk premia retreated in Europe, and the CDS of European banks reduced as of mid-February.
It bears noticing the strong increase in the oil price in the period, reflecting the worsening of geopolitical tensions related to Iran.
It bears highlighting that new measures of quantitative easing were taken in Europe and in Japan.
Therefore, the program of assets purchase of the BoE and BoJ were extended, respectively, by 50 billion pounds, to 325 billion pounds, and by 10 trillion yens, to 65 trillion yens.
In the Euro Area, the LTRO conduced in December and in February supplied 489.2 billion euros and 529.2 billion euros, respectively.
This movement was influenced, at the local scenario, by the expectation of continuity of the Selic rate reduction cycle, by the favorable trajectory of current inflation indices and by the announcement of the federal budget adjustment for At the external scenario, the uncertainties related to the restructuring of the Greek debt and the increase of global liquidity after the operation of supplying resources to the banking system promoted by the ECB contributed to the retraction of the interest rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years decreased by 0.97 p.p., 0.80 p.p. and 0.61 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 33 very short-term operations, and carried out leveling operations conducted at the end of the day, with tenures of one and two working days.
The main factors that contributed to the contraction of liquidity in the period were the net revenues of the Union and the net placement of securities by the National Treasury.
