In short, the set of available information suggests a declining trend of inflation on a twelvemonth accumulated basis, but some persistence of the high price hikes observed in 2011, which partially reflects the fact that services inflation remains at high levels.
The decline in the index in December was driven by significant reduction in producer prices during the month.
In general, the recent evolution of these indices indicates the reduction of the pressures stemming from wholesale prices over consumer prices.
The moderation in the pace of growth was noticeable in all components of domestic demand, and resulted, in part, from the policy actions implemented since the end of 2010, intensified by the deterioration of the global economic scenario since the third quarter of last year.
For micro, small and medium companies, the indicators show a scenario similar to the observed in the previous quarter, with supply moderately more restrictive and demand moderately stronger, but at levels below those observed the third quarter of Regarding credit to consumption, the outlook for this quarter basically points to stability in the percentage of credit approval, quarter-on-quarter.
For housing loans, despite the more selective supply by the financial institutions, the expectation of increasing demand induces a scenario with the approval of new lines, in this quarter, moderately above than the figures observed in the previous quarter.
Services and trade were the sectors that mostly contributed for formal employment increase in the month.
In short, evidences indicate that although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides important additional information, as it portrays the current state and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
The index continued to indicate slowdown in the sector in December, similarly to what occurred in the two previous months.
In the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
Thus, capacity utilization stood 1.6 p.p. and 1.2 p.p.
The rates of installed capacity utilization have been retreating, reflecting, in part, the reduction in the pace of production growth and the maturity of investments.
Global economy continues to face a period of uncertainty above the usual, with deterioration in activity prospects and the possibility of occurrence of extreme events.
The risks to global financial stability remain high, among others, due to exposure of international banks to sovereign debt of countries with fiscal imbalances, and high levels of risk aversion persist, despite a slight decrease at the margin.
From another perspective, high persistent unemployment rates, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, as well as limited scope for monetary policy actions and political uncertainty, have contributed for the reduction of growth projections in mature countries or even of their potential growth, indicating wider and more volatile economic cycle.
In specific cases, the probability of recession increased, especially in the Euro Area.
There has also been continued reduction in growth projections for important emerging economies.
Regarding monetary policy, mature economies have continued to adopt accommodative monetary stances and, in specific cases, non-conventional monetary policy initiatives.
Regarding inflation, the core measures have persisted at moderate levels in the US and in the Euro Area.
In emerging economies, in general, monetary policy bias is expansionist.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
In the recent past, the high volatility observed in the prices of commodities was strongly impacted by the abundant global liquidity, in a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations of growth and to volatility in FX markets.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The set of projections incorporated the estimated effects of the change in the IPCA weighting structure, which will take place in January The projections were developed and analyzed from the perspective of models that identify in a broader manner the transmission mechanisms of external developments to the Brazilian economy among others, trade, imports prices and external volatility channels.
As a working hypothesis, the main scenario considers that the current deterioration in the international scenario will have an impact on the Brazilian economy equivalent to one fourth of the impact observed during the international crisis.
For 2013, the inflation projection stands around the midpoint of the target in the benchmark scenario and above, in the market scenario.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that the chances that the restrictions to which several mature economies are now exposed extend for a period longer than previously anticipated remain high.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited scope for using monetary policy, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails.
In addition, for the main emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, as a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand, through the external trade channel.
Therefore, the Committee considers that the international scenario shows disinflationary bias for the relevant horizon.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, the reduction of total trade, the moderation in investment flows, tighter credit conditions and the worsening in consumer and businessmen confidence.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment add up to those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity, which is mirrored, for instance, in the retreat of growth projections for the Brazilian economy this year and in the upcoming year.
In other words, the moderation process of the Brazilian economy was intensified by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates that, although ongoing moderation of domestic demand growth is observed, prospects for economic activity are favorable.
This assessment is supported by signs that, despite showing some cooling, point to the fact that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers confidence, notwithstanding the accommodation at the margin, stands at historically high levels.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months, which started to retreat in the last quarter, tends to continue the decline and, therefore, to move towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that, by itself, the reversion in the inflation trend will contribute to improve the expectations of economic agents, especially those of the price setters, about the dynamics of inflation in the upcoming quarters.
Additionally, the Committee believes that this improvement in the perception will be boosted by the ongoing process of reassessment of the economic activity pace, both domestic and external, in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatches between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio reduction.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderation in credit market expansion.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the adoption of initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and from its negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has retreated and is below the long-term trend, that is, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Committee also observes that, in general, commodities prices in international markets have shown benign behavior.
The Copom notes that, according to the main scenario, the inflation rate stands around the target in 2012, and identifies decreasing risks to the materialization of a scenario in which inflation timely converges to the midpoint target.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand is still robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming quarters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of the monetary policy actions recently implemented, which, in short, are lagged and cumulative.
On the other hand, the Committee considers that recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Another important factor to curb aggregate demand is the substantial and persistent deterioration in the international scenario.
These elements and the quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in the interest rates in general, and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the 7 economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economy to currently present solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed for the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which are largely, according to the Committees assessment, permanent developments.
In light of the above mentioned, and also considering that the deceleration of the Brazilian economy in the second semester of last year was deeper than anticipated, and that recent events indicate postponement of a definitive solution for the European financial crisis, at the present moment, the Copom attributes high probability for the materialization of a scenario that considers the decrease of the Selic target to one-digit levels.
The monthly result reflected slight acceleration of market prices and deceleration in regulated prices.
The IPCA monthly change mainly reflected the increase acceleration increase in the prices of food and beverages, which contributed 0.29 p.p. in the month, up from 0.25p.p.
Three out of the five IPCA core inflation measures calculated by the BCB accelerated in December.
Four measures decelerated in the twelve months through December, compared to the twelve months through November.
The monthly result was mainly driven by the increases related to beverages; coke, oil and bio-fuels byproducts; and automobile vehicles, shells and tows, with contributions of 0.06 p.p. in each segment, offset by the negative contributions of -0.08 p.p.
In the year, the index change reflected, in particular, the changes in the prices of other chemical product segments; food products; and coke, oil and bio-fuels byproducts, which contributed 1.03 p.p., 0.57 p.p. and 0.55 p.p. for the final result.
Seventeen out of the 26 manufacturing industry activities surveyed increased in the month.
The consumer goods segment increased 1.3 p.p. month-on-month, while the indicators regarding construction inputs, intermediate and capital goods, presented respective decreases of 1.1 p.p., 1 p.p. and 0.8 p.p.
Out of this total, there was the creation of 107.9 thousand jobs in commerce and 54 thousand jobs in the services sector, while 54.3 thousand jobs in manufacturing industry, 42.3 thousand jobs in the agricultural sector and 22.8 thousand jobs in civil construction were eliminated.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased to 495 days in November, representing an increase of four days month-on-month.
The tenure related to corporate segments increased four days, while the one related to individuals increased five days, reaching 402 days and 595 days, respectively.
External Environment The US economic activity in recent months has shown a recovery, but still presents slow pace and uncertain sustainability.
The Beige Book reports modest to moderate growth in twelve districts.
These views are endorsed by better indicators, despite insufficient, for the labor market and consumer confidence.
However, the balance of risks for the US economy remains downwards, influenced, among others, by the end of fiscal stimuli this year, with only partial expectation of renewal, by the weak housing market, the slow recovery of the labor market; and by the fact that an important part of the recent increase in consumption is due to the reduction in savings.
In the Euro Area, industrial production, in November, fell for the third consecutive month, and the manufacturing PMI figure for December, 46.9 points, suggests the continuation of this trend.
Household and businessmen confidence remains in low levels, influenced by the worsening of the sovereign debt crisis.
In Japan, economic activity is stagnant, reflecting the global economic slowdown and the appreciation of the yen.
The Regional Economic Bulletin, published by the central bank of that country, reported, in January, pause in economic activity in seven of the nine regions.
The country's industrial output resumed retreat in November, also influenced by the interruption in the supply of parts for automobiles and computers caused by the floods in Thailand.
In China, despite the risks stemming from the external scenario and those related to the housing sector, economic activity remains picking up, despite decelerating.
However, the region's banks remain preferring to use the ECB's overnight deposit line, which for several days hit record highs, surpassing 500 billion.
The market for sovereign debt in the Euro Area remained depressed due to the unfavorable outlook for economic activity in the block and the uncertainty relative to the compliance with fiscal targets in some countries, presenting, however, some reduction in the premiums charged in the most recent sovereign emissions.
Until mid-December, the intensification of risk aversion in financial markets and the continuous improvement in supply conditions in agricultural commodities markets favored the devaluation of these products.
Since then, commodities prices reversed the trend, influenced by bad weather in South America, in the case of agricultural, by geopolitical tensions, relative to energy, and, in general terms, by the disclosure of better-than-expected economic indicators in major world economies and by the consequent reduction of risk aversion in financial markets.
Considering the context of inflation and growth deceleration, the accommodative stance of monetary policy prevailed among central banks.
In December, there were no monetary authority's interventions in the domestic spot market.
The movement of the short part mainly reflected the prospect of continuing the monetary easing cycle and improving the expected scenario for inflation.
In the long part, the increase in the rates was mainly driven, domestically, by economic stimulus measures announced by the government and by the expected recovery of economic activity.
Regarding the external outlook, the release of economic indicators considered positive in some countries, particularly in the US, and the recovery in commodities prices also contributed to the rise in long-term rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years increased by 0.33 p.p., 0.62 p.p. and 0.58 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 29 and donated through one very short-term operation, and carried out leveling operations conducted at the end of the day, with tenures of two working days.
The main factor that contributed to the expansion of liquidity in the period was the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury.
