In short, services inflation still remains at high levels and the pressures in the food and beverages segment are decreasing.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Industrial production decreased in 16 of the 27 branches of activity.
The sectors that contributed the most to this increase, in absolute terms, were trade and services.
In short, the set of available data indicates a heated labor market, although with some signs of moderation at the margin.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by moderate credit expansion.
Global economy faces a period of above-than-usual uncertainty, with prospects of low growth for a prolonged period, despite the recent accommodation in the volatility and risk aversion indicators.
High unemployment rates for a long period, coupled with the implementation of fiscal adjustments, the limited space for countercyclical actions and political uncertainties are translated into projections of low growth for mature economies, mainly in Europe.
Regarding monetary policy, advanced economies persist with strongly accommodative stances.
Core inflation measures have remained at moderate levels in the US, in the 3 Euro Area and in Japan.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with other countercyclical policies.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks, and their impacts, were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates -9 bps, 40 bps and 30 bps spreads for the fourth quarter of 2012, 2013 and 2014, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
For 2013, the inflation projection remained stable in both scenarios also above the midpoint target in both cases.
For 2014, the inflation forecast is around the midpoint inflation target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investments and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
In this context, despite identifying a decrease in the probability of occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, the Copom considers that the external environment remains complex.
The Copom understands that, overall, the prospects of moderate global activity have remained unchanged.
It also notes that, in mature economies, there seems to be limited leeway for monetary policy actions, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
On the other hand, in important emerging economies, the pace of activity has intensified, supported by the resilience of domestic demand.
The Copom also highlights the evidences of moderation of localized price pressures in agricultural commodities segment, which had arisen between the second and third quarters of the year and were a consequence of an unfavorable supply shock.
The Copom considers that the prospects for domestic economic activity are favorable, in this and in the upcoming semesters, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporations, and by the fact that the consumers confidence and, in a lower scale, the businessmens confidence, stand at a high level.
The Committee believes, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be favored by public transfers, as well as by labor market force, which is reflected in historically low unemployment rates and in wage growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It is noteworthy that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom emphasizes that its main scenario includes prospects for stronger economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters and limited risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
Furthermore, the Copom emphasizes that the outlook for the upcoming semesters indicates moderation in the price dynamics of some real and financial assets.
Under the Committees view, evidences such as the accommodation of wholesale prices indicate the cooling of pressures on consumer prices, resulting from the instability in the prices of in natura products and grains observed in the last months.
In short, the Copom considers that the prospective scenario for inflation shows favorable signs and reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months tends to move towards the target path, even in a non-linear way.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially regarding household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create good prospects for investment in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate the balance of the public sector moving from a position of neutrality to expansionism.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario represents an important factor restraining aggregate demand.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal field and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the 6 economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, considering the balance of risks to inflation, the domestic activity recovery and the complexity involved in the international environment, the Committee believes that the stability of monetary conditions for a sufficiently long period of time is the most appropriate strategy to ensure the convergence of inflation toward the target, even in a non-linear way.
The monthly result reflected deceleration in market prices and acceleration in regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA-15 change mainly stemmed from the increases in the prices of food and beverages, which contributed 0.20 p.p., and housing and transportation, both with identical contributions of 0.09 p.p..
The IPC-10 change in November was mainly influenced by the lower increases in the prices of the food group, whose contribution dropped from 0.27 p.p. in October to 0.07 in November.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased thirteen days in October, reaching 522 days.
The tenure related to individuals and corporate segments increased four and twenty-one days, respectively, reaching 620 and 432 days, in the order.
In the US, the acceleration in growth reflected expansions in household consumption and in the 11 federal government expenditures, and additional improvements in the housing market, reflected in growth of housing prices, in the amount of new houses being built and in the building confidence index.
In the Euro Area, which registered, in the third quarter, four straight consecutive quarters with no growth, the most recent indicators for industrial production, consumption, economic sentiment and unemployment rate, suggest the continuity of this scenario.
In China, average monthly growth rates observed in the third quarter, compared to the previous quarter, indicated improvement in industrial production and retail sales and slowdown in fixed asset investment.
In October, the three-month moving average for these same variables increased relative to September.
In financial markets, the stock markets of major countries presented divergent trajectories, a fact that was repeated regarding the US dollar exchange rate against other currencies.
In the month, there were no BCBs interventions in the domestic exchange rate spot market.
During the period, discreet increase in the interest curve slope was observed, with retreat in the short-term rates and increase in the long-term part.
Domestically, concerns with the impact of the dollar valuation against the BRL over future inflation, the possible increase in fuel prices and the reduction of electricity tariffs below expectations contributed to this movement.
The rate for one-year maturity increased 0.03 p.p..
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations through 32 borrowing operations, and carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of two working days.
The main factors that contributed to the contraction of liquidity in the period were the net revenues of the Union and the net issuance of securities by the National Treasury.
