The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The indicators of Credit Conditions, constructed by the Central Bank based on quarterly consultation held with representative institutions of each credit market segment, demonstrate, in general, more flexible conditions in the fourth quarter of 2012, compared to the third.
Related to consumer credit, the expectation for the fourth quarter indicates slight recovery in the percentage of credit approval.
For housing credits, despite the demand at levels higher than those observed from July to September 2012, the expected approval of new lines tends to be similar to the previous quarter.
In particular, foreign sales to Argentina and to the European Union were negatively impacted.
In short, domestic demand, driven by moderate expansion of credit and by employment and income growth, has been the main factor sustaining activity.
Industrial activity registered the third positive monthly growth in August, according to the series seasonally adjusted by the IBGE.
Production grew in 20 of the 27 branches of activity.
The lower growth rate of the PEA in the recent past has contributed to stability, at low levels, of the unemployment rates, despite the moderation in the pace of job creation.
The sectors that contributed the most to this increase in the number of formal jobs in the month, in absolute terms, were the services and trade sectors.
In short, the set of available data indicates that, although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
This indicator provides the current outlook and signals the evolution of commercial activity in a more timely manner.
In September, the index expanded for the second consecutive month.
For the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth, by the reduction in borrowing costs and by moderate credit expansion.
Still according to the FGV, the Industry Confidence Index continues a gradual recovery trajectory, reaching the highest level since July 2011 according to the seasonally adjusted series, mainly due to improvements in the expectations component.
Global economy faces a period of above-than-usual uncertainty, with prospects of low growth for a prolonged period.
High unemployment rates for a long period, coupled with the implementation of fiscal adjustments, the limited space for countercyclical actions and political uncertainties are translated into projections of low growth for mature economies.
Regarding monetary policy, advanced economies persist with strongly accommodative stances.
Unconventional measures announced by mature economies should increase liquidity in their respective markets, as well as commodities prices, in the short term.
Nevertheless, core inflation measures have remained at moderate levels in the US, in the Euro Area and in Japan.
In emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy bias is expansionist, which combines, in some cases, with additional countercyclical policies.
Prospectively, it is plausible to affirm that the reduction of growth targets in China and India, coupled with the fragility of the global economy, tends to generate downward pressures over commodities prices in the medium run.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks, and their impacts, were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
It is worth mentioning that, in large part, the retreat in the projection for 2013 is due to the estimated reduction in electricity tariffs.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the baseline scenario, estimates -27 bps and 27 bps spreads for the fourth quarter of 2012 and 2013, respectively.
The set of projections incorporates the estimated effects of the reduction in the neutral interest rate identified over the last years.
The main scenario does not include the occurrence of extreme events in international financial markets, but considers the estimates of the impacts caused by changes in the external environment on the Brazilian economy.
In particular, it incorporates the estimated effect of the recent supply shock in agricultural commodities.
For 2013, the inflation projection decreased in both scenarios, but still stands above the midpoint target in both cases.
For the third quarter of 2014, the inflation forecast is above the midpoint inflation target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms 5 its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premia, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investments and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
In other words, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee understands that, overall, the prospects of moderate global activity have remained unchanged, and the restrictions to which several mature economies were exposed have changed little.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited leeway for monetary policy actions, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails, in this and in the upcoming years.
Moreover, in important emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity remained moderate.
For the Committee, this shock tends to be less intense and less lasting than the one observed in , as well as it tends to reverse in the medium term.
Therefore, despite manifesting inflationary bias in the short term, the international scenario looks disinflationary in the medium term.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy materializes through several channels, among others, moderation of total trade, moderation in investment flows and tighter credit conditions.
Another transmission channel of great importance is the impact over businessmen confidence.
The Copom evaluates that prospects for economic activity in this and in the upcoming semesters are favorable, with some asymmetry among the several sectors.
This assessment is supported by signs that point to moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and, to a lesser extent, businessmens confidence stands at high levels and in an upward trend.
The Committee understands, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months tends to move towards the targets path, even in a non-linear way.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the reduction trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio and the positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate expansion in the credit market.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates as decreasing the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch, in specific segments, between supply and demand growth rates.
However, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the 6 labor market, despite the signs of moderation in this market, and considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization is below the long-term trend, in other words, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain prices pressures.
The Committee also highlights risks stemming from the instability in the prices of _in natura products and grains, which manifests, for example, in the dynamics of_ wholesale prices.
The Committee highlights that the main scenario encompasses more intense pace of activity in this semester and next year.
The Committee identifies decrease in the probability of extreme events in international financial markets, but, at the same time, it argues that the external environment remains complex, given the lack of a final solution for the European financial crisis, and the risks associated to the ongoing deleveraging process of banks, households and government - in the main economic blocks.
It also notes that the scenario for the main emerging economies appears more challenging than anticipated.
Although the inflation prospective scenario has been negatively impacted by supply shocks related to domestic and foreign climatic events in the short term, it maintained favorable signs for longer periods.
Thus, the Committee also notes that, according to the main scenario adopted, inflation tends to move towards the target path.
Alexandre Antonio Tombini, Governor, Aldo Luiz Mendes, Altamir Lopes, Luiz Awazu Pereira da Silva and Luiz Edson Feltrim.
Accordingly, the majority of the Committee members argued, in particular, that the remaining uncertainties about the pace of economic recovery, largely due to the prospects that the period of weakness in the global economy will be more prolonged than anticipated, will have disinflationary impact on the domestic economy.
Furthermore, it was highlighted that the recent price pressures stem mainly from supply shocks, both domestic and external, which tend to reverse in the medium term.
Therefore, according to these five members of the Committee, the prospective scenario for inflation justified a final adjustment in monetary conditions.
Anthero de Moraes Meirelles, Carlos Hamilton Vasconcelos Arajo and Sidnei Corra Marques.
In this sense, the minority of the Copom members argued that the activity recovery tends to be supported by monetary, fiscal and credit impulses already introduced in the economy.
Ocasionally, demand and cost pressures may have impact on inflation.
Hence, according to the view of these three members of the Committee, the prospective scenario for inflation would not recommend a further adjustment in monetary conditions.
The Copom evaluates that domestic demand tends to show robustness, especially regarding household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in this and in the upcoming semesters, when domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of monetary policy actions recently implemented, which are, in short, lagged and cumulative.
For the Committee, these effects, the programs of public services concession and the gradual recovery of businessmens confidence create good prospects for investment in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Committee considers that recent initiatives indicate the balance of the public sector moving from a position of neutrality to expansionism.
On the other hand, the Committee notes that the fragile international scenario represents an important factor restraining aggregate demand.
These elements and quasi fiscal developments are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom understands that the Brazilian economy has experienced significant structural changes, which determined retreat in interest rates in general and, in particular, in the neutral rate.
Among the factors that support this view, it bears highlighting the reduction of risk premia, a direct consequence of the accomplishment of the inflation target for the eighth consecutive year, of the macroeconomic stability and of institutional improvements.
Moreover, the process of interest rates reduction was favored by changes in the 7 structure of the financial and capital markets, by the credit market deepening, as well as by the generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
For the Committee, all these changes are characterized by a high degree of persistence although, due to the economic cycles themselves, specific and temporary reversions may occur and contribute for the Brazilian economys current solid indicators of solvency and liquidity.
The Copom also considers that the increase in the supply of external savings and the reduction of its funding cost have contributed to the reduction of the domestic interest rates, including the neutral rate, which, according to the Committee's assessment, are largely permanent developments.
In light of the above, considering the balance of risks to inflation, the recovery in domestic activity and the complexity involved in the international environment, the Committee believes that the stability of monetary conditions for a sufficiently long period of time is the most appropriate strategy to ensure the convergence of inflation toward the target, even in a non-linear way.
The monthly result reflected acceleration both in market and in regulated prices.
The monthly IPCA change mainly stemmed from the increases in the prices of food and beverages and housing, which contributed 0.30 p.p. and 0.10 p.p., respectively.
All the use categories retracted, according to the same comparison basis, with highlights for the reductions of 1.5 p.p. in capital goods production, and of -0.6 p.p. in construction material and in non-durable consumer goods.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased three days in August, reaching 507 days.
The tenure related to individuals and corporate segments increased four and two days, respectively, reaching 614 and 408 days, in the order.
Average housing prices, measured by the Case-Shiller index, rose in July for the sixth consecutive month and recorded the first increase year-over-year in June.
The composite PMI for the region reached 46.1 in September down from 46.3 in August, indicating contraction for the eighth consecutive month.
In China, despite the maintenance of the slowdown in the year-over-year data, 12 the monthly average growth rates observed in the July-August period for industrial production and retail sales advanced in relation to the averages of the second quarter, in contrast to the observed for investments in fixed assets.
Regarding the international commodities prices, it is worth mentioning the significant advance in the prices of metals, heavily influenced by the aforementioned measures.
The agricultural commodities showed variations in opposite directions, with declines in the international prices of grains and increases in sugar and coffee prices.
The price of a barrel of Brent crude oil, despite oscillating, declined during the analyzed period.
In emerging and developing countries, disinflation also suffered inflection in August, driven largely by the increases in the prices of food and raw materials over the past few months.
In the month, there were no BCBs interventions in the domestic exchange rate spot market.
Domestically, the drop in interest rates was influenced by the release of data regarding formal employment and economic activity below market estimates and by expectations of continued monetary easing cycle.
On the international scenario, concerns about the developments of the crisis in the Euro Area and the prospect of low global growth strengthened the downward movement of long-term rates.
The rates for maturities of one, two and three years declined 0.23 p.p., 0.41 p.p. and 0.37 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also conducted very short-term operations through 29 borrowing operations, and carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, with tenures of one and two working days.
The main factors that contributed to the expansion of liquidity in the period were the net expenditures of the Union and the release of funds from compulsory deposits.
