Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Sydney – 3 December 2019

Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
						Ian Harper, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
					
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic
						Analysis
						Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department)
					
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Lynne Cockerell (Deputy Head,
						Economic
						Analysis Department)
					
Members noted that interest rates were very low around the world, with a number of central banks
						having
						eased monetary policy over recent months in response to downside risks to the global economy and
						subdued
						inflation. Market expectations for further policy easing by central banks had been scaled back
						over
						previous months, with concerns about the downside risks receding a little. The US Federal
						Reserve had
						indicated that any further reduction in the federal funds rate would require a material change
						in the
						economic outlook. Reflecting these developments, market pricing had pointed to a narrowing in
						the degree
						of uncertainty around the expected path for the federal funds rate. Globally, long-term
						government bond
						yields had remained at very low levels, but had risen slightly in recent months as the prospects
						for
						further easing in monetary policy had diminished.
					
Financing conditions for corporations remained very accommodative. Robust demand for corporate
						debt had
						seen spreads narrow between corporate bond yields and government benchmarks. US equity prices
						had risen
						to new highs over the prior month, and had increased significantly since the start of the year
						relative
						to corporate earnings. Australian equity prices had also increased over the month, with the ASX
						200 returning to the highs reached in July.
					
Foreign exchange rates had been little changed over the previous month. The People's Bank of
						China
						had continued to implement targeted easing measures to support financing conditions, while
						remaining
						conscious of the need to contain financial stability risks. More broadly in emerging markets,
						central
						banks had eased monetary policy in recent months. However, political unrest remained a source of
						volatility for certain markets.
					
Members discussed the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy in Australia through financial
						markets. They noted that the reductions in the cash rate this year had been transmitted to
						broader
						financial conditions in ways that were consistent with the historical experience. Government
						bond yields
						had declined across the yield curve by more than 1 percentage point over the year, which
						had flowed
						through to lower funding costs across the economy. The Australian dollar had depreciated by
						around
						6 per cent on a trade-weighted basis over the previous year and remained at the lower
						end of
						its range over recent times. The depreciation reflected the reduction in the interest
						differential
						between Australia and the major advanced economies, and had occurred despite an increase in the
						terms of
						trade over this period.
					
The recent reductions in the cash rate had been reflected in reduced funding costs for banks, and
						had
						flowed through to lower borrowing rates for households. Average variable mortgage rates had
						declined by
						around 65 basis points since the middle of the year, as competition for high-quality
						borrowers had
						remained strong and households continued to switch away from interest-only loans towards
						principal-and-interest loans at lower interest rates. These trends were expected to continue.
					
Consistent with lower mortgage interest rates and improved conditions in some housing markets,
						housing
						loan commitments had been increasing over the preceding few months, particularly for
						owner-occupiers.
						Growth in credit extended to owner-occupiers had also increased a little in recent months, while
						lending
						to investors had still been declining.
					
Members noted that data from lenders and information from liaison suggested that only a small
						share of
						borrowers had actively adjusted their scheduled mortgage payments following the reductions in
						interest
						rates. This was consistent with historical experience in the months immediately following a
						reduction in
						the cash rate. However, the available data indicated that, even over the longer term, as
						interest rates
						had declined borrowers had not been paying down their home loans more quickly than in the past.
						Mortgage
						payments as a share of aggregate household income had remained steady over recent years,
						although were
						slightly lower than in the first half of the decade.
					
Interest rates on loans to businesses had also declined to historically low levels. Despite the
						accommodative funding conditions for large businesses, growth in business debt had slowed,
						suggesting
						that demand for finance had softened. Lending to small businesses had been little changed over
						the
						preceding year, and access to finance for small businesses remained restricted.
					
Financial market pricing implied that market participants were expecting a further 25 basis
						point
						reduction in the cash rate by mid 2020.
					
Members discussed longer-term developments in the banking sector, including the strengthening of
						prudential requirements and the opportunities and challenges presented by advances in
						technology.
						Increased capital and liquidity after the financial crisis had made banks safer, but had also
						raised the
						relative attractiveness of some forms of market-based finance. Members discussed how advances in
						technology opened up new opportunities for banks, while also introducing potential new
						competitors.
					
Members observed that there had been little change in the global outlook over the previous month,
						but
						that some of the downside risks had receded. The near-term uncertainty around US trade policy
						had
						diminished because some of the previously planned tariff increases had been postponed and there
						was some
						prospect of an initial agreement between the United States and China. In addition, a ‘hard
						Brexit’ was assessed to be less likely.
					
Weak trade outcomes had continued to restrain growth in output, particularly for export-oriented
						economies. Survey indicators of manufacturing activity and export orders had stabilised,
						although they
						remained at low levels. Surveyed conditions in the services sector had declined as weaker
						external
						demand conditions had spilled over to sectors other than manufacturing. Members noted that even
						though
						geopolitical tensions had lessened recently, ongoing uncertainty had adversely affected the
						confidence
						and spending decisions of businesses. In the euro area, investment indicators had remained weak
						and
						business confidence had declined further since September. In the United States, consumer
						spending had
						been solid and employment growth had strengthened. Recently, some survey measures of
						manufacturing and
						services activity had increased a little, although industrial production and surveyed investment
						intentions had declined further in recent months.
					
Slower growth in China and India, largely unrelated to trade tensions, had also continued to be a
						feature of the recent pattern of global growth. In China, indicators of activity had been weaker
						in
						October. The real levels of retail sales and fixed asset investment had declined in October and
						the
						output of a broad range of industrial products had remained subdued. Members noted that, in
						response to
						slowing growth, Chinese authorities had eased minimum equity capital requirements for a variety
						of
						infrastructure projects (including port, road, rail, logistics and ecological protection
						projects). In
						India, the extended monsoon season had exacerbated existing weakness in the economy.
					
Inflation remained low in the major advanced economies and was below target despite tight labour
						markets and higher wages growth. Members observed that inflation had generally declined in Asia.
						In
						China, although headline consumer price inflation had increased, reflecting higher pork and
						other meat
						prices, core consumer price inflation had remained broadly unchanged at a relatively low rate.
					
Movements in commodity prices had been mixed since the previous meeting. The announcement of
						further
						measures to support steel-intensive economic activity in China had supported iron ore prices. At
						the
						same time, reports of a tightening in coal import controls in China had weighed on coking and
						thermal
						coal prices. Base metals prices had generally been lower since the previous meeting. Supply
						developments
						had continued to support the prices of some rural commodities.
					
A number of indicators suggested that growth in Australia had continued at a moderate pace since
						the
						middle of the year.
					
Members discussed survey measures of business confidence and conditions, and consumer sentiment.
						Business confidence had been below average and below its recent high levels in 2017 and early
						2018, with
						the decline broadly based across industries. In contrast, survey measures of current business
						conditions
						had remained around average in recent months. Members noted that, historically, business
						conditions had
						been a better indicator of current economic activity than measures of business confidence,
						although its
						main advantage was timeliness rather than adding information not present in other indicators.
					
Growth in household disposable income had been weak over recent years, in both nominal and real
						terms.
						Members noted the importance of income growth as a key driver of consumption growth, although
						the
						earlier downturn in the housing market had also had a noticeable effect. The recent recovery in
						the
						established housing market was expected to be positive for consumption growth in the period
						ahead.
						Retailers in the Bank's liaison program had suggested that nominal year-ended sales growth
						had been
						little changed in October and November.
					
Households' expectations about future economic conditions had declined significantly since
						June.
						Members noted that the prolonged period of slow income growth had affected both consumer
						sentiment and
						growth in household consumption. Members observed that the decline in sentiment had coincided
						with an
						increasingly negative tone in news coverage of the economy. Notwithstanding this, households'
						assessment of their own financial situation relative to a year earlier had remained broadly
						steady and
						somewhat above average. Historically, households' assessments of their own finances
						generally have
						mattered more for household consumption decisions than their expectations about future economic
						conditions.
					
Conditions in established housing markets had continued to strengthen over the previous month.
						Housing
						prices had increased further in Melbourne and Sydney and this experience had been broadly based
						across
						both cities. Growth in housing prices had increased in Brisbane, Adelaide and regional areas,
						and
						housing prices had increased in Perth for the first time in two years. Non-price indicators had
						also
						pointed to a strengthening of conditions in the established housing market: auction clearance
						rates had
						remained high in Sydney and Melbourne, and auction volumes had picked up, albeit from a very low
						base.
					
By contrast, conditions in the new housing construction market had remained subdued. Residential
						construction activity was expected to continue to contract for several quarters, despite
						conditions in
						established housing markets having strengthened. Although there had been tentative signs of an
						improvement in conditions in some of the earlier stages of building activity, most indicators
						had
						remained weak, and most developer contacts in the liaison program were yet to report increased
						sales of
						new housing.
					
Business investment appeared to have eased in the September quarter. Information from the ABS
						Capital
						Expenditure (Capex) survey and preliminary non-residential construction data suggested that
						non-mining
						investment had decreased in the quarter, led by a marked decline in machinery & equipment
						investment. The Capex survey had provided the fourth estimate of investment intentions for 2019/20. Non-mining investment in 2019/20 was
						expected to be weaker than previously envisaged, while the survey continued to suggest that
						mining
						investment would contribute to growth over time, as firms invested to sustain – and in
						some
						instances expand – production.
					
Conditions in the labour market and wages data had shown little change since earlier in the year.
						The
						unemployment rate had remained around 5¼ per cent in October. Employment had
						declined by
						19,000 in October as both full-time and part-time employment had declined. This had
						followed a
						sustained period of stronger-than-expected employment growth, which had remained at 2 per cent
						over the year despite the most recent monthly decline. The employment-to-population ratio and
						the
						participation rate had both remained at high levels. Over the previous few months, measures of
						the
						number of job advertisements had not changed much and firms' near-term hiring intentions
						had
						remained broadly stable. Employment intentions among the Bank's liaison contacts had
						generally been
						moderate, but had been weakest for firms exposed to residential construction.
					
The wage price index (WPI) had increased by 0.5 per cent in the September quarter, to
						be
						2.2 per cent higher in year-ended terms, which was broadly as had been expected.
						Private
						sector wages growth had been 2.2 per cent in year-ended terms, and had levelled out in
						recent
						quarters following its gentle upward trend of the previous couple of years. This was consistent
						with
						information from liaison that a larger share of firms expected wages growth to be stable (rather
						than
						increasing) in the year ahead compared with a year or so earlier. Growth in the private sector
						WPI
						measure including bonuses and commissions had risen to 3 per cent in year-ended terms,
						which
						was the highest rate of growth since late 2012. This was consistent with information from
						liaison
						indicating that firms had been using temporary measures to retain and reward employees rather
						than
						permanent wage increases. Public sector wages growth had slowed in the September quarter
						following the
						one-off boost from the large wage outcome for Victorian nurses and midwives in the June quarter.
					
Turning to the policy decision, members noted that there had been little change in the economic
						outlook
						since the previous meeting. Globally, financial market conditions had been more positive, as
						market
						participants' concerns about downside risks had receded a little and a number of central
						banks had
						eased monetary policy. There were also signs of stabilisation in several recent economic
						indicators,
						particularly for the manufacturing industry.
					
Domestically, after a soft patch in the second half of 2018, the Australian economy appeared to
						have
						reached a gentle turning point. GDP growth in the September quarter was expected to have
						continued at a
						similar pace since the beginning of the year. Most of the partial data preceding release of the
						national
						accounts had been in line with expectations, although non-mining investment had been weaker and
						public
						spending a little stronger. The outlook for growth in output continued to be supported by lower
						interest
						rates, the recent tax cuts, high levels of spending on infrastructure, a pick-up in the housing
						market
						and the improved outlook in the resources sector. However, members noted that weak growth in
						household
						income continued to present a downside risk to consumer spending, and that a low appetite for
						risk could
						be constraining businesses' willingness to invest. The drought in many parts of Australia
						was
						another source of uncertainty for the outlook.
					
Members observed that labour market conditions had been broadly unchanged since earlier in the
						year.
						While this outcome had largely been in line with forecasts, it remained an area to monitor, both
						because
						an improving labour market was important for its own sake and also because a tightening in the
						labour
						market would put upward pressure on wages growth and inflation. It was noted that the current
						rate of
						wages growth was not consistent with inflation being sustainably within the target range, unless
						productivity growth was extraordinarily weak, nor was it consistent with consumption growth
						returning to
						trend.
					
Members discussed the transmission to the economy of the interest rate reductions since the
						middle of
						the year. They noted in particular that the available evidence suggested that more stimulatory
						monetary
						policy had been working through the usual channels of lower bond yields, a depreciation of the
						exchange
						rate and lower interest rates on mortgages. There had also been an effect on housing prices,
						increased
						housing turnover in the established market and some early signs of a stabilisation in housing
						construction activity. The upturn in the housing market was a positive development for the
						economy in
						the near term, but could become a source of concern if borrowing were to run too quickly ahead
						of income
						growth.
					
Members also discussed community concerns about the effect of lower interest rates on confidence,
						noting the decline in business confidence and consumer sentiment this year. This decline had
						coincided
						with heightened economic uncertainty globally, a period of softer growth in the Australian
						economy and
						weakness in household income growth, and the Board had responded to these factors in preceding
						months.
						While members recognised the negative confidence effects for some parts of the community arising
						from
						lower interest rates, they judged that the impact of these effects was unlikely to outweigh the
						stimulus
						to the economy from lower interest rates.
					
In assessing the evidence, members noted that monetary policy had long and variable lags and that
						indebted consumers may take some time before increasing their spending in response to a decline
						in their
						mortgage interest payments. More generally, the persistently low growth in household incomes
						continued
						to be a source of concern for the consumption outlook. Economic growth and the unemployment rate
						remained broadly consistent with the forecasts, but members agreed that it would be concerning
						if there
						were a deterioration in the outlook. As in other countries, there was no real concern of
						inflation
						rising quickly.
					
The Board concluded that the most appropriate approach would be to maintain the current stance of
						monetary policy and to continue to assess the evidence of how the easing in monetary policy was
						affecting the economy. Members agreed that it would be important to reassess the economic
						outlook in
						February 2020, when the Bank would prepare updated forecasts. As part of their deliberations,
						members
						noted that the Board had the ability to provide further stimulus to the economy, if required.
						Members
						also agreed that it was reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would
						be
						required in Australia to reach full employment and achieve the inflation target. The Board would
						continue to monitor developments, including in the labour market, and was prepared to ease
						monetary
						policy further if needed to support sustainable growth in the economy, full employment and the
						achievement of the inflation target over time.
					
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 0.75 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				