Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Sydney – 6 August 2019

Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
				Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Catherine Tanna
Members granted leave of absence to Carol Schwartz AO in terms of section 18A of the Reserve Bank
				Act 1959.
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets),
				Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets
				Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary)
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that global growth had remained
				reasonable, having eased since mid 2018. Near-term indicators relating to trade, manufacturing and
				investment had remained subdued, although consumption growth had been relatively resilient, supported by
				strong labour market conditions especially in the advanced economies. Despite wages growth having
				generally trended higher over the preceding few years, inflation had remained below target in a range of
				economies.
Growth in major trading partners was expected to slow a little in 2019 and 2020. This outlook had been
				revised down a little since the May Statement on Monetary Policy in light of the escalation
				of the US–China trade and technology disputes and the related weakness in indicators of
				investment. Members noted the recent announcement by the US administration of a 10 per cent
				tariff to be imposed on a further US$300 billion of Chinese exports to the United States. Further
				escalation presented a downside risk to the outlook, particularly if heightened uncertainty weighed
				further on business investment. Members noted that investment intentions had already eased significantly
				in a number of economies, including the United States and the euro area, and investment had fallen in a
				number of economies with a high exposure to international trade, including South Korea.
In China, a range of activity indicators suggested that domestic economic conditions had slowed further
				in the June quarter. Further monetary and fiscal stimulus measures had also been announced. Fiscal
				support had encouraged investment in infrastructure, while residential construction had continued to
				grow relatively strongly, which in turn had supported steel production. The outlook for the Chinese
				economy had been revised lower, largely because of the ongoing US–China trade and technology
				disputes. Uncertainty about how these disputes would play out and how effective domestic policy measures
				would be in supporting Chinese demand continued to be an important consideration for the global growth
				outlook and, from an Australian perspective, the future demand for steel and bulk commodities.
The US–China disputes and the slowing in Chinese domestic demand had affected export and
				investment growth in the east Asian region. However, exports to the United States had increased for some
				economies in the region, including Vietnam, as a result of trade diversion. By contrast, growth in
				consumption in the east Asian region had generally remained more resilient. Growth in output in India
				had slowed and the outlook was weaker than previously forecast, largely because there had been less
				fiscal support and trade tensions with the United States were emerging.
In the major advanced economies, risks to the outlook remained tilted to the downside, reflecting the
				trade disputes. The US economy had continued to grow relatively strongly into the June quarter. This was
				despite the effects of the trade dispute on the manufacturing sector and on business investment more
				generally, partly because tight labour markets had supported strong consumption growth. Members noted
				that the most recent round of tariff announcements would affect US imports of consumption goods from
				China and could boost US consumer prices to some extent. Further slowing in investment seemed likely as
				the effect of earlier fiscal stimulus waned and the uncertainty related to the trade and technology
				disputes persisted.
Weaker global trade and greater uncertainty had also affected growth in output in the euro area. Growth
				in Japan was expected to be boosted temporarily by spending brought forward ahead of an increase in the
				consumption tax in October, although weaker external demand had weighed on export growth.
Commodity prices had generally fallen since the previous meeting, partly in response to the escalation
				of trade tensions in early August. After more than doubling in the first half of 2019, iron ore prices
				had declined to be below US$100 per tonne. Coal and oil prices had also declined over the previous
				month. Rural commodity prices had been little changed. Members noted that the terms of trade for
				Australia in the June quarter had been higher than expected.
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that GDP growth was expected to have been firmer in the
				June quarter after three weak quarters. This was partly because resource exports had recovered from
				earlier supply disruptions and mining investment was likely to be less of a drag on growth. Partial
				indicators suggested that consumption growth had remained subdued in the June quarter; the volume of
				retail sales had been subdued and sales of new cars had declined. While dwelling investment was expected
				to have declined further in the June quarter, public demand and non-mining business investment were
				expected to have continued to support growth.
Members observed that the lower near-term GDP growth forecast mostly reflected the fact that
				consumption growth had been weaker than expected over recent quarters. Members noted that consumption
				growth per capita had been particularly weak recently. The forecast for GDP growth over 2019 had been
				lowered to 2½ per cent. Growth was expected to pick up to 2¾ per cent over
				2020 and to around 3 per cent over 2021. This was supported by a range of factors, including
				lower interest rates, tax measures, signs of an earlier-than-expected stabilisation in some established
				housing markets, the lower exchange rate, the infrastructure pipeline and a pick-up in activity in the
				mining sector.
Members noted that although the outlook for consumption remained uncertain, the risks around the
				outlook were more balanced than they had been for some time. The low- and middle-income tax offset was
				expected to boost income growth, with a surge in the lodgement of tax returns since the end of June. In
				addition, signs of a recovery in some established housing markets suggested that the dampening effect of
				declining housing prices on consumption could dissipate earlier than had previously been assumed.
The evidence that conditions in housing markets were showing signs of a turnaround had strengthened in
				July. In Sydney and Melbourne, housing prices had increased, housing turnover appeared to have reached a
				trough and auction clearance rates had risen further. Outside the two largest cities, housing market
				conditions had shown tentative signs of improvement; prices had risen in Brisbane, while the pace of
				decline had slowed in Perth. Rental vacancies had been low in most cities except in Sydney, where they
				had risen further as new apartments were added to the rental stock.
Members observed that it could take some time for the stabilisation of conditions in the established
				housing market to translate into a pick-up in construction activity. Indeed, leading indicators
				suggested that dwelling investment was likely to decline further in the near term. Residential building
				approvals had declined further over May and June and were around their lowest levels in six years.
				Timely information from liaison contacts suggested that increased buyer interest had yet to translate
				into more housing sales. However, members noted that signs of a turnaround in housing markets suggested
				there were some upside risks to dwelling investment later in the forecast period, particularly given the
				expected strength in population growth.
Forward-looking indicators for business investment had been mixed. Survey measures of business
				conditions had been less positive than a year earlier, especially in the retail and transport sectors,
				but generally had remained around average. By contrast, non-residential building approvals had trended
				up in recent months and the pipeline of work under way was already quite high. There was also a large
				pipeline of private sector projects to build transport and renewable energy infrastructure, which was
				expected to support non-mining business investment.
Although mining investment had declined in the March quarter as large liquefied natural gas (LNG)
				projects approached completion, the medium-term outlook for mining investment had remained positive. A
				number of projects had been committed and others were under consideration, which would add to investment
				in coming years if they went ahead. Members noted that the outlook for mining investment had not been
				affected by the recent elevated levels of iron ore prices. However, they observed that higher iron ore
				prices would add to government taxation revenues and boost household income and wealth through dividends
				and the effect on share prices. At the margin, this could provide greater impetus to spending than
				currently assumed.
Resource exports had picked up during the June quarter as some supply disruptions to iron ore had been
				resolved and LNG production had increased further. Resource exports were expected to contribute to
				growth over the forecast period and the recent depreciation of the Australian dollar was expected to
				support further growth in service and manufacturing exports.
Members noted that recent labour market data had been mixed. The unemployment rate had remained at
				5.2 per cent for the third consecutive month, which was higher than had been expected in May.
				However, growth in employment had continued to exceed growth in the working-age population in the June
				quarter and had been stronger than forecast in May. As a result, the employment-to-population ratio and
				the participation rate had remained around record highs. Over the previous year, there had been a
				particularly notable increase in the participation rates of women aged between 25 and 54 years
				and workers aged 65 years and over. Members noted that the increase in participation by older
				workers had more than offset any tendency for the ageing of the population to reduce aggregate
				participation in the labour force. Members discussed some of the factors that could be contributing to
				these trends, including slow income growth, improvements in health and greater flexibility in the labour
				market.
Leading indicators implied a moderation in employment growth over the following six months: job
				vacancies had declined slightly over the three months to May (but remained high as a share of the labour
				force) and firms' near-term hiring intentions had moderated, to be just above their long-run
				average. The unemployment rate forecast had been revised higher, with the unemployment rate expected to
				remain around 5¼ per cent for some time before declining to about 5 per cent as
				growth in output picked up.
Members noted that the outlook for the labour market was one of the key uncertainties for the
				forecasts, with implications for growth in wages, household income and consumption. The outlook for
				wages growth had been revised a little lower because the outlook for the labour market suggested that
				there would be more spare capacity than previously thought. Private sector wages growth was expected to
				pick up only modestly, while public sector wages growth would be contained by government caps on wage
				increases. Members observed that the outlook for household consumption spending could be weaker if
				households expected low income growth to persist for longer.
Members noted that the June quarter CPI had been largely as expected. Trimmed mean inflation had
				increased a little to 0.4 per cent in the June quarter, but had remained at
				1.6 per cent over the preceding year, consistent with the forecast in May. Headline inflation
				had been 0.7 per cent (seasonally adjusted), partly because fuel prices had increased by
				around 10 per cent in the June quarter; over the year, headline inflation had also been
				1.6 per cent. Overall, members noted that there had been few signs in the June quarter CPI
				numbers of inflationary pressures emerging.
Inflation in market-based services had remained steady, which was consistent with a lack of wage
				pressures in the economy. Inflation in the housing-related components of the CPI had been around
				historical lows. New dwelling prices had declined again in the June quarter, reflecting the use of bonus
				offers and purchase incentives by developers to counter the weak housing conditions. Rent inflation had
				been flat in the quarter in aggregate, but had fallen noticeably in Sydney, consistent with the rising
				vacancy rate; rent deflation had eased in Perth and had been steady in most other cities. Members noted
				that low inflation in new dwelling costs and rents, which represent around one-sixth of the CPI basket,
				was likely to persist in the near term.
There had been an increase in inflation for retail items because there had been some pass-through of
				the exchange rate depreciation and the drought had boosted certain food prices. These effects were
				expected to dissipate if there was no further exchange rate depreciation, as is usually assumed in the
				forecasts, and once normal seasonal conditions returned. Inflation in the prices of administered items
				and utilities had remained well below typical increases recorded a few years earlier.
Inflation was expected to pick up more gradually than previously forecast because of subdued wage
				outcomes and the evidence of spare capacity in the economy. The experience of other economies suggested
				that any pick-up in wages growth might take longer to translate into inflation than in the past.
				Underlying inflation and headline inflation were both expected to pick up to be a little above
				2 per cent over 2021, as spare capacity in the labour market declined and as growth increased
				to run above potential. Members noted that there were downside risks to some individual CPI components.
				In the near term, electricity prices could grow at a below-average pace or even fall, and government
				cost-of-living initiatives could weigh on other items in the CPI basket. Inflation rates for both new
				dwelling prices and rents were also expected to remain low in the near term, but were more uncertain
				towards the end of the forecast period.
Members commenced their discussion of financial markets by noting that central banks in the major
				economies had eased, or were expected to ease, policy settings in response to downside risks to growth
				and subdued inflation outcomes. Financial market volatility had increased recently from low levels, in
				response to the escalation of the trade and technology disputes between the United States and
				China.
The US Federal Reserve lowered its policy rate target by 25 basis points in July. Market pricing
				suggested that the federal funds rate was expected to decline by a further 100 basis points or so
				over the following year. The Federal Reserve noted that the US labour market had remained strong.
				However, it was perceived by members of the Federal Open Market Committee that there was room for some
				easing of monetary policy given the implications of global developments for the US economic outlook and
				subdued inflation pressures. Elsewhere, the European Central Bank (ECB) had foreshadowed additional
				monetary stimulus unless the outlook for inflation in the euro area improved. The ECB indicated that it
				could expand its bond-buying program, among other measures, and market pricing suggested that the ECB
				was likely to reduce its policy rate over the following months. Market participants were also expecting
				the Bank of Japan to ease monetary policy further in the period ahead.
In response to the shift in the outlook for monetary policy, long-term interest rates had declined to
					historical lows in several markets, including in Australia. Yields on government bonds were negative
					for a number of European sovereigns and Japan. In addition, corporate bond spreads were low globally,
					with a growing portion of corporate debt in the euro area trading at yields below zero. Members
					discussed the implications of the low level of bond yields for corporate balance sheets and
					investment.
Global equity markets had declined sharply prior to the meeting, in response to the recent escalation
					of the trade and technology disputes. Nevertheless, equity market indices were still well above their
					levels earlier in the year, supported by lower bond yields and expectations that earnings growth would
					be reasonable. During July, equity market indices in the United States and Australia had reached record
					high levels.
In foreign exchange markets, prior to the meeting there had been an increase in volatility, from very
					low levels, in response to the escalation of the trade and technology disputes. In particular, the yen
					had appreciated against the US dollar while the Chinese yuan had depreciated. Members took note of
					the market commentary that the US and Japanese authorities could intervene in an effort to lower the
					value of their currencies. The Australian dollar had depreciated in recent times to be at its lowest
					level in many years.
In Australia, the reduction in variable mortgage rates had been broadly consistent with the reduction
					in the cash rate in June and July. The degree of pass-through of the cash rate reductions was also
					comparable to that observed over the preceding decade. Housing credit growth had declined in June, for
					both owner-occupiers and investors. At the same time, however, loan approvals had picked up in June,
					which for investors was the first sizeable increase for some time. This was consistent with other
					indicators suggesting that the housing market had stabilised over recent months. However, loan
					approvals to property developers had remained subdued. Members also noted that access to finance for
					small businesses continued to be tight.
Banks' debt funding costs and borrowing rates for households and businesses were at
					historically low levels. Rates in short-term money markets, bank bond yields and deposit rates had all
					declined to historically low levels. The proportion of bank deposits that attract no interest had
					increased marginally to be just under 10 per cent. Despite the low level of funding costs,
					banks' bond issuance remained subdued. This reflected slow credit growth, along with the banks
					increasing their issuance of hybrid securities to fulfil new regulatory capital requirements. Members
					also noted that mergers and acquisitions activity had not been especially high, despite funding
					conditions being very accommodative for large businesses.
Market pricing implied that the cash rate was expected to remain unchanged in August. A 25 basis
				points reduction had been fully priced in by November 2019, with a further 25 basis points
				reduction expected in 2020. The low level of bond yields implied that the cash rate was expected to
				remain very low for several years.
Members reviewed the experience of other advanced economies with unconventional monetary policy
				measures over the preceding decade. These measures comprised: very low and negative policy interest
				rates; explicit forward guidance; lowering longer-term risk-free rates by purchasing government
				securities; providing longer-term funding to banks to support credit creation; purchasing private sector
				assets; and foreign exchange intervention. Members considered the key lessons from the international
				experience, noting that a full evaluation could not be undertaken as many of these measures were yet to
				be unwound. One key lesson was that the effectiveness of these measures depended upon the specific
				circumstances facing each economy and the nature of its financial system. Some measures had been
				successful in reducing government bond yields, which had flowed through to lower interest rates for
				private borrowers. Other measures had been effective in addressing dislocations in credit supply.
				Members noted that a package of measures tended to be more effective than measures implemented in
				isolation. Finally, it was important for the central bank to communicate clearly and consistently about
				these measures.
Turning to the policy decision, members observed that the escalation of the trade and technology
				disputes had increased the downside risks to the global growth outlook, although the central forecast
				was still for reasonable growth. Uncertainty around trade policy had already had a negative effect on
				investment in many economies. Members noted that, against this backdrop, the low inflation outcomes in
				many economies provided central banks with scope to ease monetary policy further if required. Indeed, a
				number of central banks had reduced interest rates this year and further monetary easing was widely
				expected. In China, the authorities had taken steps to support economic growth, while continuing to
				address risks in the financial system.
Overall, global financial conditions remained accommodative. Long-term government bond yields had
				declined further and were at record lows in many economies, including Australia. Borrowing rates for
				both households and businesses were also at historically low levels and there was strong competition for
				borrowers of high credit quality. Despite this, demand for housing credit, particularly from investors,
				remained subdued, while access to credit for some types of borrowers, especially small businesses,
				remained tight. The Australian dollar had depreciated to its lowest level in recent times.
Domestically, growth had been lower than expected in the first half of 2019. Looking forward, growth
				was expected to strengthen gradually, to 2¾ per cent over 2020 and to around
				3 per cent over 2021. This outlook was supported by a number of developments, including lower
				interest rates, higher growth in household income (including from the recent tax cuts), the depreciation
				of the Australian dollar, a positive outlook for investment in the resources sector, some stabilisation
				of the housing market and ongoing high levels of investment in infrastructure. Overall, the domestic
				risks to the forecast for output growth appeared to be tilted to the downside in the near term, but were
				more balanced later in the forecast period.
Employment growth had been stronger than expected and labour force participation had increased to a
				record high. However, the unemployment rate had increased and there appeared to have been more spare
				capacity in the labour market than previously appreciated, although there was uncertainty around the
				extent of this. The unemployment rate was expected to decline to around 5 per cent over the
				following couple of years, consistent with the gradual pick-up in GDP growth. Wages growth had been
				subdued and there were few signs of wage pressures building in the economy. Combined with the
				reassessment of spare capacity in the labour market, this had led to a more subdued outlook for wages
				growth than three months earlier.
In the June quarter, inflation had been broadly as expected at 1.6 per cent. Members noted
				that inflation had averaged a little below 2 per cent for a number of years. In the near term,
				there were few signs of inflationary pressures building, but, over time, inflation was expected to
				increase gradually to be a little under 2 per cent over 2020 and a little above
				2 per cent over 2021.
Based on the information available and the central scenario that was presented, members judged it
				reasonable to expect that an extended period of low interest rates would be required in Australia to
				make sustained progress towards full employment and achieve more assured progress towards the inflation
				target. Having eased monetary policy at the previous two meetings, the Board judged it appropriate to
				assess developments in the global and domestic economies before considering further change to the
				setting of monetary policy. Members would consider a further easing of monetary policy if the
				accumulation of additional evidence suggested this was needed to support sustainable growth in the
				economy and the achievement of the inflation target over time.
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.00 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				