Most members pointed out that global economic highlighted that economic activity in the United States has continued showing resilience. They indicated that, in contrast, economic growth in China has turned out to be lower than expected. One member considered that the global economic recovery has been atypical. He/she highlighted that a rebalancing among aggregate expenditure components continues, along with a lesser global supply and demand imbalance. Most members United States. Some members mentioned that this is also observed in other advanced economies. One member added that global economic activity and labor markets remain strong even under tight liquidity conditions and uncertainty factors. previously anticipated. They added that a slight rebound of economic activity is expected for 2024. One member added that, in this context, a moderation of world labor markets is anticipated. Some members considered that a recession in some economies is likely, albeit moderate and short-lived. One member mentioned that the resilience of the US economy has contributed to improve growth prospects for Latin America. He/she commented that a better economic performance is also foreseen in the euro area, while lower growth is anticipated in Asia. Another member stated that timely indicators point to a greater expansion of services compared to manufacturing. Among the risks to global economic growth, some members mentioned the prevalence of an environment of geopolitical tensions and economic fragmentation. One member pointed out that this has encouraged the nearshoring process. In this regard, he/she mentioned that shocks associated with the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict in Ukraine, in addition to their short-term effects, could also have implications for the long term. Another member underlined the risk associated with tighter financial conditions. All members pointed out that headline inflation continued decreasing in most economies. Most members attributed such decline to lower Nevertheless, all members forewarned that headline inflation remains at high levels. One member added that it is still above central banks’ targets. Most members highlighted that the core component has shown a resistance to decline. One member pointed out that, at the global level, the core component remains at levels nearly twice the central banks’ targets. Another member estimated that it will decline very gradually. He/she pointed out that services inflation remains affected in several economies, highlighting the upward trend in the shelter component in the United States. One member underlined that, in some economies, core inflation even continues trending upwards. Another member mentioned that, during disinflationary processes, the reduction in inflation is not necessarily linear, but rather, fluctuations may occur, making it difficult to identify its trend. He/she used as an example the cases of Canada, Japan and the United States, which registered a moderate rebound in headline inflation in April, as compared to the previous month. He/she considered that longerlasting or more intense effects of price-related shocks cannot be ruled out, which could delay the convergence of inflation to its target. Most members highlighted that, after having left their reference rates unchanged, some advanced economy monetary authorities increased them again. One member stated that, while the global monetary tightening cycle has been somewhat similar across economies, looking ahead, a greater heterogeneity in its pace of moderation is expected. He/she pointed out that this is due to the unequal evolution of core inflation, as well as to the differences in the timing of the respective monetary policy cycles, with advanced economies having started their hiking cycles after several emerging economies. Some members indicated that, overall, central banks continue stating that interest rates should remain at high levels for an extended period. Most members mentioned that, in light of the complex inflationary environment, there was an increase in the expected trajectory for reference rates of advanced economy central banks. They also noted a lower probability of interest rate cuts Most members mentioned that, in its last meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged. One member stated that the chairman of that institution ruled out interest rate cuts in 2023 and mentioned instead that these cuts would only be evaluated once inflation has decreased considerably. Most members underlined that the median of the Federal Reserve members' projections suggests that they could raise the funds rate by 50 basis points in the second half of 2023. One member mentioned that the Federal Reserve now expects the US economy to show more resilience while it anticipates higher levels of core inflation by the end of the year. performance of international financial markets. They attributed said results to greater risk appetite following the suspension of the debt ceiling in the United States as well as to the perception of lower risks in its banking sector. Some members indicated that expectations that the main central banks are nearing the end of their hiking cycle also contributed to the above. One member added that the probability of a systemic risk event materializing has decreased. Most members mentioned that the lesser risk aversion was reflected in gains in the main stock market indices. One member noted that this was more apparent in the technology sector shares. He/she underlined that interest rates increased in the main economies. Another member pointed out that the increase in short-term interest rates was due to the reassertion of the restrictive tone by the main central banks. One member noted that foreign exchange markets showed a heterogeneous behavior by region, with Latin American currencies appreciating the most. Another member stated that emerging economies registered inflows into equity assets and outflows from fixed-income assets. He/she added that, although risk appetite increased, the outlook for financial markets remains negative, given the environment of uncertainty and the expectation of an economic deceleration. Most members pointed out that domestic economic activity has shown resilience in a complex external environment. One member mentioned that in the first quarter of 2023 GDP surprised to the upside. Another member stated that available information suggests that economic activity would have expanded in April, supported by the manufacturing sector and by a certain reactivation of tertiary activities. Most members noted that some recent indicators point to a deceleration in the second quarter. One member added that the balance of risks to growth is more equilibrated given that some upward risks, such as the resilience of the US economy, have gained more relevance. Some members noted that industrial production rebounded in April 2023, after having contracted during the previous month. One member warned that, from a medium-term perspective, it remains sluggish and does not show a change in trend since the second half of 2022. Another member mentioned that manufacturing recovered slightly in April and that the component of transportation equipment has already reached its pre-pandemic levels, but that other segments of industrial production decreased at the margin. Some members highlighted that there are signs of a loss of dynamism in manufacturing production. One member added that mining shows signs of deceleration. As to the services sector, some members underlined its growth during the first quarter of the year. However, one member highlighted that only 30% of its subsectors followed clearly positive dynamics during said period. Another member noted the dynamism shown by the segment of accommodation and food preparation services, which is about to reach its prepandemic level. He/she indicated that the services segments that have recovered more rapidly since the pandemic are those mostly associated with the industrial sector. Some members underlined that domestic demand has continued increasing, although one member considered that it has done so at a slight pace. Most members indicated that, by the end of the first quarter of 2023, private consumption continued consumption of imported goods. One member mentioned that the consumption of services shows sluggishness. Another member indicated that, in monthly terms, it grew marginally in March, although he/she emphasized that, in annual terms, it registered high growth. He/she underlined that the timely indicator of private consumption shows that it continued growing during the April-May bimester, albeit with some moderation at the margin. One member pointed out that leading indicators, such as indices based on Internet searches, suggest that there will be a moderation in the growth of consumption of services. As for investment, most members underlined that it continued increasing in March, mainly driven by spending on highlighted that construction remains weak. One member attributed the latter to the decreasing trend in residential investment. Another member underlined that, given the opportunities provided by nearshoring, it is necessary to implement public and fiscal policies that foster a favorable environment for private investment and that public investment focuses on the provision of the infrastructure necessary to attract investment. Regarding the external sector, most members noted that the value of manufacturing exports decreased in April, due to a fall in the automotive sector. One member explained that the above reflected a fall in the volume exported, rather than in prices. Some members highlighted that non- automotive exports to the United States continued increasing and remained at high levels. One member forewarned that, looking ahead, a moderation in external demand continues to be expected. All members pointed out that the labor market remains strong. They highlighted that the unemployment rate is at minimum historical levels. Some members mentioned that the labor participation rate continued increasing. One member underlined that the number of IMSS-insured workers continued expanding. Another member added that the number of available job vacancies increased. He/she mentioned that this tends to be associated with positive economic activity shocks, rather than with a sectoral reallocation. In this context, most members considered that the labor market shows signs of tightness. Some members noted that the unemployment gap is negative, that is, that the open unemployment rate is lower than the Nonaccelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment to be negative, even with a metric that includes the inactive but available-for-work population. Another member indicated that employment is growing at a rate higher than labor participation, which in the past has coincided with a positive output gap. Most magnitude of wage revisions. One member reiterated that in May the annual variations of contractual wages and of wages of IMSS-insured workers remained at high levels. Another member pointed out that the annualized quarterly growth rate of average wages drawn from the National Survey of Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish) accelerated during the first quarter of the year. Finally, one member added that the wage bill is increasing at a rate unseen in a long time, and that some business sector participants perceive labor shortages to some extent. Most members stated that the estimate of the output gap keeps narrowing. Some members pointed out that it is not statistically different from zero. One member expressed that he/she expects it to remain close to zero during 2023 and 2024. Another member cautioned that GDP has grown at a slower rate than employment, which raises questions regarding the impact of the shocks that have affected the economy on the country's factor productivity. All members highlighted that, since the last inflation continued decreasing, although it remains at high levels. They mentioned that, in the first fortnight of June, it registered 5.18%. One member underlined that headline inflation has decreased for more than four consecutive months. Another member mentioned that it continues on its convergence path. One member highlighted that different measures of central tendency show widespread decreases. He/she added that there is a high probability that the current price dynamics do not correspond to those of a high inflation regime. All members underlined that the decrease in headline inflation has fundamentally responded to the evolution of the non-core component and, to a lesser degree, to the decline in core inflation. One member noted that of the 3.52 percentage points by which headline inflation decreased between August 2022 and the first fortnight of June, around 75% is attributable to the fall in the non-core component, which declined by 10.6 percentage points during that period. He/she added that the core component so far has decreased by slightly over 1.5 percentage points since its peak in November 2022. Another member noted that the disinflationary process will comprise two stages. The first one, in which inflation decreases but still remains at elevated levels, and the second one, in which it consolidates at levels consistent with its target. He/she pointed out that in the first stage the speed of reduction of the CPI components will be heterogeneous, and therefore some of them will likely have relatively high readings. All members indicated that diverse inflation pressures have been easing. One member added that this has been more noticeable during the second quarter of 2023. Another member pointed out that most supply chains are already operating under normal conditions, that international food and commodity prices are clearly decreasing, and that inflation in the United States is declining, while producer prices in Mexico are exhibiting negative inflation rates. Most members considered that the monetary tightening attained has contributed to the inflation’s behavior. One member added that base effects are also contributing to the above. He/she mentioned that some estimates that decompose inflation in different time frequencies show that its decline is mainly explained by shortterm factors, while medium- and long-term trends remain affected. Some members noted that inflation is still influenced by the shocks it has been subject to. All members stated that core inflation continued headline inflation. They mentioned that, in the first fortnight of June, it registered 6.91%. One member argued that its decrease has been more noticeable in recent months, given that of the nearly November 2022, approximately 118 have been registered since April 2023. Another member agreed that core inflation is already trending downwards, although he/she acknowledged that there is still a long road ahead. One member pointed out that it remains at high levels and continues facing significant pressures. Most members mentioned that merchandise inflation has continued decreasing. One member highlighted that it has been declining for six consecutive months, but still remains at high levels. Another member considered that its decline has been slow. One member noted that it has benefited from significant base effects. Most members variations. One member highlighted that the prices of basic goods associated with food and personal care products continue registering increases of over signs of mitigation of merchandise price pressures are more noticeable when seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations of their price index are considered. He/she noted that, based on latest readings, the three-month moving average of such variations in food merchandise prices registers He/she added that for non-food merchandise these figures are 3.48 and 5.65%, respectively. He/she pointed out that the share of weight-adjusted items from the food merchandise component with price variations larger than 10% is currently at 10.6%, after having been at 80% in 2022. He/she added that, in the case of non-food merchandise, this share is currently 7.7%, while last year it was above 40%. Some members noted that annual services inflation remains high. One member underlined that most variations in services prices have not yet registered an inflection point. Some members noted, however, that, at the margin, this component showed signs of moderation. One member mentioned that it decreased slightly during the first fortnight of June, due to a marginal reduction in the inflation of services other than housing and education. He/she added that inflation of housing and education services remained relatively stable, although at levels above 3%. Another member noted that the dynamics of services prices improved when considering their seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variation, which shows a three-month moving average of 3.84% compared to the annual rate of items in the services basket, which currently shows double-digit price variations, is 1.1%, while at the beginning of the year it reached levels of around Some members noted that the high level of services inflation occurs in a context of a strong labor market, in which the demand for services has recovered. One member acknowledged that there is a certain effect of labor market dynamics, but he/she stated that their magnitude does not seem to be such as to explain the levels reached by services inflation. He/she considered that, in any case, this would be one of the factors that have contributed to the persistence of core inflation. He/she added that, while domestic pressures are typically associated with increases in services inflation, the behavior of the latter currently reflects other factors, such as global shocks to certain components or delayed price increases due to weak demand at the time. Therefore, he/she estimated that its evolution not necessarily responds to domestic pressures. He/she stated that, in his/her opinion, the dynamics of services inflation continue reflecting: i) the recovery of this sector in view of the mitigation of changes in consumption patterns, which has led to price increases that had been postponed due to weak demand, and, in this regard, he/she highlighted the increases in education prices; ii) that housing inflation continues being affected by last year's high inflation figures; and iii) that some items continue responding to increases in international references, such as food services. Regarding this last item, he/she mentioned that the sub-index of services excluding housing, education and tourism is which 213 correspond to food services. Most members mentioned that non-core inflation remained at historically low levels, reaching 0.03% during the first fortnight of June. They pointed out that the above was due to the lower annual variations of energy and agricultural and livestock products’ prices. One member stated that monetary policy does not have a major impact on this component. Another member highlighted that domestic gas prices exhibit negative variations of a magnitude unseen in historical records. Some members underlined that longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Nevertheless, one member mentioned that their dispersion is high and noted that the skewness coefficient of their distribution is still positive. Another member stated that medium- and long-term expectations remain high and do not exhibit a downward trend, which he/she considered a matter of concern. Most members considered that short-term inflation registering moderate adjustments. One member pointed out that this behavior has not been generalized. Some members indicated that expectations for the next 12 months and those for the end of 2023 and 2024 decreased. One member underlined that expectations for the end of 2024 are above Banco de México’s projections. Some members indicated that breakeven inflation increased since the last monetary policy decision and remains above target. One member estimated that the price dynamics of basic consumer goods could affect household inflation expectations. Most members emphasized that inflation is still projected to converge to the 3% target in the fourth quarter of 2024. One member stated that these previsions consider Banco de México’s monetary policy actions and that the effects of the inflationary shocks associated with the pandemic and with the military conflict in Ukraine continue dissipating. Some members mentioned that Banco de México’s forecasts for headline inflation were revised marginally downwards for some quarters. They added that those for core inflation remained practically unchanged. One member pointed out that its seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate is expected to continue declining and fall below the upper limit of the target range in the fourth quarter of Most members considered that uncertainty regarding the expected disinflationary process persists. They highlighted that this is a complex phenomenon. Some members estimated that, although base effects will favor the decline in core inflation during the remainder of the year, there is a significant challenge for this decline to continue towards the end of 2023 and during 2024. One member indicated that, although external inflationary pressures are easing, attention must now center on domestic pressures, both structural and conjunctural, especially those related to demand and the labor market. Another member estimated that the persistence of inflation stems from domestic pressures. He/she underlined that, based on some indicators, inflationary pressures of manufactured goods respond to demand-related pressures. All members agreed that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member mentioned that such balance has not deteriorated. Among upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the persistence of core inflation at high levels. One member rated this as the most concerning risk. Another member estimated that the above not only responds to the shocks associated with the pandemic and with the military conflict in Ukraine, but also appears to derive from changes in price formation, as shown by the greater frequency and magnitude of goods and services’ price adjustments. Most members indicated as an upward risk the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. In this regard, some members expressed concern regarding the tightening of the labor market. One member argued that the accelerated wage growth is incompatible with the inflation target. He/she considered that pressures related to labor costs, reflected in different wage indicators, are already being passed on to consumers given the strength of demand. However, another member underlined that inflation indicators that are more sensitive to slack conditions and to wages show a downward trajectory, although they remain at high levels. One member mentioned that the evolution of the labor market should be consistent with the equilibrium of the economy and with price stability. He/she added that, so far, readings of this market that could imply adverse effects on inflation are heterogeneous and nonconclusive. All members agreed that the dynamics of the labor market should continue to be monitored. One member argued that measures of economic slack will gain even more relevance in the coming months. Meanwhile, another member mentioned as an upward risk a possible abrupt correction in market expectations for the Federal Reserve’s future actions, with its corresponding impact on the exchange rate and price stability. Most members mentioned the risk of a greater-than-expected increase in non-core inflation in the following months. One member warned that, even with the foreseen increase in non-core inflation, the central bank forecasts would imply that, during the planning horizon, non-core inflation would be below its average of the last 13 years, and thus there is a risk that this indicator registers higher-than-anticipated levels. Some members mentioned higher prices of agricultural and livestock products, caused by climate-related factors, as an example of risks that could lead to an increase in non-core inflation. Among risks to the downside, one member mentioned the possibility of a greater-than anticipated slowdown in global economic activity, mainly in the United States, and also in Mexico, which would lead to lower domestic inflationary pressures. All members highlighted the appreciation of the Mexican peso since the previous monetary policy meeting. Most members noted that the peso- dollar exchange rate reached its lowest level since December 2015 and that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market have been due to the country's sound macroeconomic fundamentals and the wide volatility-adjusted interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States. One member added that the yield in domestic currency implied on foreign exchange forwards being above the reference rate reflects that the Mexican peso is attractive to investors. Some members considered that remittance inflows and better investment prospects in view of the nearshoring process have also contributed to the favorable behavior of the national currency. One member added the weakening of the US dollar in recent months and uncertainty regarding the beginning of a rate-cutting cycle by the US Federal Reserve. Most members highlighted that, since the previous monetary policy decision, short-term medium- and long-term ones registered limited adjustments. One member added that the inversion of the yield curve prevailed. Another member underlined that the performance of domestic financial markets was in line with global markets, registering gains in the main stock market index and reductions in risk premia. However, one member noted that the stock market registered a negative performance at the margin. Some members underlined that there has been a recovery in the percentage of Mexican Federal Treasury Certificates (Cetes, for their acronym in Spanish) held by foreign investors. One member stated that non-resident holdings of bonds decreased since the last decision as a result, in part, of an increase in the cost of foreign exchange hedging and of profit taking from positions given the appreciation of the Mexican peso during this year. He/she indicated that pension and mutual funds have been the main buyers of government bonds this year. He/she noted that the increase in employer’s contributions has increased the resources managed by the Specialized Investment Companies for Retirement Funds (Siefores, for their acronym in Spanish) and, in turn, the demand for different assets, including government debt and corporate securities. Most members mentioned that the pass-through of increases in the reference rate to commercial bank deposit rates has contributed to incentivize Mexican households to save through term deposits. Some members indicated that commercial banks' performing credit to private firms and households has continued to expand, especially for consumer credit. One member noted that delinquency rates remain relatively low and stable, although a marginal increase in those of credit cards has been observed. Regarding the financial cycle, he/she added that the financial conditions index for Mexico has trended upwards so far this year, and therefore financial conditions remain tight, although at stable levels. Another member pointed out that credit to large issuing firms decelerated in a difficult environment for issuing securities in foreign markets. He/she pointed out that this stands in contrast with the expansion of domestic financing to private firms. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the disinflationary process is underway given that diverse pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed that these continue having an incidence on inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member considered that caution is required at the current stage of disinflation. He/she acknowledged that since the last monetary policy meeting, the disinflation process continued moving forward. However, he/she judged that the outlook remains complicated. In this context, he/she argued in favor of keeping the reference rate unchanged at processes are complex. He/she pointed out that there is always uncertainty about the pace at which shocks may dissipate and that some inflation components may exhibit volatility. He/she highlighted that the reference rate should be maintained at its current level for a period that is long enough to ensure that inflation declines in a sustained manner and that the upward bias of the balance of risks for inflation moderates. He/she stated that it is still too early to consider the possibility of interest rate cuts. He/she noted that the monetary policy stance attained needs more time to continue operating. He/she pointed out that it will be essential to continue analyzing the observed and forecasted behavior of inflation and its components, as well as of all its determinants. Among these, he/she highlighted inflation expectations, cost-related pressures, domestic economic activity, labor and financial market dynamics, as well as external factors such as world inflation, global economic activity, and international monetary policy. He/she highlighted that it is necessary to closely monitor a wide range of economic and financial variables. He/she argued that during this inflationary period, monetary policy has contributed to the anchoring of inflation expectations, mainly long-term ones. He/she mentioned that, despite the magnitude of the shocks, they have remained relatively stable, which has been essential for the disinflation process to begin. He/she added that monetary policy has contributed to the resilient behavior of the Mexican peso. He/she stated that this has eased inflationary pressures by moderating the costs of imported inputs used by the productive sector. He/she noted that it has also contributed to moderate the rate of expansion of external demand faced by the export manufacturing sector, which shows high levels of capacity utilization. He/she added that monetary tightening has fostered a process of intertemporal substitution of household spending. Finally, he/she reiterated that Banco de México remains firmly committed to its primary mandate of price stability. He/she stated that this is to the benefit of the country's population, particularly those with lower incomes. Another member considered that, in view of the prevailing inflationary pressures, it is essential to preserve the level of monetary restriction attained in order to promote the decline of inflation in line with the central bank's projections and mitigate inflationary risks. He/she thus considered it appropriate to maintain the reference rate at its current level of 11.25%. He/she stated that the high uncertainty environment regarding the inflationary process compels Banco de México to act with caution and favor a flexible monetary policy stance subject to incoming data. He/she noted that subsequent monetary policy decisions will depend on incoming data, particularly on headline and core inflation consolidating their downward trend as expected, and on domestic pressures not generating persistence. He/she added that the central bank must clearly state that it is prepared to respond to the circumstances. He/she pointed out that it cannot be ruled out that the level of monetary restriction attained should be maintained for longer than anticipated or that a greater or lesser tightening may be required. He/she stated that, in any case, a restrictive stance should be maintained throughout the planning horizon. He/she mentioned that the monetary policy statement should highlight that the favorable evolution of inflation has mainly responded to external factors, while domestic pressures have persisted and may hinder the convergence of inflation to its target within the forecast horizon. Finally, he/she warned that the accumulated lag in physical investment and lower productivity, both worsened by the pandemic, may have lowered the country’s potential growth, which constitutes a risk factor for inflation that, in his/her opinion, will have significant implications for monetary policy conduction in the short and medium terms. He/she warned that if the country’s potential growth has fallen and in the absence of a restrictive monetary policy, the economy could be on its path towards an equilibrium of low growth and high levels of inflation. Looking ahead, the possibility of lower potential growth could make it difficult to observe high growth rates without inflationary pressures being generated. One member considered it necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period in order to achieve convergence of inflation to its target. He/she recalled that this was communicated since the previous meeting, in which it was transmitted that, according to the information available, the terminal rate had already been attained. He/she considered that, in an environment of lower external pressures, monetary restriction is having an effect. He/she pointed out that a necessary but not sufficient condition to overcome this inflationary episode was that global pressures would begin to ease. He/she stated that now domestic pressures must be contained by maintaining a restrictive monetary stance. He/she mentioned that efforts should focus on further reducing core inflation. He/she stated that the relative monetary policy stance allows for some room for maneuver to focus exclusively on the inflationary outlook, even if the US Federal Reserve were to raise its reference rate on several occasions. He/she mentioned that, since the last reference rate increase in March, the ex-ante real interest rate has risen by 20 basis points due to the fall in 12-month inflation expectations, which is equivalent to almost an additional increase in the reference rate if expectations had not declined. However, he/she pointed out that the monetary stance must be prevented from becoming too restrictive given the expected decline in inflation expectations. He/she highlighted that the expectations channel will be crucial in the upcoming months, together with the materialization of larger effects on the monetary aggregates and other transmission channels. He/she underlined that it is important to continue guiding markets on the temporality of forward guidance and the nature of any possible adjustment in the reference rate. He/she warned that it is too early to believe that the interest rate cuts which are anticipated by market indicators for the end of 2023 will materialize. He/she stated that the term "extended period" should remain undefined until there is greater certainty about an improvement in the inflationary outlook. He/she pointed out that, instead, it will be important to maintain caution when discussing the desirable timing to initiate a normalization cycle and underlined that the environment is still complex and fragile. He/she highlighted that Banco de México will remain committed to its primary mandate through a firm stance until the inflation target is attained. Another member pointed out that, although inflation keeps improving, most of its decline is attributed to the non-core component and to important base effects that are unlikely to operate indefinitely. He/she noted that, although the reference rate has not been adjusted, the ex-ante real interest rate has been increasing. He/she estimated that this is expected to continue occurring, although to a limited extent, given that inflation expectations tend to decline slowly. He/she considered that the effectiveness of the monetary policy stance will depend on the functioning of the transmission channels, which, in his/her opinion are operating in the required direction, particularly with regards to the exchange rate channel. He/she added that, as in other monetary cycles, the tightening of financing conditions and the rise in funding costs have not increased in the same proportion as the reference rate, and therefore the magnitude and lag with which they will influence the behavior of domestic demand still need to be evaluated. He/she argued that monetary restriction will require a prolonged period to be properly transmitted, since the lags with which different channels operate are ample and differ from each other. He/she stated that such restriction must ensure: i) the consolidation of an orderly and sustained trend of headline and core inflation to a level of 3%; ii) a neutral balance of risks for the forecast, and iii) inflation expectations adjusting to their historical averages. He/she considered that, in view of the complex inflationary scenario, these conditions are not yet resolved, and therefore it is necessary to maintain a flexible and data-dependent approach. He/she expressed the need for communication to provide clear signals in a timely manner and to avoid inconsistencies that could damage the central bank's credibility. He/she warned that the reference rate foreseen by fixed-income markets for the end of 2023 and 2024 is below the level required to guarantee the convergence of inflation to its target over the forecast horizon. He/she pointed out that, at this moment, anticipating changes in the monetary cycle would be premature. He/she indicated that, in contrast, providing clear communication on the commitment to the constitutional mandate of price stability can contribute to an adequate formation of expectations and reduce some of the lags with which the transmission mechanisms operate. One member considered that the monetary tightening attained has contributed to the disinflation process. He/she argued that given the persistence of core inflation and a balance of risks biased to the upside, maintaining the reference rate at its current level allows to continue evaluating the degree of absorption of the monetary policy stance in the economy. He/she added that although the transmission channels are operating and their effect will be more noticeable in the coming quarters, the atypical nature of the shocks and their implications on inflationary dynamics strengthen the need for an extended pause. He/she reiterated that, although domestic pressures tend to be associated with increases in services inflation, the latter is still affected by the described shocks and is not necessarily explained by domestic pressures. He/she added that if such pressures were present, these would already be addressed with the monetary restriction achieved. He/she stated that the significant adjustment to the inflation forecast at the beginning of the year in part responded to the anticipation of greater pressures on services, including those stemming from the greater dynamism of the labor market. He/she asserted that the firm and timely action implemented at that policy meeting also sought to address such dynamics, although he/she also highlighted the need to monitor its evolution. On the other hand, he/she considered it prudent to refrain from taking actions that could diminish the effectiveness of the accumulated adjustment or of communication as a policy tool that would relax the monetary stance prematurely. For this reason, he/she stated that currently it is not appropriate to discuss the possibility of interest rate cuts. He/she estimated that, although better readings in inflation expectations are anticipated, which is important to observe under the inflation targeting regime, the referred pause will allow said expectations to continue evolving favorably and contribute to improve the price formation process. He/she added that, among a wide range of factors, it is also relevant to consider the evolution of the balance of risks, the development of inflation with respect to the forecast, and the progression of the forecast itself. Finally, he/she stated that it is essential to continue using communication as an active tool to strengthen the monetary policy stance. He/she highlighted that, in his/her opinion, it is still prudent to communicate that the pause will continue for a sufficiently long period to consolidate the convergence of inflation and foster an orderly adjustment of the economy and markets. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the disinflationary process is underway given that diverse pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed that these continue having an incidence on inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.