Most members highlighted that during the first quarter of 2023, global economic activity recovered compared to the fourth quarter of 2022. Some members pointed out that this was due to the better functioning of supply chains, to lower pressures on energy prices, and to the reopening of China’s economy. Most members noted that labor showing signs of tightening. However, some members expressed that in the United States there are signs of lesser pressures. One member stated that in the major economies, there was a moderation in nominal wage growth. Most members pointed out that world growth prospects for 2023 continue pointing to a deceleration compared to 2022. One member stated that lower growth is expected in advanced economies, while emerging economies are anticipated to face difficulties associated with a moderation in their external demand, a higher debt service, a lower fiscal margin, and high inflation. He/she added that indicators related to world trade volume have already shown certain signs of weakness, while timely indicators of manufacturing and services show a differentiated behavior, with the latter displaying greater dynamism. Another member stated that, in some systemically important economies, a recession cannot be ruled out. However, he/she noted that a slight recovery in global economic activity is still expected for 2024. Among global risks, some members mentioned tighter monetary and financial conditions. Some members added the worsening of geopolitical tensions and challenges to financial stability. Most members stated that headline inflation continued decreasing in a large number of economies, although they warned that it still remains at high levels. They attributed this decline to lower reference prices for food and energy. One member added that the mitigation of shocks and global monetary tightening have also contributed to the fall in inflation. However, most members highlighted that the core component continues showing resistance to decline. In this regard, one member considered this behavior a matter of concern. He/she noted that tight labor markets are one of the factors keeping inflation at historically high levels. Another member pointed out that in some countries it still does not show an inflection point. One member highlighted that in some economies it showed certain moderation. Finally, some members indicated that, in several economies, inflation is expected to converge to its target until the end of 2024 or in early 2025. Most members considered that central banks are in the final phase of their hiking cycles. They highlighted that several monetary authorities have already stopped increasing their reference rates. In this regard, one member stated that the main emerging economies that have already paused their hiking cycle accumulated on average underlined that several central banks have communicated that high rates for an extended period will be necessary to achieve the convergence of inflation to its target. One member added that the fact that the authorities had used specific tools to deal with the risks to the stability of the financial system which resulted from the events in the banking sector, has allowed central banks to focus on fighting inflation. All members mentioned that, at its May meeting, the US Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Most members stated that for the next meeting, analysts and market participants foresee a pause. Most members considered that the tightening of credit conditions due to problems in the banking sector contributed to this projection. Most members noted that market instruments are pricing in interest rate cuts during the second half of 2023. They highlighted that, in contrast, the chairman of the Federal Reserve stated that, given the current inflation projections, they do not foresee cuts in 2023 and that they will maintain a data-dependent stance. One member added that surveys conducted among analysts indicate that interest rate cuts would occur until next year. Most members mentioned that, after the financial turbulence generated by the banking sector events in previous months, international highlighted that this was due to the timely intervention of authorities in the affected economies. Some members noted that the environment of lower risk aversion was reflected in gains in the main stock market indexes, in a depreciation of the US dollar, and in moderate increases in medium- and long-term interest rates. However, one member stated that, in view of the US debt ceiling negotiations, the fixed-income market in that country exhibited volatility. Most members considered that risks to global financial markets persist. Some members pointed out that tighter global financial and credit conditions could prevail. Most members stated that, in the context of a complex external environment, the Mexican highlighted that, according to the GDP flash estimate for the first quarter, economic activity increased its rate of expansion and growth was higher than expected. One member stated that this means that the national economy would have registered six consecutive quarters of positive growth, something unseen since 2016. However, another member reckoned that the balance of risks to growth is biased to the downside. One member pointed out that the latest information suggests a slowdown starting in the second quarter of the year. Most members noted that the performance of the Mexican economy during the first quarter was supported by both the services and industrial expansion of services was generalized during the first two months of 2023, being observed in eight out of its nine subsectors. Regarding the components of the services sector, another member highlighted the greater dynamism of those related to retail; transportation and mass media information; finance and real estate; and accommodation and food preparation services. However, most members noted that industrial activity has lost momentum in recent months. In particular, they highlighted the moderation in manufacturing production. One member pointed out that this could be reflecting an incipient weakening of external demand. Some members also mentioned the slowdown in mining. One member stated that construction registered a marginal improvement in March. Most members highlighted that in the first two months of the year private consumption continued showing dynamism, driven mainly by the consumption of services. One member mentioned that its level is historically high. However, another member pointed out that consumption of goods showed a slight reversion in February. One member noted that there has been a greater dynamism in the consumption of imported goods compared to that of domestic goods, possibly due to the appreciation of the real exchange rate since the start of the hiking cycle in 2021. Most members warned that, looking ahead, some timely indicators suggest a moderation of private consumption. Regarding investment, they noted that it continued increasing, supported by the machinery and equipment component, although one member considered that it still shows a significant lag. Another member pointed out that, overall, investment in construction is sluggish. One member noted that residential construction remained at low levels, while another member highlighted the growth of non-residential construction. In the context of lackluster investment, one member considered necessary to establish conditions for the country to take advantage of the nearshoring phenomenon. He/she argued that this would help counteract the foreseen cyclical weakness of external demand. He/she added that, from a longer-term perspective, it would allow the country's productive capacity to increase. Regarding the external sector, some members pointed out that manufacturing exports showed moderate growth during the first quarter of the year. intermediate goods have continued contracting, while non-automotive exports have weakened. However, another member considered that the latter have been recovering after the decline observed at the end of 2022. He/she added that automotive exports have remained stable and at relatively high levels. All members agreed that the labor market shows strength. Most members pointed out that the labor participation rate continued increasing, while the unemployment rate reached historic lows. They pointed out that, in line with the above, the working population has grown at a population. Some members highlighted the growth in the number of IMSS-insured workers. Some members pointed out the high employment rate among the working-age population. Meanwhile, most members highlighted the relatively high magnitude of wage revisions. One member noted that the nominal annual variation of the daily wage of IMSS-insured workers has remained at levels above 11%, while contractual wage revisions have accelerated, with those of private sector companies standing out, at levels of 8.9%. Another member warned that minimum wage increases are foreseen to have a greater effect on the average wage, given that, according to the latest figure reported as of March, 35% of the employed population already receives up to one minimum wage. Most members noted that the output gap continues narrowing. They highlighted that it is not statistically different from zero. One member commented that he/she expected the point estimate, which is slightly below zero, to remain negative this year and the next. Another member mentioned that, considering measurement issues, there may be greater demand-related pressures than what would initially seem to be the case. All members highlighted that since the last monetary policy meeting, annual headline inflation continued decreasing. Most members argued that various inflationary pressures are easing. However, most members emphasized April. They considered that its decline was mainly due to the evolution of non-core inflation. Some members pointed out that, more recently, the core component has also contributed. One member noted that, since February, biweekly inflation data has been below the analysts’ consensus. He/she mentioned that in April the monthly variation of headline inflation was negative, something unseen in the previous two years, while the annual variation of practically all of its components and subcomponents fell. Another member added that, when analyzing the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations of headline inflation and its two components, these have trended downwards. He/she mentioned that the fraction of the consumption basket showing variations greater than 10% has decreased. He/she stated that indicators, such as the trimmed mean, suggest that the performance of most inflation components, except for the services sub-index, has improved. One member argued that the downward trajectory of inflation seems to be starting to consolidate, although its decline has been slow and marginal so far. Most members highlighted that the latest readings of annual core inflation showed a more marked reduction than in previous months, although it still remains at high levels, mentioned that it was below 8% for the first time in eight months. Another member added that it has been declining for three consecutive months. Most members stated that its monthly variation has declined. Some members noted that in April it was closer to its 10-year average. One member added that some indicators related to its monthly variations confirm a deceleration beyond base effects and a less generalized growth. He/she indicated that close to 50% of the consumption basket of goods and services within the core component already registers an annualized monthly inflation below 5%. However, most members considered that core inflation shows persistence. Some members stated that, although inflation has declined, it is mainly due to favorable external factors. They warned that, in their opinion, there are domestic inflationary pressures that could hinder the convergence of inflation. One member pointed out that the transition to domestic pressures is a pattern observed in most countries. Another member stated that this could be attributed to the fact that: i) housing is facing supply-related pressures accumulated over several years; ii) the rest of services may be affected by the normalization of consumption patterns and the pass-through of cost related pressures; and iii) the labor market shows tighter conditions and relevant wage dynamics in an environment of high inflation. Most members pointed out that merchandise inflation has been decreasing. One member noted that it is currently below the double-digit levels that were observed for nine months. Another member noted that this decline is due to the better functioning of global supply chains and to the moderation of price pressures on various inputs. Some members mentioned that both the food and non-food merchandise subindices have decreased. One member pointed out that both components accumulated four and five months of declines, respectively, although they remain at high levels. In this regard, another member warned that food merchandise inflation remains at double-digit levels. Most members pointed out that, in its latest reading, services inflation decreased. One member stated that said decrease was mainly due to the behavior of tourism-services inflation, which reflected seasonal factors. Some members also mentioned that services inflation continues showing persistence. Some members also underlined that it remains high. Regarding its components, most members noted that the annual price variations of housing and education services still do not show a downward inflection. One member shared a reflection on the behavior of services inflation. First, he/she stated that its increase partly reflects the recovery of this sector given the reversal of changes in consumption patterns generated by the pandemic. Second, he/she noted that inflation in education services has already stopped increasing and considered that the increase in this component at the beginning of the year was likely a one-off event, although it will continue having an impact on the annual inflation of services due to base effects. Third, he/she pointed out that housing inflation continues being affected by last year's high inflation figures, as this component is highly sensitive to the observed inflation readings and tends to reflect them with a lag. Fourth, he/she pointed out that some of the services components have been affected by the global shocks that have exerted pressure on inflation, as is the case with food services, although these have recently shown a downward trajectory in their seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations. However, another member warned that the prices of some services, indeed, such as food services, are still increasing at double-digit rates. Most members mentioned that annual non-core 2.12% in April. They added that this decrease is explained by reductions in the annual variation of both energy and fruit and vegetable prices. One member noted that, since January, inflation of these components accumulated a significant fall of member indicated that non-core inflation has reflected more immediately the mitigation of external pressures on food and energy prices. Some members pointed out that non-core inflation is registering unusually reduced variations that, looking ahead, cannot be deemed permanent. One member stated that the April figure was one of the lowest in historical terms and was the lowest reading since December 2020. Most members pointed out that longer-term inflation expectations remained relatively stable. However, they stated that these are at levels above the target. Some members considered that they still do not show a downward trend. Regarding short-term expectations, some members mentioned that inflation expectations for the next 12 months and for 2023 declined. One member pointed out that the survey conducted among analysts indicates that the probability that headline inflation ends the year above 5.5% has decreased. Another member noted that the median of expectations for the next points from its highest reading during the current inflationary episode. Most members mentioned that breakeven inflation has declined. One member said that it remains at levels incompatible with the inflation target. Another member pointed out that, in light of the reductions exhibited by this indicator since March, the inflation risk premium has fallen to levels close to its historical average. Most members mentioned that forecasts for headline inflation were revised marginally downwards for some quarters, while those for core inflation remained practically unchanged. They noted that inflation is still projected to converge to the target in the fourth quarter of 2024. One member noted that the marginal revisions were made because observed inflation has remained slightly below Banco de México's forecasts at the March meeting. However, he/she warned that inflation forecasts drawn from surveys and market instruments are above the central bank's projections for practically all of 2024. Another member expressed that the moderation of pressures on international food and energy prices will eventually be transmitted to the prices of goods and services of the core component. He/she mentioned that a more significant decline in inflation continues to be anticipated, due to both the mitigation of global shocks and to the monetary policy actions implemented. One member noted that inflation in the United States has shown signs of easing, which favors the disinflation process in Mexico. All members considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member added that said balance has not deteriorated. He/she stated that, nevertheless, there is still uncertainty associated with the foreseen trajectory of inflation. Another member indicated that the projected trajectory should continue to be validated with observed data. He/she considered that the road to inflation convergence remains fragile, lengthy, and difficult. Among upward risks to inflation, some members noted the persistence of core inflation at high levels. One member added that, although a rapid fall in headline and core inflation is projected as of the third quarter of this year, it may not occur, even after the monetary tightening attained, due to the persistence of inflation that has been observed. In this regard, another member pointed out that this could compromise the anchoring of inflation expectations. He/she expressed concern about the persistence of merchandise inflation and the significant increase of services inflation, which may imply that various shocks have still not been fully assimilated. One member mentioned that the configuration of inflationary pressures continues to pose challenges for the future, given that the decline in inflation is mainly supported by the non-core component. In this regard, some members pointed out the risk of pressures on energy prices and on agricultural products’ prices. One member added that the noncore component could be affected by climaterelated shocks, given the possible arrival of the _El_ following its low readings, non-core inflation could observe a reversion to its mean, hence exerting pressure on headline inflation. In addition, some members pointed out the risk of greater cost-related pressures. Specifically, some members mentioned the increase in wages in the context of a strong labor market. However, one member underlined that recent estimates of the Phillips curve for Mexico suggest that it exhibits a relatively mild slope. He/she argued that the above implies that labor market dynamics are not the main inflation determinant at this time. Instead, he/she considered that those determinants associated with supply and with inflation expectations represent the main channels through which pressures have accumulated, and thus, in his/her opinion, these would also be the means to achieve convergence, and for that reason, inflation expectations must remain anchored. As an additional upward risk, another member mentioned possible episodes of foreign exchange depreciation. Among risks to the downside, one member highlighted the possibility of a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of the world economy. Most members highlighted that, since the previous monetary policy meeting, domestic financial markets, in line with international ones, performed better. They emphasized the timely intervention of the authorities to address the problems that occurred in the US and European banking sectors. In this regard, one member indicated that the risk of contagion appears to have subsided. In addition, he/she pointed out that the Mexican banking system has a limited exposure to the institutions that registered problems, has solid levels of capitalization, and exceeds regulatory liquidity requirements. He/she added that a high degree of leverage is not observed in the domestic financial system and, therefore, no fundamental reasons for a shortage of liquidity are foreseen in Mexico. All members highlighted that the Mexican peso appreciated. Most members pointed out that the national currency is at levels unseen in several years. Meanwhile, one member added that the bilateral real exchange rate with the U.S. has appreciated around 10%, while the multilateral one has done so by about 17% since the beginning of the hiking cycle. Some members attributed the currency´s recent performance to the ample interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States as well as to Mexico’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals. One member noted that, after the episodes of financial turmoil in the international banking sector, the increase in volatility that had been observed in the foreign exchange market has reversed. Another member highlighted the improvement in trading conditions in said market. Most members pointed out that, since the last monetary policy decision, short-term interest rates increased and medium- and long-term ones decreased, deepening the inversion of the yield curve. One member noted that domestic financial conditions have reached tighter levels, in line with the domestic and global monetary cycles. Most members underlined the gains of the the behavior of this market has been in line with that observed across other emerging economies. Some members pointed out that Mexico’s default risk premium decreased. Some members indicated that commercial banks’ performing credit to firms and households has continued to expand, especially credit for consumption. One member highlighted that mortgage lending has also increased. Another member pointed out that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels. One member noted that part of the credit dynamism is attributed to the fact that the economy continues to recover from the impact associated with the pandemic. He/she mentioned that, in real terms, outstanding credit is slightly below the level observed in February 2020. He/she added that, although businesses continue to obtain financing from domestic sources through the issuance of financial instruments, they have faced more adverse conditions issuing debt abroad, in line with the tightening of global credit conditions. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the economy has started to undergo a pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed that these pressures continue having an incidence on inflation, as it remains high, and the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member recalled that, since 2021, the inflationary environment has been complex, with inflation levels unseen in recent decades. He/she pointed out that this central bank began the monetary restriction cycle in a timely manner and that, in light of the intensification of inflationary pressures, forceful actions were taken. He/she noted that, after attaining a restrictive policy stance and in view of the signs of easing of various shocks, since the end of last year a reduction in the pace of interest rate increases was started. He/she added that the current outlook, despite remaining complex and uncertain, and despite inflation still being far from target, is less adverse than that registered throughout last year. He/she argued that, given the described inflation outlook and considering the monetary policy stance attained after the accumulated 725-basis point increase in the reference rate, it is appropriate to leave said reference rate unchanged. He/she pointed out that, due to the accumulated increases and considering the clearly restrictive levels of the ex-ante real interest rate, the attained monetary policy is solid and consistent with the disinflationary process. He/she mentioned that a cautious approach should be maintained and the attained restrictive monetary stance should be allowed to continue operating. He/she considered that, with this stance, a signal is sent to the public that Banco de México is still not satisfied with the inflationary environment. He/she highlighted that the monetary restriction contributes to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, hence preventing inflation from persisting at high levels even after the shocks dissipate. He/she pointed out that a restrictive policy stance also contributes to an orderly performance of financial markets, including the foreign exchange market, considering the inflationary environment and the global monetary tightening. He/she indicated that the volatility-adjusted spread of domestic and external interest rates, derived from the monetary policy actions, as well as the country’s solid macroeconomic fundamentals, have favored the resilient performance of the Mexican peso, which contributes to ease inflationary pressures. He/she also mentioned that a restrictive policy stance leads to an intertemporal reallocation of economic agents' expenditure by incentivizing savings, which further favors the disinflationary process. He/she argued that, during the current cycle, a significant slowdown has been observed in households’ demand for liquid assets, while demand for long-term instruments has increased. He/she underlined that, looking forward, the outlook will remain complex, with upward risks and uncertainty over the pace at which the shocks will fade. In this context, he/she considered it difficult to anticipate the time during which the reference rate would remain at its current level. He/she argued that it is too early to begin discussing possible interest rate cuts. He/she sustained that it is crucial to strongly endorse the central bank’s commitment to the attainment of its primary mandate and, consequently, the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of price stability. Another member pointed out that the recent evolution of the main inflation indicators along with the level of monetary restriction attained after 15 consecutive increases in the reference rate allow to consider a pause, for this occasion, in the monetary restriction cycle. He/she emphasized that the tone of the monetary policy statement would be of utmost importance for the formation of market expectations regarding future policy decisions. He/she highlighted that the statement should communicate that, although the main inflation indicators have behaved favorably, they have responded primarily to the evolution of external factors, while domestic inflationary pressures persist which can hinder the convergence of inflation to its target within the planning horizon. He/she underlined the following factors that may prevent inflation from decreasing at the anticipated pace: i) the dynamism of domestic demand, mainly driven by consumption; ii) the strong labor market; iii) increases in labor costs and their pass-through to consumer prices; and iv) medium- and long-term inflation expectations above policy decisions, he/she indicated that the environment of high uncertainty about the inflationary process calls for a cautious approach and favors a flexible policy stance. He/she added that it cannot be ruled out that a greater or lesser tightening may be required. He/she argued that it should be stated that a pause does not imply that Banco de México’s work has concluded, nor that it will necessarily be followed by a monetary easing. He/she added that it should be clearly communicated that Banco de México will respond according to the economic circumstances as they unfold. In particular, he/she mentioned that the upcoming decisions will depend on headline and core inflation consolidating their downward trend. He/she highlighted that, in any case, the central bank must be clear in that the monetary policy stance should remain in restrictive territory within the entire planning horizon. He/she mentioned that the above would contribute to align analysts' inflation expectations, which are currently above forecasts for the entire 2024, with those of Banco de México, which would improve the effectiveness of monetary policy. One member argued that, considering the interest rate increases accumulated during this hiking cycle, a sufficiently restrictive policy stance was attained to address a still complex inflationary outlook. He/she stated that the ex-ante real interest rate has been in restrictive territory for several months, reaching maximum levels since the overnight interbank rate was adopted as the monetary policy instrument. He/she underlined that, although Mexico's monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. has decreased at the margin, the broad interest rate spread and the observed resilience of the Mexican peso provide room for this reduction. He/she added that, in the absence of unexpected shocks, the attained stance is consistent with a downward trajectory of inflation over the forecast horizon. He/she expressed that the terminal rate has been attained, without implying that there will not be a further adjustment or that this is the end of the monetary restriction, since the monetary policy is now shifting from an active policy management, involving nominal rate increases, to a new phase of passive policy management, determined by the decline in inflationary expectations. He/she indicated that the restrictive monetary policy will continue to operate through its transmission mechanisms. He/she considered that a restrictive policy stance should continue for as long as necessary to break the persistence of core inflation. He/she noted that an additional interest rate increase could be required if inflation does not subside. Similarly, he/she pointed out that, if inflation were to decline, an overly restrictive policy stance should be avoided, and, therefore, an interest rate cut would be eventually considered. He/she pointed out that this would not be a monetary easing, but rather an adjustment to maintain the exante real interest rate in a range between 6 and 7%, which, by his/her estimation, is consistent with convergence of inflation to the target. He/she added that future intentions should be made known by means of a forward guidance, specifying these are subject to incoming data and, thus, do not represent a fixed commitment. He/she mentioned that, although it is venturesome to announce that the restrictive stance will be maintained throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates, it is crucial to communicate that such stance needs to be maintained for an extended period. He/she considered that progress in the communication strategy has been fundamental for the public to get to know the central bank’s reaction function and to strengthen the formation of expectations. He/she added that such progress has not responded to circumstantial issues, but instead has been the result of intense discussions and an analysis of the academic literature and of international best practices. He/she highlighted that it is key to continue working so that, through a clear, direct and transparent communication, which is fundamental for the efficient management of inflation expectations, the primary mandate is fulfilled. Another member pointed out that the attained interest rate level is historically restrictive, both in nominal and real terms, which he/she deemed consistent with the unprecedented inflationary pressures that have been observed. He/she mentioned that, given this stance, the analysis should focus on the evolution of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. He/she stated that: i) starting 9 months ago, a rebalancing in the asset portfolio of the private sector has been observed, with a substitution of liquid assets for longer-term instruments, especially among households, which implies that the interest rate channel is operating and gaining traction; ii) in the current cycle, financing interest rates have increased more than in other episodes, and bank lending conditions have also tightened considerably, which suggests that credit conditions are stringent; iii) in contrast to other monetary cycles in which the real exchange rate depreciated abruptly, this channel is acting in a highly restrictive manner; iv) the asset price channel, which in Mexico tends to be weak, has operated through the increase in the nodes of the yield curve since the beginning of the tightening cycle, affecting the prices of debt instruments, which have decreased significantly; and v) inflation expectations remain anchored and, at the margin, have gradually reversed their negative impacts, a trend which will allow further strengthening of the monetary stance. For this reason, he/she considered that all channels are working in the right direction to bring inflation back to its target over the forecast horizon. He/she underlined that the configuration of inflationary pressures is still fragile, and that the high levels of uncertainty increase the importance of maintaining a flexible and datadependent approach. He/she indicated that communication must be clear to enable an adequate formation of expectations and an orderly behavior of markets, which continue discounting cuts in the reference rate in the near future, an expectation that he/she considered is not compatible with the convergence of inflation to its target in the planning horizon. He/she forewarned that it should be communicated that the restrictive policy stance will last for a period necessary and sufficient to confirm: i) a clear and downward trend of headline and core inflation towards 3%; ii) a neutral balance of risks around the forecast; and iii) inflation expectations returning to their historical averages. He/she explained that the above is key to ensure the fulfillment of the constitutional mandate. One member added that the hiking cycle began in a timely manner and Banco de México responded forcefully to the significant deterioration of the inflation outlook. He/she pointed out that, following a significant accumulated increase of 725 basis points in the reference rate, it is reasonable to make a pause in the hiking cycle and evaluate the degree of absorption of this monetary tightening in the economy. The above, considering that, although inflation still remains elevated, signs of easing of price-related pressures can be observed, and such restriction will continue to have an effect during the following quarters. He/she added that the short-term ex-ante real interest rate is at a clearly restrictive level. He/she mentioned that this rate would increase insofar as inflation expectations continue decreasing. He/she reflected on the lag with which monetary policy operates. He/she pointed out that, in this horizon, two stages can be distinguished. In the first stage, which is already taking place, the monetary policy rate affects the channels through which it operates. In the second stage, which will start to become more evident, the impact of the channels is reflected on inflation and its determinants. He/she highlighted that one of the most relevant transmission channels is that of inflation expectations. He/she underlined that shorter-term ones have already stabilized, while longer-term ones, which affect the price formation process to a greater degree, have remained anchored. He/she pointed out that the monetary adjustment has been transmitted along the entire real yield curve and in market interest rates for the different segments. It has also enabled a change in households’ asset holdings towards longer-term instruments, which affects consumption decisions. He/she highlighted the functioning of the exchange rate transmission channel. In this regard, he/she emphasized that the Mexican peso has appreciated significantly in real terms since the beginning of the restrictive cycle. He/she observed that the tightness of monetary conditions is at one of the highest levels since the inflation-targeting regime was adopted. He/she underlined that, although, in his/her opinion, there is no conclusive evidence of domestic inflationary pressures, if they were present, they would be already addressed with the restrictive level that has been attained. He/she added that, given the persistence of the core component and the environment of high uncertainty, it is crucial to remain vigilant to take the necessary actions if additional shocks were to occur. He/she stated that, after having paused the hiking cycle, Banco de México can resort to its communication as a tool to continue supporting the strength of the monetary policy stance. He/she added that, to this end, it is reasonable to communicate that a restrictive policy stance will be maintained for as long as necessary to guarantee the convergence of inflation to the target. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the economy has started to undergo a disinflationary process given that many pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed that these pressures continue having an incidence on inflation, as it remains high and the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.25%.