Most members indicated that, so far in 2023, global economic activity has registered a higher- than-expected dynamism. However, they noted that economic growth has been heterogeneous across regions. In this regard, they contrasted the resilience of the US economy with the weakening of the euro area and Chinese economies. One member added that some emerging economies have slowed down. He/she mentioned that economic growth in several economies has not been reflected in a greater volume of international trade, due to the increase in trade restrictions in recent years. He/she considered that this could imply a shift in the sources of growth, given that domestic and regional determinants are gaining relevance. Some members indicated that prospects for world growth imply a higher rate of expansion for 2023 as compared to previous forecasts. Nevertheless, one member recalled that a slowdown with respect to the previous year is still expected. Another member noted that leading indicators continue pointing towards weakness in manufacturing and, recently, to a deceleration in the services sector. He/she added that a moderation in the growth rate is also anticipated for 2024. In the case of the United States, one member pointed out that growth forecasts have been revised upwards considerably. Some members highlighted that the probability of a recession in the United States as estimated by analysts has diminished. However, one member warned that strikes in the automotive sector could deteriorate the sector’s output and affect supply chains negatively. In the case of China, most members pointed out downwards. Some members forewarned about the fragility of the real estate sector in that country. One member added that the deterioration of China’s economic outlook has negatively affected the projections for other emerging economies with which it has strong trade links. Meanwhile, another member indicated that growth expectations for the euro area also decreased. One member mentioned that the balance of risks for global economic activity remains biased to the downside as a result of factors such as a greater-than-expected weakness of the Chinese economy and the effects of restrictive monetary policies. Regarding labor markets, some members highlighted that these remain tight in several countries. However, one member noted that recent data point to a possible easing in some economies. Another member stated that there are mixed signals in the case of the United States. In this regard, one member mentioned that different indicators in that country point to a better supply-demand balance. He/she stated that, since the decline in the number of vacancies has not been accompanied by higher unemployment levels, it suggests that it is possible to maintain certain economic dynamism, consistent with a soft-landing scenario. He/she added that nominal wage growth has trended downwards in the United States, in contrast with the upward trend still observed in the euro area and in the United Kingdom. Another member considered that wage negotiations have intensified in some strategic industries, such as the automotive industry in the United States. Most members highlighted that headline inflation continued decreasing in most economies, indicated that it continues being above the central banks’ targets in a large number of economies. Most members underlined that in some cases headline inflation has slightly rebounded. Some members attributed the above to the increase in oil prices. Nevertheless, some members noted that the international prices of a number of commodities have decreased. With regard to core inflation, most members stated that it continues showing resistance to decline. One member emphasized that it remains high. Some members pointed out that, regarding its components, services’ prices are still subject to significant pressures. One member considered that the slow decline of the core component generates uncertainty as to inflation’s pace of convergence to the central banks’ targets. Another member stated that, despite the signals indicating that monetary policy effects have been passed on to the labor market and the economy, the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England currently foresee headline inflation converging to their targets towards the beginning of 2026 and 2025, respectively. Among the risks to world inflation, most members mentioned the possibility of a surge in international commodity prices. One member highlighted that the global inflationary outlook has become more challenging, given that the risks for inflation’s convergence to the targets have increased significantly. He/she stated that the above derives from higher global economic growth expected for core inflation, and the reversion of non-core inflation, which had been at historically low levels. Another member underlined that the international experience proves that the disinflationary process could be nonlinear, given the challenges prevailing in the inflationary outlook. Most members highlighted that, currently, central banks’ actions are heterogeneous across heterogeneity has intensified given the differentiated evolution across economies. Another member stated that, insofar as inflation has declined, central banks’ actions have tended to be more cautious, taking into consideration in each case the restriction already achieved, the monetary policy lags, as well as the specific conditions of each economy. The majority pointed out that most central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged. However, one member stated that some of them, such as the European Central Bank and the Central Bank of Norway, raised their reference rates. Most members considered that the monetary authorities in advanced economies appear to be near the end of their hiking cycles. They highlighted that said institutions have strengthened the message that reference rates will remain high for an extended period. Some members added that decreases are no longer anticipated to take place before the first quarter of increases cannot be ruled out for the remainder of specified that several central banks opted to keep their reference rates unchanged. However, some members pointed out that in certain cases they reduced their reference rate in view of concerns over the deceleration of economic activity. One member noted the reference rate cuts in Brazil, Chile and Peru. All members mentioned that, in its September policy meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the unchanged. One member added that the chairman of that institution explained that subsequent actions will remain dependent on incoming data and that a further upward adjustment during the rest of 2023 cannot be ruled out. Likewise, another member noted that, based on the median projection for the federal funds rate of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), an additional increase in said rate is anticipated for the rest of the year. One member emphasized that expectations drawn from market instruments also imply that an additional increase at the end of the year is possible. Most members highlighted that the median of FOMC projections for the end of 2024 and 2025 increased by 50 basis points with respect to the projections made in the June meeting. They message that reference rates will remain at high levels for an extended period. One member mentioned that, even prior to the Federal Reserve’s latest monetary policy decision, both analysts and markets had already been revising upwards their expectations for the federal funds rate for 2024, given the economy’s resilience and that inflation is still high in the United States. In this context, most members stated that volatility, that sovereign interest rates, mostly long-term ones, increased, and that the US dollar registered a generalized appreciation. Some members underlined that financial markets have shown high sensitivity to the release of economic figures. One member pointed out that this has occurred in response to data reinforcing the expectation of monetary policy rates remaining high for an extended period. Another member underlined that financial markets in emerging economies registered negative dynamics in terms of interest rates, exchange rates, and stock market indices. He/she mentioned that inflows to equity assets are still being observed in these markets, along with outflows from fixed-income assets. The majority noted that following the update of the base year of Mexico’s System of National Accounts, the recovery of the economy after the initial shock of the pandemic has been more dynamic than previously estimated. They added that available information suggests the Mexican economy kept expanding during the third quarter of 2023. In this regard, some members considered that the Mexican economy continues showing resilience. One member pointed out that, with the expansion in the third quarter of 2023, the Mexican economy would have grown for eight consecutive quarters. Despite the above, another member stated that during the third quarter of the year, economic activity would have expanded at a slower pace than during the first half of 2023. One member considered that the Mexican economy is expected to continue showing resilience in the complex international environment and that risks remain balanced. He/she specified that, on the one hand, a greater nearshoring towards Mexico could provide a largerthan-expected boost to the Mexican economy. On the other hand, he/she stated that a significant slowdown in the US economy cannot be ruled out. All members noted that consumption remained dynamic. One member pointed out that it is at historic highs. Most members emphasized the Specifically, one member argued that this is largely explained by the normalization of households’ spending patterns. However, another member noted that it shows some deceleration. Most members also underlined the significant growth in the consumption of imported goods. One member mentioned that it has been spurred by the exchange rate appreciation. However, he/she added that consumption of domestic goods is also expanding. With regard to the determinants of consumption, confidence remains at high levels. One member stated that the above, along with the wage bill and remittances, will sustain the dynamism of consumption for several months. Nevertheless, indicators, consumption growth is expected to moderate somewhat towards the second half of the year. All members underlined that investment growth has received a strong impulse from spending on machinery and equipment as well as from non- residential construction. One member added that the latter has benefited from the nearshoring phenomenon. Regarding external demand, some members noted that automotive exports have trended upwards during the year. One member mentioned that this has offset the decline in the nonoil non-automotive balance and has allowed a reduction of the trade deficit with respect to 2022. On the production side, considering information as of the second quarter and the beginning of the third one of 2023, most members underlined the heterogeneity in the components of industrial production and of services. One member mentioned that, based on timely indicators, over the last months, secondary and tertiary activities continued registering positive annual variations, although they showed some moderation. The majority highlighted that industrial production continued expanding in July. They specified that it has been largely supported by civil engineering construction projects associated with the public sector infrastructure projects. Some members underlined the sluggishness in manufacturing other than transport equipment. One member pointed out that such weakness would be in line with that observed in US manufacturing. Some members highlighted that transport equipment has offset the performance of the rest of the manufacturing sector. As for services, they noted that, from a medium-term perspective, this sector has shown dynamism after the economy’s reopening process, while one member mentioned that growth in some of its segments has moderated. Some members indicated that the output gap is in positive territory. One member added that, considering the new data for Mexico’s national accounts, which reflects a faster recovery, and the greater boost to economic activity that is expected for become slightly positive in the forecast horizon. Nevertheless, he/she stated that it is still not expected to be statistically different from zero. All members pointed out that the labor market continues showing strength. Most members remained at historically low levels. One member underlined that the unemployment gap has become more negative since almost a year ago. Some members mentioned that an estimate of the nonoccupied population who is available for employment has decreased significantly. One member pointed out that this has been particularly noticeable in the case of women. Another member added that this indicator is also at historically low levels. Most members highlighted the behavior of the labor force participation rate. One member pointed out that, based on July data, said rate has continued increasing. Another member asserted that it is at relatively high levels. One member noted that both labor participation and the underemployment rate are close to their historic averages. Some members underlined the dynamism of employment. One member emphasized that the creation of formal employment remains above its historic mean, although it appears to be decelerating. Another member mentioned that the labor informality rate remains high. Most members stated that annual wage growth remains high. Some members highlighted that wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering double-digit annual variations. However, some members mentioned that some measures of wage indicators have been slightly lower at the margin. One member considered that this deceleration could indicate a moderation in the strength of the labor market. Meanwhile, another member argued that wage revisions appear to maintain an inertia that is unlikely to decelerate rapidly, especially if the minimum wage is raised significantly. He/she warned that this issue is worsened by the increasingly noticeable shortages in both skilled and unskilled labor. Most members mentioned that, since the last monetary policy decision, headline inflation continued decreasing and registered 4.44% in the first fortnight of September. One member stated that this is the lowest level since February 2021. Another member noted that, considering the latest readings, headline inflation has decreased by 426 basis points since its highest level registered in August 2022. Some members indicated that progress in the disinflation process has been reflected in a number of metrics. One member highlighted the following: i) a reduction in the share of CPI items with annualized monthly rates higher than 10%, which shifted from figures above 40% in frequency of price revisions, which, after having been at levels above their historical average in 2022, have been more in line with these averages in 2023; and iii) a significant fall in seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly price changes. Despite the important progress in the disinflationary process, some members forewarned that headline inflation is still at high levels. Most members acknowledged that the non-core component has contributed the most to the decline in headline inflation. In this regard, one member emphasized that it has been good fortune, because the prices of this component do not respond to the monetary policy actions, and that it is highly likely that an upward trend of these prices will be observed. He/she added that, for that reason, it will be necessary to pay greater attention to the dynamics of the core component. In that sense, most members pointed out that the downward incidence of the core component on headline inflation has increased in recent months. One member mentioned that, at the margin, the fall in headline inflation is explained by the reduction in its core component, given that non-core inflation started to increase. Another member pointed out that the rates of reduction are heterogeneous among the various components of inflation. Regarding core inflation, most members stated that, after the latest monetary policy meeting, it continued decreasing and registered 5.78% in the first fortnight of September. Some members highlighted that, considering the latest readings, this component has decreased by 273 basis points since it reached its highest level of 8.51% in November progress in the disinflation process. One member underlined that the percentage of the CPI items in the core consumption basket with annualized monthly rates above 10% has decreased significantly with respect to the figures registered in 2022. He/she added that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate of this component has decreased after having averaged 8.35% in 2022, so that it averaged Despite its decrease, most members emphasized that core inflation still remains at high levels. In persistence. In this regard, one member underlined that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly inflation has not managed to remain consistently below the upper limit of the variability interval and appears to begin reversing the downward trend it had been showing during this year. Some members argued that internal factors, such as the dynamism of domestic demand, have contributed to the persistence of core inflation. One member mentioned that the strength of the labor market has also contributed to said persistence. Most members pointed out that merchandise inflation has decreased more significantly than services inflation. One member stated that it has recently declined from 7.82% in July 2023 to 6.35% in the first fortnight of September. Another member underlined that seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly changes of merchandise prices have decreased considerably in recent months. He/she added that the share of CPI items within the merchandise basket registering variations below or equal to 3% shifted from 18% at the beginning of the year to 40% in the latest figures. Regarding the components of merchandise inflation, some members stated that, in its latest readings, the annual variation of food merchandise prices decreased to 7.73%, while that of non-food merchandise prices declined to 4.74%. Some members argued that the easing of the shocks resulting from the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict in Ukraine, such as the normalization of supply chains and the fall in the international references of some commodities, has contributed to the decline in merchandise inflation. One member added that the exchange rate appreciation has contributed to the above process, as it has eased pressures on imported goods’ prices, including intermediate and final goods. He/she stated that services inflation has also declined, but at a more gradual pace. He/she pointed out that it has recently decreased, from 5.24% in July to 5.08% in the first fortnight of September. Another member characterized this reduction as barely noticeable. Some members mentioned that the recent readings in services have turned out above projections. Most members agreed that the gradual reduction in core inflation mainly reflects the persistent behavior of services inflation. They argued that the pass-through of higher costs stemming from the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine characterized by lags. They explained that this has been due to the fact that the demand for services has been recovering gradually, after having contracted significantly at the beginning of the pandemic in the face of weak economic activity, the lockdown, and the change in members stated that price increases in food and energy products, among others, have exerted pressure on services’ operating costs. One member added that these costs also increased due to the implementation of sanitary measures, the adoption of technology to facilitate remote work, and the increase in real estate rental prices, among other factors. Some members noted that, contrary to this described behavior of services, in the case of merchandise, the cost pass-through was faster given the higher demand registered since the beginning of the pandemic. Most members considered that the recovery in the demand for services is allowing a greater pass-through of accumulated costs, which would explain the persistence exhibited by this component. One member stated that the dynamism of both the economy and the labor market is also contributing to the gradual decline in services inflation. However, he/she mentioned that, in his/her opinion, the resilience of economic activity explains the slow rate of decrease of this component, although not necessarily its high levels. He/she highlighted that this distinction is relevant for the conduction of monetary policy. Regarding the change in household consumption patterns, he/she pointed out that, according to the National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its acronym in Spanish), the fraction of spending allocated to leisure and education decreased significantly between 2018 and 2020, and that by normalization of these patters has probably still been observed during 2023. He/she acknowledged that there could be permanent changes in consumption patterns that are still difficult to identify. As a reflection of these factors, some members highlighted the case of educational services, whose biweekly inflation in the first half of September was the highest for an equivalent fortnight since 2008. Most members noted that non-core inflation remained at particularly low levels, registering 0.48% during the first fortnight of September. However, they pointed out that it rebounded slightly as compared to previous readings. One member mentioned that this was due to increases in the annual variations of fruit and vegetable prices, as well as energy prices, particularly LP gas. He/she stated that these increases are largely attributed to the base effects that had already been anticipated. Most members noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained relatively stable at levels above target. One member pointed out that they remain above their historical average. He/she added that, at the margin, inflation expectations for the end of 2023 slightly increased, while those for the end of underlined that, although the medians of expectations for all different horizons registered limited adjustments, improvements continued to be observed in the distribution of short-term expectations, as the share of analysts expecting a lower inflation increased. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, one member indicated that, since the last monetary policy decision, breakeven inflation increased. He/she added that this could imply higher inflation expectations for the short term, as well as a higher inflation risk premium. Most members pointed out that forecasts for headline and core inflation have been revised upwards reflecting a more gradual decline than previously foreseen. All members mentioned that inflation is now projected to converge to the target in the second quarter of 2025. Most members highlighted that the adjustment in forecasts is primarily due to the expectation of a greater persistence in the services component, due to the accumulation of costs that have not yet been fully passed on to consumer prices. Some members noted that the forecasts consider a more resilient economic activity. One member added that pressures on core inflation are accompanied by the effects of higher economic growth, and an expansionary fiscal framework for 2024 not foreseen in previous projections. All members considered that the inflationary outlook is still complex. One member stated that it cannot be ruled out that the effects of the shocks may dissipate more slowly than expected and that some inflation components may show fluctuations that interrupt or delay their downward trajectory. All members agreed that the balance of risks for the foreseen trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. Some members mentioned that, in their opinion, said balance has deteriorated since the last monetary policy decision. One member argued that, considering the new forecasted trajectory, the balance of risks for inflation has not deteriorated. Among upside risks to inflation, all members component at high levels. One member stated that the decline in this component could moderate once the base effects dissipate. He/she added that services prices could continue to be subject to pressures from cumulative costs. He/she noted that the favorable downward effects associated with the behavior of merchandise prices could be wearing off. Some members highlighted the risk of exchange rate depreciations in light of international financial volatility events. One member pointed out that periods of more severe exchange rate volatility than those observed recently cannot be ruled out, with greater and more lasting effects on the exchange rate, which could particularly affect merchandise prices. Another member argued that not only external factors but also internal ones could exert pressure on the Mexican peso. Some members stated that the expansion of the fiscal deficit for 2024 could represent additional inflationary pressures. One member highlighted some challenges ahead for public finances associated with: i) the fiscal adjustment required to achieve consolidation in the expectation of lower world growth in 2025; and iv) the reduction of fiscal space to increase spending on infrastructure. He/she argued that the latter is key to increase potential growth and take advantage of the nearshoring process. In addition, he/she stated that Pemex's situation is a cause of concern for the sustainability of public finances due to its dependence on federal resources. Some members added as an upside risk to inflation the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. They considered that those from the labor market could be aggravated by the wage policy. One member pointed out that insecurity could also affect indirectly firms’ operating costs. Some members noted the risk that the economy’s resilience leads to a more gradual reduction in inflation than expected. In this regard, one member mentioned the increasing domestic demand pressures. Another member cautioned about higher global economic growth being an external factor that could also affect inflation dynamics in Mexico. Some members forewarned about the risk of pressures on energy or agricultural and livestock product prices due to geopolitical or climate-related events. One member highlighted the possibility of the increase in non-core inflation leading it to converge to levels similar to its historical values. He/she added that given the prevailing risks, medium and long-term inflation expectations could rebound. Another member stated that there is the risk of inflation stagnating above the variability range in 2024, given the increasing domestic pressures. Regarding financing in the economy, one member noted that total financing maintained a moderate pace of growth. Some members pointed out that domestic financing also continued growing. One member stated that foreign financing decreased. Most members mentioned that credit from commercial banks continued expanding. In to firms. Some members noted the increase in consumer credit. Some members stated that the dynamism of credit reflects the labor market’s strength. One member mentioned that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels, although a marginal increase has been observed recently in credit card and payroll loans. Most members stated that, since the last meeting, the Mexican peso traded in a wide range, exhibited volatility, and depreciated somewhat. They highlighted that this behavior was mainly due to global factors, in particular, to the expectation of a greater monetary tightening by the main central banks of advanced economies, such as the Federal Reserve. In this regard, one member noted that the volatility and depreciation of the Mexican peso were mainly associated with the generalized appreciation of the US dollar. Most members pointed out that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market depreciation, the Mexican peso remained stronger than during the first months of the year. Some members highlighted that the Mexican peso has shown resilience, due to the solid macroeconomic fundamentals and the monetary policy actions. As for the behavior of the exchange rate, most members mentioned the announcement of the Foreign Exchange Commission regarding the reduction in the foreign exchange hedging program. They stated that, although the currency depreciated and registered volatility after the announcement, the reaction was brief. One member added that analysts and traders reacted favorably to this announcement. Most members noted that interest rates on government securities, mainly medium and long- term ones, increased, in line with the higher interest rates observed worldwide. One member highlighted that liquidity conditions in this market have not yet reached pre-pandemic levels. Another member pointed out that sovereign risk premia continued fluctuating within a narrow range, with recent increases mainly related to global factors. One member noted that the stock market performed negatively, mainly due to the communications sector. Another member noted that both markets as well as analysts are assigning a greater probability to the possibility that there are no changes to the reference rate until the beginning of 2024, and that likewise, expectations for interest rate cuts throughout the horizon have moderated. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that, although progress in the disinflation process has been made, the outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and taking into account the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member argued that the monetary policy actions implemented, together with the dissipation of shocks, allowed the disinflation process to begin and advance in recent months. This occurred after the multiple deep and generalized shocks the world has undergone. He/she stated that monetary policy is operating through all its transmission channels. He/she underlined the role of the expectations and exchange rate channels. He/she pointed out that longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and the Mexican peso has shown resilience, which has contributed to ease pressures on prices. He/she warned that, although inflation is decreasing, it is doing it from high levels and in an environment in which upward risks prevail. He/she mentioned that under these conditions, a prudent conduction of monetary policy has implied taking time to allow the achieved monetary stance to continue operating and evaluating the development of the inflationary outlook. He/she pointed out that under this cautious approach it is essential to analyze the information that is accumulating on the dynamics of shocks and their effects. He/she added that this is required to avoid reference rate cuts that are premature or implemented faster than necessary and, consequently, that could jeopardize the downward trajectory of inflation. Taking into account the above, he/she considered that the reference rate should remain at its current level for an extended period. He/she reflected on the fact that, although inflation figures are below the highest levels observed in the past year, they are still above the central bank's permanent target. He/she highlighted that this illustrates both the progress that has been made in disinflation, as well as the tasks that still need to be addressed. He/she stated that in subsequent meetings the Governing Board will remain attentive, as it has been doing, to the evolution of macroeconomic conditions, considering that the road ahead is still lengthy and is not exempt from risks. He/she noted that the more gradual decline in inflation that is now foreseen could imply that, looking ahead, the reference rate may need to be lowered more gradually, once the disinflationary process allows for such decreases. Finally, he/she reiterated that the priority when conducting monetary policy must continue to be lowering inflation and consolidating an environment of price stability in Mexico, in line with the central bank's mandate and for the benefit of the Mexican population. Another member considered that the outlook for inflation has become more complex for the conduct of monetary policy, because of both a more adverse external environment and idiosyncratic factors. In this context, he/she expressed that it is essential to maintain the level of monetary restriction attained as long as more information and analyses are available to evaluate the need to implement additional adjustments in the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that the factors supporting the upward revision in inflation forecasts should be explained, and that the balance of risks for inflation has deteriorated in an environment of high uncertainty. He/she added that in view of the more complex outlook, forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for a more extended period than the previously foreseen. He/she reiterated that it is convenient to maintain the monetary stance in restrictive territory during the entire forecast horizon. He/she expressed that the fiscal package could generate pressures on aggregate demand. He/she added that if the fiscal consolidation process contemplated for 2025 is not achieved, given the challenges that this implies, the consequences for inflationary dynamics could be even greater for that year. He/she mentioned that in a scenario of greater pressures, it will be necessary to maintain the level of monetary restriction for an even longer period than that foreseen in the previous meeting and, going forward, expanding this policy stance could be required, either actively or passively. He/she added that the best course of action should be evaluated in case inflationary pressures materialize, with the aim to preserve price and financial stability. One member stated that the current restrictive stance should be maintained for an extended period in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to its target, which is now foreseen for the second quarter of 2025. He/she highlighted that the disinflationary process faces domestic pressures from a tightening labor market and the dynamism of aggregate demand, in addition to the still uncertain effects of fiscal expansion. He/she emphasized that the lack of synchronization between the expansionary fiscal policy and a restrictive monetary policy, implies it is necessary to pay attention to: i) the possibility of offsetting the likely effects of this stimulus on aggregate demand; and ii) the possibility that the fiscal stance lasts longer than anticipated, if the fiscal balance reduction projected for 2025 is not of the expected magnitude. He/she considered that the materialization of these risks could require monetary restriction for a longer period. He/she added that the monetary cycle should continue focusing on domestic pressures, primarily on the core component, and remain unaffected by changes in the monetary policy stances of other countries. He/she pointed out that in order to address the risks to inflation and allow the restrictive stance to take full effect, its passive management must continue. He/she considered that, since the last reference rate increase, the decline in 12-month inflation expectations caused the real ex-ante rate to increase by almost 70 basis points. He/she pointed out that this passive management should continue until: i) core inflation improves beyond the marginal adjustments it has registered; ii) expectations of headline and core inflation for 2024 consolidate within the variability interval; and iii) the risk of economic overheating is mitigated. He/she considered that forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for an extended period. He/she indicated that the period in which the nominal interest rate remains fixed should last at least for the rest of the year, with the possibility of extending beyond the first quarter of 2024 if necessary. He/she expressed that the monetary policy statement should maintain the categorization of such period as "extended" and even "not yet defined”, in order to contribute to the expectation that it is still not possible to accurately forecast the date of the beginning of reference rate cuts. He/she added that it should also be communicated that the period to reach a neutral stance is still beyond the forecast horizon. He/she concluded by stating that the increasing domestic risks call for strictly adhering to the primary mandate and, therefore, to a much more restrictive tone in communication. Another member stated that the disinflationary process is still complex. He/she noted that various metrics point to a favorable downward trajectory for inflation, while different measures of inflation expectations continue improving. However, he/she mentioned that inflation’s behavior over the forecast horizon still faces significant challenges. He/she pointed out that the forecasts had been adjusted upwards for six quarters, and convergence had been postponed for two. He/she mentioned that such revisions were attributable mainly to a worsening of the expected determinants of inflation, for which there are various sources of uncertainty that maintain the balance of risks biased to the upside. He/she highlighted that the dynamism of economic activity implies challenges for the monetary policy transmission mechanisms, given a highly dynamic labor market supporting the growth of credit and consumption, in addition to the normalization of expenditure patterns which has fostered a new adjustment of relative prices between merchandise and services, starting at high levels. Likewise, he/she pointed out that services prices are showing a larger pass-through of accumulated cost-related shocks, due to the greater demand they face, and that in those sectors in which costs have already decreased, market structures have facilitated the continuation of price increases. For this reason, he/she considered that, given the current environment of high uncertainty, the monetary policy stance should remain restrictive for an extended period in order to continue fostering conditions for inflation to return to its target. He/she pointed out that the real ex-ante short-term interest rate has continued to increase, that the real ex-post rate of new credit to firms could reach historically high levels, and that the real exchange rate continues working in favor of lower inflation. He/she considered that monetary conditions are at a sufficiently restrictive level, but that they require time to be adequately transmitted to the economy. He/she mentioned that while last year's environment of uncertainty required a risk management approach and forceful decision making, the current uncertainty is more associated with the speed at which inflation will converge to its target. He/she indicated that the monetary policy approach should remain prudent, cautious and gradual. He/she added that communication should highlight the need for certainty on the observed and expected determinants of inflation, in order to consolidate a trajectory for inflation towards its target, and comply with the central bank’s constitutional mandate. One member argued that, despite the advances in the disinflationary process, convergence has become slower and the main challenge continues to be the persistence of core inflation, especially that of services. In this regard, he/she highlighted that, given the weakness of demand that they faced, the passthrough of the increase in costs to services prices has been lower than for merchandise. Thus, some items of the services sector continue recovering from the effects of the changes in the consumption patterns, on top of which the dynamism of the labor market has also contributed to its persistence. Likewise, he/she emphasized the relevance of having communicated a prolonged pause and of continuing to be cautious with the stance that has been achieved, given the prevalence of the challenges in the inflationary front. In this regard, he/she highlighted that, on the one hand, the real ex-ante short-term interest rate is close to 350 basis points above the upper limit of the neutral range and, since September 2022, it has been in restrictive territory. He/she added that communication has been an important complementary tool that, without being too explicit, has allowed to convey the Governing Board’s view of the inflation outlook to the markets. He/she pointed out that, under these two axes, the monetary policy stance is expected to continue operating through its different channels. He/she stated that monetary restriction has favored a recomposition in the holding of assets towards those of longer terms. He/she added that the Mexican peso has appreciated around 24% in real terms since the beginning of the hiking cycle. He/she pointed out that, although the nominal reference rate has remained unchanged since last May, there have been no reductions in long-term interest rates or an easing of financial conditions. He/she considered that this indicates that communication has contributed to avoid a premature easing of monetary conditions. He/she expressed that all of the above has helped inflation expectations to remain anchored and the adverse effects on their distribution to show improvements. Thus, in this period of pause, the real ex-ante interest rate has increased, and this passive tightening also allows to handle the various risks that prevail. He/she considered that, given the risks to inflation, it is pertinent to reaffirm that the reference rate will remain at its current level for an extended period. He/she stated that, in this way, the monetary policy stance will continue contributing to the disinflationary process consistent with the primary mandate of price stability. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that, although progress in the disinflation process has been made, the outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and taking into account the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%