Most members pointed out that the global economy continued growing during the second quarter. Some members stated that, although this occurred at a slower pace than in the previous quarter, it was faster than expected. One member mentioned that the above took place in an environment of high uncertainty and of tightening of global monetary conditions. Most members highlighted that the performance of the global economy has been driven, in part, by the services sector. In a related manner, some members stated that the favorable evolution of consumption contributed to the resilience of economic activity. One member added the positive performance of investment in some countries. Another member indicated that the normalization of global supply chains has also supported world economic growth. Most members noted that economic growth exhibits heterogeneity across regions. One member underlined that economic activity in the euro area expanded marginally, while Latin American countries recovered moderately. In contrast, some members highlighted the resilience of the US economy. One member pointed out that economic activity figures in the United States have been higher than expected. Another considered that an unsynchronized deceleration among the various sectors of the US economy has probably prevented an abrupt weakening of aggregate activity, as some sectors have been contracting while others have been expanding. He/she added that this would be associated with the asymmetric effects of the shocks derived from the pandemic as well as with the various lags with which monetary policy operates, affecting industrial production faster and more notably than tertiary activities. Some members stated that world growth prospects for 2023 continue implying a deceleration, although slightly less intense than previously anticipated. One member mentioned that, considering the recent revisions, 3% growth is foreseen for both 2023 and expected slowdown would result, in part, from the dissipation of the effects of the fiscal support provided during the pandemic and the lagged impact of tight monetary conditions; he/she highlighted that this impact has been more apparent in the manufacturing sector, mainly in advanced economies. He/she mentioned that the balance of risks to global economic activity remains biased to the downside due to different factors, such as the resurgence of concerns over the banking systems in advanced economies and a greater-than-expected weakness in the Chinese economy. One member noted that favorable revisions to the growth outlook for Asian economies, particularly for China, are not foreseen. In the case of the United States, one member pointed out that growth forecasts have been revised upwards during this year. However, another member mentioned that the US economy is still expected to slow down as of the third quarter. Despite the probability of an upcoming recession has diminished. One member indicated that, although monetary policy is operating, the economy has adjusted more gradually than in other hiking cycles, and thus, the perception that a soft landing could materialize has increased. Regarding global labor markets, some members highlighted that these remain tight in several countries. However, one member argued that labor markets exhibit certain signs of a better balance between supply and demand. He/she pointed out that US non-farm payroll growth kept moderating, while the labor force continued trending upwards. He/she underlined that nominal wage growth has stabilized in the United States, in contrast to the euro area and the United Kingdom, where it is still trending upwards. All members indicated that although headline economies, it remains at high levels. Most members highlighted that it still lies above central bank targets in a large number of economies. They attributed the decrease in global headline inflation to lower pressures on mentioned that, overall, inflation is expected to converge to its target between 2024 and 2025. One member stated that the convergence process is still subject to high uncertainty. Most members highlighted that, globally, the core component has shown resistance to decline. One member pointed out that this component continues exhibiting persistence, which may still be reflecting effects of the shocks from the pandemic, geopolitical tensions and tight labor markets, which overall have led to a pass-through of costs to consumers. Nevertheless, another member considered that there are a number of differentiated dynamics among economies. He/she stated that, for example, in the United States, lower contributions of services to core inflation have been observed, while services inflation continues trending upwards in the euro area. Among the risks to the global inflation outlook, some members mentioned the possibility of a surge in international commodity prices, especially following Russia's exit from the Black Sea grain export deal. As an additional risk, one member added the climate-related factors affecting various crops around the world. In addition, he/she warned about the possibility of disruptions in production chains, especially of semiconductors, in view of the trade tensions between China and the United States, and in the context of a high demand for such inputs by the technology sectors associated with artificial intelligence. Most members pointed out that central banks of the major advanced economies raised their reference rates. All members mentioned as an example the case of the US Federal Reserve and some members of the European Central Bank. One member stated that the Bank of Japan adjusted its yield curve control program, raising the upper limit for its long-term interest rate. Nevertheless, most members considered that central banks in advanced economies appear to be nearing the end of their hiking cycles. They observed that said authorities indicated that their subsequent actions will be dependent on incoming data. One member highlighted that further interest rate increases have not been ruled out. Another member added that these institutions reiterated their commitment to maintain high interest rates for an extended period. As for emerging economies, some members stated that in most of these economies the monetary authorities left their reference rates unchanged, while some adjusted them downwards. All members mentioned that the central banks of Brazil and Chile lowered their reference rates in response to specific macroeconomic conditions in each economy. One member underlined that in both cases headline inflation has been declining. He/she pointed out that in Brazil inflation has been below 4.75% since March, which is the upper limit of the tolerance band, whereas in Chile economic activity has weakened considerably. Another member noted that, although inflation in Chile has not converged to the central bank’s target, as it has in Brazil, the high level of unemployment and the outlook for lower growth motivated the interest rate cut. One member stated that these economies typically have more pronounced monetary policy cycles. Some members indicated that, in light of the particular macroeconomic conditions faced by each country, monetary policy is likely to remain heterogeneous at a global level. One member argued that this heterogeneity responds, in part, to the focalization of the diverse monetary tightening cycles. All members mentioned that, in its July meeting, the US Federal Reserve increased the target range of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. One member noted that this is consistent with the median of the most recent projections by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) members. Some members highlighted that the chairman of that institution argued that interest rate decreases would take place once a sustained downward trend in inflation is confirmed. One member underlined that the chairman of that institution does not deem it appropriate to make interest rate cuts this year. Another member pointed out that, in addition, he indicated that they no longer expect a recession for this year. Some members stated that even an additional increase is possible during the remainder of 2023. Most members pointed out that international financial markets have recently registered volatility. They explained that this volatility was mainly caused by concerns regarding the fiscal situation in the United States. Nevertheless, they indicated that the downgrade in US credit ratings had a moderate effect on markets. One member underlined that the revisions to expectations regarding the end of the monetary authorities' restrictive cycle in advanced economies also contributed to the recent financial volatility. Some members highlighted that financial markets’ sensitivity to economic data has increased due to the data-dependent approach that a number of central banks have stressed. Most members underlined the greater risk aversion and higher volatility registered during the period. In this context, they noted that long-term interest rates increased. One member pointed out that the main stock market indices had mixed results. Some members stated that the effects have also been felt in foreign exchange markets. In this regard, some members mentioned the recent appreciation of the US dollar. In this context, one member forewarned that the high levels of public debt accumulated after the pandemic, along with tight financial conditions, could undermine governments' ability to repay. He/she added that further downgrades in sovereign credit ratings could pose a risk to global economic growth and financial stability. All members highlighted that the Mexican economy has shown resilience. Most members pointed out that, according to GDP flash estimates, the economy registered higher-than- anticipated growth during the second quarter of the year. One member added that this would imply an expansion for the seventh consecutive quarter, something not seen since the end of 2015. Most members pointed out that said growth was driven by the three major sectors of the economy. In particular, they highlighted the performance of industrial production and services. One member noted that growth was supported by domestic spending. He/she underlined the contribution of greater investment in public infrastructure projects and growth in those subcomponents of services which had lagged behind the most during the post pandemic recovery process. Another member highlighted that the services sector is the one that has contributed to growth the most. One member added that the performance of the components of tertiary activities has been heterogenous. Some members mentioned that the strong labor market has also contributed to the favorable performance of economic activity. performance of industrial production to a significant increase in civil engineering construction projects. One member pointed out that this reflected the significant dynamism in public construction associated with railway works. In contrast, he/she mentioned that private sector construction shows significant sluggishness and has not regained its prepandemic levels yet. Another member pointed out that, within private construction, the industrial, commercial and service construction sector has recently improved. He/she considered that this segment is the one that could best reflect the nearshoring process. He/she mentioned that the positive trend observed in credit for industrial parks and warehouses suggests that said expansion could continue. However, he/she stated that, although manufacturing activity continues growing and remains at high levels, it has recently lost momentum influenced by the slowdown in US manufacturing activity. Most members noted that domestic demand has continued to grow. They stated that said expansion has been supported by consumption. One member pointed out that it has grown at a higher-than-anticipated rate. Another member asserted that it is at historical highs. Regarding the determinants of consumption, one member mentioned that, although remittances in US dollars remain at high levels, their value in Mexican pesos and in real terms has decreased during the year, and thus, in his/her opinion, this factor hardly explains the current dynamism of household spending. In contrast, he/she indicated that the strengthening of the labor market could indeed be supporting consumption, especially that of services. He/she added that the National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its acronym in Spanish) suggests that there has been a reallocation of resources towards lower income deciles, which have a higher marginal propensity to consume, possibly contributing to a higher-than-expected growth in domestic spending. Most members stated that investment maintained its pace of recovery. One member mentioned that there was a significant reactivation of non-residential construction. Some members highlighted that, during the second quarter of 2023, the value of exports decreased slightly with respect to that observed in the previous quarter. Despite the aforementioned, some members noted that exports remain at high levels. One member argued that Mexico's increased share in US imports has offset the effects of the slowdown in total US imports. Another member stated that manufacturing exports have recovered from the contraction observed at the beginning of the year. One member added that, in turn, imports exhibit solid growth in the components of consumer and capital goods. As for the risks to Mexican economic activity, some members argued that these are balanced. One member stated that on the one hand there is still a possibility of a noticeable slowdown in the US economy, particularly in 2024. On the other hand, he/she considered that the reconfiguration of global production chains could give a greater boost to domestic economic activity. Most members highlighted that the estimate of the output gap continues to narrow. One member noted that it is not statistically different from zero and another member stated that the point estimate is virtually at zero. One member added that it is anticipated to remain close to zero during 2023 and 2024. All members pointed out that the labor market continued to show strength. Most members underlined the dynamism of employment and the fact that the unemployment rate remains at historic lows. One member mentioned that the labor force participation rate has returned to levels close to those observed prior to the pandemic. Another member added that an expanded measure of unemployment that includes part-time workers and individuals out of the labor market but who are available for work is also at extremely low levels. He/she indicated that the unemployment gap is estimated to be negative and that over the past 10 months it has continued to widen. In this context, some members stated that the labor market remains tight. Most members noted the relatively high magnitude of wage revisions. Some members indicated that there was an increase in the growth rate of real wages of IMSS-insured workers. One member stated that such increase responds to the disinflationary process and the stabilization of nominal wages. Another member noted that contractual wage revisions accelerated, particularly in private sector companies. He/she added that the estimate of the output gap practically at zero, along with the strength of consumption and of the labor market, do not only show an economy that is resilient, but one that is actually vigorous and that the strength of the labor market could be causing pressures on the cost structure. Most members stated that the disinflation process in Mexico remains underway as a result of the mitigation of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict. In this regard, they highlighted the better functioning of supply chains and the reduction in commodity prices. They added that the appreciation of the Mexican peso has contributed to ease price- related pressures. Some members forewarned that this process has also relied on comparison base effects. All members pointed out that, since the last monetary policy meeting, headline inflation has continued decreasing and registered 4.79% in July. Some members indicated that it has decreased for six consecutive months. The majority pointed out that since September 2022, when it reached its highest level in this inflationary episode, it had percentage points, 2.82 of which are attributed to underlined that the latter component, which is the most volatile, has contributed significantly to the fall in headline inflation. Nevertheless, some members highlighted that the core component has also contributed to the disinflationary process and that its contribution has recently increased. One member estimated that of the 2.06 percentage points by which headline inflation has decreased over the past four months, 1.05 are attributable to core inflation. All members mentioned that after the decline in core inflation since the last monetary policy meeting, the core component registered 6.64% in July. Some members highlighted that, since November 2022, when it reached its highest level during this inflationary period, it has decreased by a total of 1.87 percentage points, 1.45 of which took place over the last four months. One member considered that the latest figures have been positive and confirm a downward trajectory of its annual variation. He/she pointed out that the most recent readings have been below the anticipated level. He/she added that the seasonally adjusted annualized monthly changes are already near the upper limit of the variability interval. Another member argued that the percentage of the core consumption basket that displays a seasonally adjusted annualized monthly inflation above 10% has been decreasing, from a maximum of about 50% of the basket to only 6% in the latest data. However, he/she noted that the share of the basket with variations of less than 3% is still below its historical average. He/she argued that this suggests that, although progress has been made in the disinflationary process, there is still a long road ahead. Despite the decline in the core component, most members highlighted that it remains at high levels. One member stressed that the fundamental problem of the disinflationary process continues to be the fact that core inflation is far from target. Most members pointed out that it exhibits a persistent behavior. One member mentioned that, while said persistence may be, in part, due to shocks from the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, it may also respond to a contamination of the price formation process, as suggested by the increased frequency and magnitude of price adjustments. He/she also argued that, while external pressures on this component have diminished, domestic pressures have increased. He/she underlined that, in his/her opinion, the latter are due, in part, to demand-related pressures, higher inflation expectations, and to the wage policy. He/she stated that the favorable performance of private consumption is evidence of demand-related pressures. He/she considered that wage growth remains at levels that are not compatible with the inflation target and warned that wage dynamics do not show signs of moderation. Some members argued that this persistence would be reflecting the dynamics of services prices. Within core inflation, most members noted that the merchandise component has continued to decline. Some members considered that this has mirrored the mitigation of global shocks. One member highlighted that merchandise inflation has decreased for seven consecutive months. However, most members agreed that it still remains at high levels. One member mentioned that annual food merchandise inflation is still close to double-digit levels. Most members considered that services inflation still does not show a clear downward inflection point. They underlined that it remains high. One member pointed out that this is observed not only in Mexico but also in other economies. Another stated that, although it is above its historical mean, several of the shocks observed during the year have not accumulated, as it occurred in 2021 and 2022. One member delved into the fact that, since the last monetary policy decision, inflation of services other than housing and education decreased slightly. In this regard, another member added that inflation of food services and of transportation services remain at high levels. Some members highlighted that inflation of education services continues trending upwards. One member indicated that this is also observed in housing inflation. Most members argued that the normalization of households’ consumption patterns has affected the evolution of services inflation. Some members mentioned that the evolution of services inflation has reflected the lagged effect of accumulated cost-related pressures from global shocks. One member stated that, while households reallocated their spending from services to merchandise at the beginning of the pandemic, the demand for services has been growing insofar as the population’s mobility has increased. He/she considered that this process has taken time, as evidenced by the slow recovery observed in the activity indicators of entertainment and of food preparation and temporary accommodation services. Thus, these reflect the cost-related pressures which accumulated in the context of the ongoing recovery of demand that the sector is experiencing. Another member considered that the high levels of services inflation are not necessarily associated with domestic pressures. He/she acknowledged that there is a certain effect of the dynamism of the economy and of the labor market on services prices, but he/she considered that this effect does not appear to be of sufficient magnitude to account for the high levels of services inflation. He/she stated that, in any case, these factors have contributed to the persistence of core inflation, and that it is important to monitor them. He/she added that, for the conduct of monetary policy, it is necessary to appropriately distinguish the factors behind the inflationary dynamics. Most members pointed out that in July non-core inflation registered a negative annual variation of -0.67%. They underlined that it is at historic lows. They added that annual variations of less than zero had not been observed in the past, except at the beginning of the pandemic. One member highlighted the sharp decline in this component since August 2022 when it registered double-digit levels. He/she also emphasized the significant reductions in energy inflation and in agricultural and livestock goods' inflation during this period. Another member considered that the decline in non-core inflation is due to the mitigation of global shocks. He/she stated that the significant fall in energy prices, mainly of LP gas, and the low agricultural and livestock product prices have contributed to the disinflationary process. inflation expectations drawn from surveys remained stable at levels above target. One member pointed out that, although medium and longterm expectations increased slightly throughout this inflationary episode, overall, these have remained anchored. He/she pointed out that, despite their positive performance, the distribution of these expectations exhibits some bimodality, with a bias towards high readings. He/she mentioned that this phenomenon had already occurred in previous episodes, and that it was corrected in due course. However, another member warned that medium- and long-term expectations remain above the target and do not exhibit a downward trend. Most expectations decreased. One member considered that, although inflation expectations' readings have improved, there is still work to do, and thus it is important for monetary policy to continue contributing to its improvement. Another member pointed out that core inflation expectations for the end of 2024 are still above the upper limit of the target range. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, one member stated that break-even inflation shows a downward trend due to the decline in the inflation risk premium, which is below its historical average. He/she mentioned that the behavior of expectations is consistent with allowing the disinflationary process to evolve as expected. Most members highlighted that Banco de México’s forecasts continue anticipating that inflation will converge to the 3% target in the fourth quarter of 2024. One member mentioned that, for this meeting, headline inflation forecasts remained practically unchanged. Most members underlined that those corresponding to core inflation were revised marginally upwards for the short term. One member pointed out that this revision was offset by a downward adjustment in the forecast of the non-core component. Another member highlighted that, at the margin, significant improvements in core inflation figures must be observed for annual rates to continue decreasing. In this regard, he/she stated that core inflation could remain beyond the target range longer than expected. Some members estimated that the base effect which has favored annual inflation will begin to decrease towards 2024. In this regard, one member noted that it can be anticipated that the convergence process will face difficulties next year. Another member pointed out that at this stage of the disinflationary process it can be expected that the speed at which the components of inflation decrease will be heterogeneous, the process will be non-linear, and inflation may rebound at certain moments. All members agreed that the balance of risks regarding the expected trajectory for inflation over the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. Among risks to inflation, they highlighted the persistence of the core component at high levels. Some members added as an upward risk the possibility of greater cost-related pressures, mainly from the strong labor market and domestic demand. One member warned about the possibility that economic growth above 3% narrows the output gap and leads to inflationary pressures. Another member noted the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in light of episodes of international financial volatility. He/she stated that there is a risk of a correction in markets’ expectations regarding the Federal Reserve's future monetary policy stance, which could affect the expected trajectory of the peso and, therefore, the convergence of inflation to the target. One member added that insecurity and possible additional increases to the minimum wage could also lead to cost increments for firms. Most members pointed out the risk of non-core inflation increasing more than expected in the next months. One member considered a matter of concern the expectation that the favorable dynamics of the non-core component reverses in a context in which core inflation is still at high levels. Another member estimated that an additional risk derives from the fact that, since the non-core component is the main factor that has allowed the decline in headline inflation, and since the inflation of this subindex has reached its lowest historical point, it is foreseeable that it will return to values in line with its historical mean, which are more elevated than the values forecasted by Banco de México, thus making the convergence to the target more difficult. One member stated that the high incidence of non-core inflation on the improvement of the inflationary outlook constitutes a structural weakness for headline inflation dynamics. He/she mentioned the risk of price-related pressures on agricultural and livestock products due to the impact of the "El Niño" meteorological phenomenon. Another member noted that some elements that have favored the convergence of inflation, such as the decline in commodity prices and base effects, could contribute less to such convergence towards the end of the year. Some members stated that additional shocks cannot be ruled out in view of a highly uncertain environment. Most members considered that, in light of the risks, the improvement in the Regarding financing in the economy, one member pointed out that both total and domestic financing continued increasing. Most members noted that bank consumer lending continued to expand. One member associated the above with the strength of the labor market. Some members noted that credit to firms also continued growing. However, one member noted that its rate of expansion has stabilized. He/she also indicated that the latest information points to an increase in the demand for bank lending, from both firms and households, and to a decrease in the supply of bank lending for some sectors. Looking ahead, he/she pointed out that the demand for credit is expected to continue showing dynamism and its supply, to continue exhibiting heterogeneity, although it is not necessarily expected that lending conditions will tighten. He/she highlighted that firms and households continue substituting liquid assets for long-term instruments. Another member underlined that delinquency rates remain at relatively low and stable levels. Most members highlighted that the Mexican peso continued to display the resilient performance that it has been presenting. One member pointed out that in July of this year the nominal exchange rate reached levels unseen since December 2015, while in real terms it reached levels similar to those observed in May 2013. Another member indicated that the peso has accumulated a gain of around 12% in 2023. Among the factors that have explained the resilience of the national currency in the medium run, most members mentioned the volatility-adjusted domestic and foreign interest other emerging economies. Some members added that the positive outlook on the nearshoring process has also contributed to the above. One member noted the high inflow of remittances, the weakening of the dollar, and the uncertainty about the start of an easing cycle by the US Federal Reserve. Some members noted that recently domestic financial markets registered volatility, in line with global financial markets. One member stated that, since the last policy meeting, the Mexican peso traded in a wide range of around 80 cents, and finished the period with a slight depreciation. Most members highlighted that, despite the recent volatility associated with an increase in risk aversion, trading conditions in the foreign One member pointed out that long positions continued being taken on the Mexican peso in the derivatives market, in order to take advantage of the interest rate spread. He/she stated that this accumulation is comparable in magnitude to remittance flows during the quarter. He/she added that non-resident investors took advantage of recent exchange rate fluctuations to increase their positions in _M-Bonos, which in turn contributed to limit the_ upward adjustment in the exchange rate. He/she argued that, in a floating exchange rate regime, exchange rate fluctuations work as an automatic stabilizer by absorbing eventual shocks. He/she noted that in such a regime, the authorities do not aim for a certain exchange rate, but rather focus on ensuring orderly trading conditions in the foreign exchange market. Most members noted that long-term interest rates on government bond yields rose as a result of the recent episode of higher risk aversion. One member pointed out that the yield curve maintained stable operating metrics. Another member stated that the stock market declined during this period, affected by the communications sector. Some members indicated that one rating agency downgraded Pemex's credit rating while another one changed its outlook from stable to negative. One member warned about the higher financial cost that this company could face and the possible difficulties to meet its short-term refinancing needs. He/she argued that the multiple rating downgrades between January 2019 and July 2023 signal the company's recent financial deterioration. He/she mentioned that the lack of investment in maintenance, the lack of changes in its business strategy, and an outlook for lower capital expenditures have increased its dependence on federal resources, which could be a risk to sovereign debt ratings. He/she added that the Mexican banking system has significant exposure to this company. Another member considered that the downgrade of this company's rating had a limited impact on domestic financial markets. He/she stated that Mexico’s sovereign risk premia remained practically unchanged. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the disinflationary process is underway given that diverse pressures have eased. having an incidence on inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member highlighted that it is essential to continue with a very cautious approach, carefully assessing the outlook for inflation and its determinants. He/she underlined that since the last monetary policy meeting, the disinflation process in Mexico continued underway. However, he/she warned that the outlook is still complex and uncertain. He/she pointed out that although inflation has decreased, its path towards the target is still lengthy and faces significant challenges. For this reason, he/she considered that the reference rate must still remain at its current level for an extended period. He/she stated that this will give more time for the disinflationary process to continue and to become more generalized among the inflation components. He/she added that it will also allow to evaluate the behavior of inflation determinants. He/she underlined that the disinflation process responds to monetary policy actions, as well as to the fading of the effects of inflationary shocks. He/she highlighted that in this episode, Banco de México's decisions have contributed to the anchoring of inflation expectations, especially longer terms ones. He/she pointed out that, despite the magnitude of inflationary pressures, such expectations have remained stable. He/she added that monetary policy has also contributed to the resilient performance of the Mexican peso, in an environment of tight global monetary conditions. He/she argued that the anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations has prevented inflationary shocks from leading to even higher inflation levels. He/she stated that the behavior of the national currency has also contributed to the disinflationary process. He/she reiterated that this does not mean that there is a target for the interest rate spread or for the level of the exchange rate. He/she stated that, although Banco de México takes into consideration developments in international monetary policy, this is merely one among many factors that are analyzed at each meeting. He/she pointed out that central bank decisions obey particular macroeconomic conditions prevailing in each economy. He/she argued that due to the above, there is currently a certain heterogeneity in the decisions made by the monetary authorities. He/she mentioned that, in the case of Mexico, the central bank will continue making its monetary policy decisions based on the country's inflation outlook. He/she concluded by emphasizing that, in accordance with its constitutional mandate, the consolidation of an environment of price stability must remain monetary policy’s priority. He/she highlighted that this is for the benefit of the Mexican population, especially the lower-income segments, which are affected to a greater extent by the regressive effects of the inflationary phenomenon. Another member considered that it is essential to preserve the achieved level of monetary tightening in order to continue reducing inflation as expected and to mitigate the upside risks to inflation. He/she argued that the high uncertainty regarding the inflationary process and a balance of risks biased to the upside make it necessary to continue operating cautiously, favoring a flexible monetary policy stance, dependent on incoming data. He/she pointed out that for this reason maintaining the level of monetary restriction longer than expected or even that a further tightening is required, cannot be ruled out. He/she stated that the monetary policy statement should acknowledge that the favorable evolution of inflation has mainly responded to external factors and to the non-core component, and that, on the contrary, domestic pressures may hinder the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she indicated that there are two risk factors with significant implications for monetary policy conduction in the short and medium terms that urge caution against rushing with the withdrawal of monetary restriction. He/she mentioned as a first factor the accumulated lag in physical investment and the fall in productivity, which may have reduced the potential growth of the economy. He/she estimated that, if this were the case, inflationary demand pressures could materialize even when traditional estimates of the output gap do not indicate an overutilization of productive capacity. He/she noted as a second factor Pemex's financial situation given its possible impact on public finances, financial stability, and the exchange rate. He/she stated that these two factors reinforce the convenience of maintaining the monetary policy stance in restrictive territory during the entire planning horizon. He/she expressed that this is a necessary condition not only to induce the convergence of inflation to the target, but also to manage the risks associated with such convergence. One member stated that, despite its improvement, the inflationary outlook continues facing domestic and idiosyncratic risks and structural factors, which calls for maintaining the current level of the reference rate for an indefinite period. He/she considered that, given the increasing domestic pressures on inflation, monetary policy should continue considering the international context as a secondary factor. In this regard, he/she mentioned that there is still a wide interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States, and that global risks are contained. He/she noted that although the exchange rate has contributed to mitigate external price-related pressures its level is not a goal in the decisionmaking process. He/she argued that the beginning of monetary easing in some emerging economies responds to contexts different from that of Mexico, and therefore cannot be taken as a reference to determine the central bank's policy stance. He/she warned that in light of the still high level of headline and core inflation expectations for 2024, it is essential to stress that a restrictive stance will be maintained to ensure the anchoring of inflation expectations. He/she argued that it will be important to monitor that the effects of this stance are fully transmitted to the economy. He/she warned that several analysts as well as markets are discounting cuts in the reference rate before the end of 2023. However, he/she pointed out that it is still premature to consider a possible cut, even in the case of a finetuning to avoid an overly restrictive stance. He/she noted that, for now, the further tightening of the restrictive stance will continue through passive monetary policy management. He/she estimated that normalization towards a neutral stance is foreseen beyond the forecast horizon. Finally, he/she expressed that in the forward guidance, the period during which the policy rate will remain in place must still be characterized as extended, as such period may cover the rest of the year. He/she stated that, for this reason, it is essential that such guide signals that the inflationary problem has not yet been resolved and that it stresses the commitment to the primary mandate of price stability. Another member considered that the disinflation process continues to advance, although some elements that have worked in favor of convergence may contribute less towards the end of the year, and the balance of risks remains biased to the upside. He/she pointed out that the nature of the observed shocks starting with the pandemic has led to an environment of high uncertainty which could extend the lag with which monetary policy operates. He/she noted that these lags are considerable and may not be stable throughout the entire horizon. He/she highlighted that the greater resilience of the economy may suggest a more gradual transmission of monetary policy onto domestic demand which contributes to a slower decline in the core component. He/she noted that the latter could be explained, among other factors, by the normalization of consumption patterns and the growth of tertiary activities, which tend to be less sensitive to interest rates than other sectors. He/she mentioned that the better performance of the economy has also contributed to ease tighter credit conditions and to maintain the prices of various assets at high levels, which has caused credit channels and asset prices to operate slowly. He/she pointed out that, despite this, monetary policy has tightened further through both the increase in the ex-ante real interest rate and the behavior of the real exchange rate. He/she indicated that the level of restriction attained is contributing to the anchoring of inflation expectations and to the disinflationary process. However, he/she argued that monetary restriction will still require an extended period to be adequately transmitted and to guarantee: the consolidation of an orderly and sustained trajectory of inflation to the 3% target, a neutral balance of risks around the inflation forecast, and an adjustment of inflation expectations towards their historical averages. Considering all of the above, he/she deemed that the reference rate should be maintained at its current level. He/she warned that expectations implicit in the fixed income market anticipate a cycle of cuts in the reference rate for which is not consistent with the expected behavior of economic activity. He/she expressed that, in this environment of high uncertainty, communication must underline that the stance will continue to be flexible and data-dependent in order to comply with the constitutional mandate. One member considered that the solid stance adopted by Banco de México has contributed to the disinflationary process. However, he/she noted that, despite better inflation readings and its more favorable outlook, there are elements that make it convenient to continue with a cautious approach and maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. He/she argued that since there is a stance consistent with inflation’s convergence and monetary policy operates with lags, the effects of this monetary tightening should be allowed to continue having an incidence on the economy, which appears to be operating at its potential. He/she considered that the persistence of core inflation as well as the fact that the balance of risks remains biased to the upside, in an environment of high uncertainty, are an important challenge, and thus new shocks cannot be ruled out. Likewise, he/she stated that, although they have remained anchored, inflation expectations are still affected, and during this pause period, improvements in their readings will continue to be observed. He/she highlighted that this period will also allow us to analyze the effects of the shocks associated with the global inflationary episode on how the economy operates, not only in the short term, but also its possible impact in the long term. He/she also stated that the level of restriction attained is sufficiently robust in light of possible adjustments in the stance relative to other economies. He/she indicated that Banco de México's timely and decisive actions have allowed it to implement a more gradual tightening cycle than in other emerging economies, but in a more timely manner than in advanced economies. In this regard, he/she stated that the pace of normalization of monetary cycles is foreseen to be heterogeneous. Regarding forward guidance, he/she highlighted that it has allowed to transmit Banco de México's vision of the inflationary outlook effectively. He/she added that, without being too explicit, it has contributed to strengthen the monetary policy stance. He/she delved into the fact that, in view of the prevailing uncertain and complex environment, a moderate and effective use of forward guidance should be pursued, in order for it to consolidate as a vehicle to facilitate the understanding of monetary policy actions looking ahead. He/she was of the opinion that it must be communicated that currently it is not prudent to discuss the possibility of cuts in the reference rate and that it must stay at its current level for an extended period, which will give time to see substantial improvements in the inflationary outlook, while fostering an orderly adjustment of the economy and markets. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered that the disinflationary process is underway given that diverse pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed that these continue having an incidence on inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook will be complicated and uncertain throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.