Most members highlighted that during the first quarter of the year, global economic activity recovered compared to the fourth quarter of 2022, showing greater dynamism than expected. They added that, in various economies, labor markets continued showing signs of tightening. One member pointed out that, in advanced economies, nominal wages continued increasing at relatively high rates, although in real terms these show negative annual variations. Most members mentioned that in the weeks following the last monetary policy meeting, the global growth outlook for 2023 was revised slightly upwards. However, they noted it indicated that the likelihood of a recession this year has diminished. One member added that forecasts for an economic recovery by 2024 are maintained. Among global risks, another member noted the worsening of geopolitical tensions and tighter financial conditions. Most members mentioned that global inflation remains at high levels, although in a large continued decreasing. They attributed this particularly those of energy. One member added the lower sea freight costs and lesser pressures on global supply chains. Another member pointed out the fading, although moderate, of certain pressures on merchandise prices excluding those related to food and energy. Most members warned that at the global level core inflation shows persistence. Some members noted that the core components’ behavior is taking place in a context of economic expansion and a strong labor market. Some members highlighted the contribution of the services component to the persistence of core inflation. They considered that, given the resistance of the latter to decline, in most economies, convergence of inflation to their central banks' targets, foreseen for the end of 2024 and early 2025, remains uncertain. One member reflected on the asymmetric effects that global shocks have had on the economic sectors during this episode. He/she pointed out that the services sector initially registered a contraction and a fall in relative prices, while the opposite was observed with merchandise. He/she highlighted that services are currently recovering and their prices have been subject to upward pressures, as opposed to merchandise prices, which have started to normalize, which explains why some inflationary pressures are common across different economies. He/she also considered that these adjustments are not perfectly synchronized, which continues to be a source of heterogeneity and pose challenges for monetary policy. In this context, he/she estimated that, in the absence of shocks of similar magnitude, it is feasible to return to patterns similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. However, he/she warned that the potential long-term effects of the shocks are uncertain and need to be monitored. All members referred to the developments in the US and European banking systems since the second week of March, as well as to concerns about financial stability. One member highlighted that the latter was generated by the failure of certain regional commercial banks in the United States and the subsequent difficulties of a Swiss bank of global systemic importance. He/she pointed out that one of the US banks had high investments in long-term fixed-income securities and that the other affected banks had a high proportion of depositors with balances above the limit covered by deposit insurance. He/she considered that this, together with an inadequate risk management, had left these institutions in a vulnerable position. Another member pointed out that monetary tightening did not generate the problems of these institutions. He/she explained that the new financial conditions only exposed their vulnerabilities, as well as the need to strengthen supervision and compliance with risk management standards. Most members highlighted that the financial authorities of the referred countries have confidence in their banking sectors, such as liquidity provision and increasing bank deposit insurance. They added that the authorities reported being prepared to use all their tools to maintain the soundness of their banking All members noted that developments in the US and European banking systems led to greater risk aversion and high volatility in international financial markets. Most members mentioned that, in this context, interest rates on mainly downwards and that the US dollar appreciated. Some members added that stock market indices fell. One member noted that emerging markets showed, in general, a negative performance, with exchange rate depreciations and higher risk premia. He/she added that the latter led to tighter financial conditions. Another member expressed his/her concern about additional events that could generate instability in the international financial system and, therefore, an increase in global risk aversion. Some members pointed out that, in light of the greater uncertainty over financial stability, expectations on the monetary policy stances of several advanced economies, including the United States, exhibited volatility. One member indicated that, previously, during February and early March, these expectations had risen due to increased concerns about inflation. He/she pointed out that, in the case of the Federal Reserve, analysts and markets had incorporated an increase of 50 basis points for the March decision. He/she added that, subsequently, indeed, given the risks to financial stability, such expectations were abruptly adjusted downwards. He/she noted that markets and analysts even considered the possibility of a pause for the Federal Reserve's March decision. central banks in advanced economies continued that, at its March meeting, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Most members highlighted that this central bank anticipated that a further increase might be necessary. Some members pointed out that the monetary policy statement mentioned that events in the banking sector are likely to lead to tighter credit conditions, which will influence the evolution of economic activity, employment, and inflation. One member highlighted that this central bank’s communication suggests that the hiking cycle is approaching its final stage. Another member underlined that its chairman stated that no cuts are foreseen in 2023. Most members noted that markets expect a less restrictive policy stance for this year than that anticipated by the Federal Reserve. One member pointed out that this disparity could represent a risk. Another member warned that the divergence between market expectations and central bank communication is a current global phenomenon. authorities, such as the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve, stated that the appropriate tool to fight inflation is the reference rate, while liquidity facilities and other tools are appropriate to deal with financial stability problems. Regarding this subject, most members agreed that monetary policy should indeed focus on pursuing low and stable inflation, while financial stability should be achieved through other tools. Some members argued that it is not possible to address both inflationary and financial stability problems using the same tool. One member acknowledged that the insolvency of some US banks poses challenges to monetary policy. However, he/she pointed out that it would be wrong to use the reference rate to mitigate financial risks at the cost of fighting inflation. He/she considered it essential to communicate that the central banks’ priority is price stability. Another member stated that financial stability, like price stability, is a public good that is essential for the wellbeing of society. He/she noted that the appropriate tools to achieve financial stability are: a) macroprudential supervision and regulation focused on containing the accumulation of vulnerabilities; b) timely identification of risk factors; c) coordination among financial authorities; and d) liquidity facilities that financial institutions can access during stress episodes. One member considered that disruptions to financial stability require caution in diagnosing and monitoring the problem, as well as in determining the required policy response. Most members pointed out that the Mexican moderate pace. One member mentioned that it has shown resilience in light of a complex external environment. Some members stated that heterogeneity among sectors persists. One member added that, in January, seasonally adjusted Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its acronym in Spanish) figures reflected a monthly fall in primary activities, while tertiary activities rebounded and secondary ones remained unchanged. Another member indicated that the economy is expected to continue growing moderately. Some members mentioned that slack conditions continue narrowing. One member noted that the output gap is currently not statistically different from zero. Another member stated that the economy’s cyclical position remains at a level similar to that at the end of 2022. Some members mentioned that industrial production stagnated at the beginning of the year. Some members noted that construction registered a decline during the same period. One member added that, although this sector had reactivated to some extent in December, it partially reversed such progress in January, and thus, from a medium-term perspective, it seems stagnant. He/she added that only the administration's major public infrastructure projects have driven forward the sector. Meanwhile, another member noted a certain reactivation of manufacturing production and electricity generation. He/she stated that the manufacturing sector excluding the transportation equipment subsector expanded, while the rest of manufacturing registered a contraction. He/she added that the transportation equipment subsector is still below its pre-pandemic levels. Some members indicated that the manufacturing subsectors most integrated to global production chains register greater dynamism, while those that are more domestically linked have exhibited sluggishness. As for the services sector, they pointed out that recently six of its nine subsectors have continued growing. However, one member stated that commercial activities, which had led growth in this sector, have somewhat decelerated. On the demand side, most members highlighted the expansion of private consumption at the end of last year. They underlined the improvement in the consumption of services. Some members pointed out that timely indicators, such as consumer confidence, the wage bill and remittances, suggest that this dynamic continued during the first months of consumption of non-durable goods has stagnated in its latest readings, while that of semi-durables and durables has contracted, mitigating the shift in consumption patterns observed since the pandemic. members noted that this is being supported by the machinery and equipment component. However, one member warned that investment is still behind its peak levels of mid-2018, although it is close to its pre-pandemic levels. Another member mentioned that investment in non-residential construction continues trending upwards and is above its February 2020 level, while residential construction has stagnated and is still below that level. One member stated that ensuring the conditions for the country to take full advantage of the reconfiguration of global production chains would give a greater boost to domestic production, helping to counteract the anticipated cyclical weakness in external demand. Regarding exports, some members noted that during the January-February period, manufacturing exports exhibited some weakness. One member noted that external demand has shown less dynamism and that the largest trade deficit on record for a January-February period was observed. All members agreed that the labor market remains strong. Most members pointed out that conditions in this market are showing signs of participation rate continued increasing, while unemployment remained at low levels. Some members stated that the unemployment rates are at historic lows. One member noted that employment has increased at a faster pace than the labor participation rate. Another member warned of a shortage of skilled labor in some regions of the country. Most members highlighted the relatively high magnitude of wage revisions. One member pointed out that contractual wage revisions in private companies reached levels of 8.6%. He/she indicated that the annual wage growth of IMSS-insured workers has remained at levels above 11%. He/she added that the increase in the minimum wage explains a growing fraction of the increase in the IMSS-insured workers’ average base salary. However, another member stated that wages do not seem to show an atypical behavior considering the evolution of their traditional determinants, such as inflation, labor market dynamics, and productivity growth. He/she also considered that the observed increase in wages rather obeys a recovery of real wages, which are barely 1.8% above what was registered in the last quarter of 2019. All members considered that the inflation pressures are easing. Most members pointed out member recalled that in order to solve Mexico's inflationary problem external pressures must ease, although he/she underlined that this is not a sufficient condition. Some members mentioned that, at this point, domestic pressures are regarded as a challenge, especially those affecting services prices. Most members noted that annual headline inflation has decreased due to the evolution of the non-core component, while core inflation has adjusted downwards gradually. Some members recalled that annual headline inflation had been declining since September 2022. Most members mentioned that during the first fortnight of March, headline and core inflation registered Most members pointed out that core inflation continues showing persistence and remains at high levels. One member indicated that, although the core component has not yet shown a clear downward inflection point, last November it interrupted its upward trend and its figures have been in line with expectations. Another member stated that estimates in which the most recent monthly variations of this component are weighted, suggest that said component is close to following a downward trend. He/she added that supercore inflation as well as indicators more related to supply factors may have already reached their inflection point. One member pointed out that inflation more related to wages decreased at the margin. He/she mentioned that, within this indicator, six of the 36 CPI items that comprise it contributed with nearly 63% of its annual variation in the first fortnight of March, while the contribution of the remaining 30 items registered a marginal decrease. Therefore, he/she considered that the increase registered in this index has not been generalized. Another member indicated that there has been an improvement in producer prices, and therefore there is a lower passthrough of cost-related pressures to consumer prices. All members mentioned that merchandise inflation continued decreasing. Most members highlighted, in particular, the reduction in food merchandise inflation. Some members considered that the seasonally adjusted monthly variations of merchandise prices are already showing a clear downward trend. Some members noted the reduction in the percentage of food merchandise items with double-digit seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations. One member pointed out that, for the first time since the beginning of last year, the percentage of such food merchandise items showing annualized monthly price variations above 10% is below 50%, while that of non-food merchandise continues decreasing, and currently stands at around 13.6%. Regarding food merchandise components, another member underlined the lower annual variations in the prices of corn, wheat, and dairy products. Most members highlighted the upward trend in annual services inflation. One member pointed out that, although the acceleration of services inflation is not excessive, the annual variation of this index is consolidating at high levels. Some members noted that inflation of services other than housing and education increased again during the first fortnight of March. One member pointed out that, considering seasonally adjusted monthly variations, a certain stabilization is observed in education and housing inflation, but inflation of the rest of services continues trending upwards. Another member noted that the price increases in some services could be one-off adjustments, as in the case of domestic services, higher education or other personal care services, but pointed out that it is necessary to remain vigilant, especially regarding inflation of services other than housing and education, because these increases are taking place in an environment where inflation has remained at elevated levels for two years. Most members highlighted that the prices of various services have increased significantly due to the high cost of their inputs. Some members added the increased labor costs. They mentioned the minimum wage and one member added the higher vacation benefits. Another member noted that recent service inflation figures also reflect the mitigation of the change in consumption patterns generated by the containment of the health emergency and the subsequent reopening of the economy. He/she pointed out that part of the behavior of this component is due to the recovery in the sector and reflects price increases that were probably postponed at the time due to weak demand. In this regard, he/she pointed out that services activity recently reached its pre-pandemic levels. Most members mentioned that in the first fortnight of March, non-core inflation adjusted downwards, reaching 4.15%. They indicated that such reduction was due to decreases in its agricultural and livestock products and energy Some members mentioned that, according to surveys, inflation expectations for 2023 and 2024 increased again. However, some members considered that short-term expectations have somewhat stabilized. One member pointed out that those for the next 12 months continued decreasing. Most members mentioned that longer-term However, one member warned that inflation expectations for all terms remain elevated and above the central bank’s target. Regarding inflation expectations drawn from market instruments, another member highlighted that breakeven inflation remains at high levels. Most members mentioned that Banco de México's forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised marginally. They noted that inflation is still projected to converge to the target in the fourth quarter of 2024. One member pointed out that only for the first and second quarters of 2023 headline inflation forecasts were revised downwards and those corresponding to the core component were revised upwards. Another member noted that non-core inflation has been below forecasts. One member noted that forecasts over the planning horizon consider the gradual fading of the effects of the pandemic and the military conflict shocks, as well as the monetary policy actions that have been implemented. Most members stated that, looking ahead, inflationary pressures are expected to continue decreasing. One member added that the reduction in merchandise inflation will become more noticeable and that services inflation will likely stabilize. He/she pointed out that the mitigation that has been observed in the global shocks that have affected some services prices will eventually be reflected in this component. He/she stated that, although international food prices have been decreasing for some months, only until March their annual variations became negative. In this context, he/she considered that, looking ahead, a more noticeable reduction in food merchandise and food services inflation could be observed. He/she stated that these two components accounted for 64% of the most recent inflation figure. With respect to upward risks to inflation, most members mentioned the persistence of its core component at high levels. Some members noted the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. One member stated that insecurity continues affecting the high distribution costs. He/she considered that the narrowing slack conditions have made inflation more susceptible to new supply- and demand-related shocks. Some members pointed out the inflationary risk generated by the tight labor market. However, some members highlighted that, according to Banco de México estimates, a wage-price spiral is not being observed. One member added that the nearshoring phenomenon could increase the existing pressures in the real estate market. Another member pointed out that the turmoil in financial markets caused by the failure of some US banks could be a source of additional volatility in the foreign exchange market, which could represent a risk for inflation. One member added the possibility of pressures on energy or agriculture and livestock product prices. In this regard, another member stated that the forecasted inflation trajectories should be taken cautiously, because the non-core component, which is not susceptible to monetary policy actions, is assumed to behave favorably and below its historical average. As for downside risks, one member pointed to a greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world economy. Most members considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the Most members pointed out that domestic financial markets registered high volatility, in view of the recent increase in global risk developments in international banking systems. One member mentioned the negative behavior of these markets. However, another indicated that markets have operated in an orderly manner despite the observed volatility. Most members pointed out that the stock market registered falls. Some members underlined the reduction in the value of the financial sector stocks. One member added the fall in those of the consumer discretionary sector. Most members indicated that, after having volatility over the last weeks in response to the members pointed out that, in view of increased risk aversion, the Mexican peso reversed part of the appreciation registered during the year. One member stated that the exchange rate adjustment occurred through a reduction in long positions and an increased demand for currency hedging in light of the risk of a greater depreciation, which were partially offset by increased positions on short- and medium-term government securities. Another member pointed out that the Mexican peso has accumulated an appreciation of over 6% during beginning of the restrictive cycle, the bilateral real exchange rate with the United States has appreciated around 7%, while the multilateral tradeweighted one has appreciated around 15%, which could be reflecting tighter monetary conditions. Another member stated that during this period the nominal exchange rate reached levels unseen since perspective, the national currency keeps standing out among the currencies of emerging economies. trading conditions have recently deteriorated. However, another member noted that these remained stable for most of the period. He/she added that, during this episode of volatility, no pressures were observed on either the pesodenominated funding market or the US dollardenominated one. He/she underlined that the factors that have caused the Mexican peso to appreciate prevail, and therefore, in the absence of new risks, the peso is anticipated to exhibit more stability. Most members pointed out that, since the previous monetary policy decision, interest rates on government securities in Mexico registered generalized increases. One member stated that, initially, with the 50-basis point increase in the reference rate of the February meeting, the yield curve adjusted significantly upwards. He/she added that, subsequently, said curve has adjusted slightly downwards, in line with the developments in fixedincome markets in the United States. Another member pointed out that interest rates in Mexico remain above the levels registered in the previous policy decision. One member stated that interest rates exhibited increases of 67 basis points in the short term and of 52 basis points in the long term. Some members indicated that default risk premia increased. One member mentioned that, despite this, capital inflows to the fixed-income market continued. All members noted that developments in the US and European banking systems have had a limited impact on the domestic financial system. institutions in Mexico do not have direct credit or debt exposure to the affected foreign entities. They mentioned that Mexican banks exceed capitalization. One member underlined that, in Mexico, unlike in the United States, all banks, regardless of their size, must comply with said requirements. Another member pointed out that the macroprudential policies implemented in Mexico over the last two decades have so far allowed the Mexican financial system to be sufficiently resilient to avoid contagions as well as to contain any signs of instability. Notwithstanding, he/she underlined that there will not be a complacent stance in the face of potential risks. One member added that the risk of potential losses for banks and brokerage firms due to interest rate increases has decreased. He/she mentioned that, although no liquidity problems are foreseen in the Mexican banking system, a temporary increase in the cost of financing cannot be ruled out. All members highlighted that, looking ahead, Banco de México will remain attentive to the developments in international financial markets and to any likely impact on the domestic financial system. One member underlined that, due to its sound macroeconomic fundamentals, the Mexican economy is currently in a resilient position, given the challenging economic environment that all economies are facing. He/she mentioned that the Mexican economy is in better conditions than in the past to face the risks associated with an external juncture characterized by tight financial conditions derived from the monetary restriction cycle at the global level, as well as the challenges associated with the stability of the international financial system, which could lead to an even greater tightening of global financial conditions. Some members indicated that the performing credit of commercial banks to firms and households has continued to expand, especially credit for consumption. One member also underlined the increase in mortgage lending. Another member pointed out that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels. One member stated that asset holdings, both by households and firms, continue to shift towards longer maturity ones, reflecting the higher yields offered by these instruments. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the challenges stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the persistence of accumulated inflationary pressures and the possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well as the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on the above, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%. With this action, it slows the pace of interest rate increases and the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy decision, the Board will take into account the inflation outlook, considering the monetary One member argued that, considering all the above, in this meeting a 25-basis point increase is appropriate, given: a) the inflation outlook; and b) the monetary policy stance already attained. Regarding the first element, he/she reiterated that assessing the inflation outlook overall involves analyzing the observed and expected behavior of inflation as well as its determinants. In this regard, he/she considered that this outlook, despite remaining complex, is less adverse than that observed during most of 2022. He/she pointed out that, since the previous monetary policy decision, in view of the evolution of the noncore component, the observed behavior of headline inflation has turned out lower than anticipated. He/she added that the performance of core inflation has been in line with forecasts. He/she underlined that, looking ahead, the expected trajectory of inflation is similar to that already anticipated during the previous monetary policy decision. He/she noted that, so far, no significant effects of the US and Swiss banking problems on the outlook for domestic inflation are perceived, although he/she acknowledged that the Board must remain vigilant over this issue. He/she underlined that, at the margin, a deterioration of inflation dynamics is not perceived, although he/she emphasized that they remain complex. He/she stated that this reinforces the alternative of a rate increase for this policy decision of lesser magnitude than that of February’s, as mentioned in the previous policy statement. Regarding the second element, he/she restated that during this inflationary period Banco de México has acted in a timely and forceful manner. He/she pointed out that the reference rate has accumulated a 700-basis point increase and that, during the second half of 2022, a restrictive policy stance was attained, as required by the inflationary environment. Hence, he/she considered important to give relevance to the policy stance attained. This, considering that, to face a complex inflationary environment such as the present one, the central bank currently has an even more solid and robust stance than during the previous monetary policy decision. He/she argued that, considering the features of the inflation outlook mentioned above, the policy stance can be strengthened in lesser magnitude than as in the February meeting. Another member considered that, despite the positive performance of inflation, domestic pressures persist, mainly in the core component and with an upward dynamic in the services sector. He/she listed three sources of domestic pressures: i) growth of consumption exceeding the expansion of economic activity; ii) increased cost-related pressures stemming from the labor market; and iii) high inflation expectations. In this environment, he/she deemed it necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance, although at a slower pace, considering the restrictive level attained. He/she noted that the main risk continues being that inflation does not decrease at the pace necessary to achieve convergence within the planning horizon. He/she underlined that the policy statement should: i) acknowledge that, although there are signs of moderation in inflationary pressures and inflation is in line with forecasts, both inflation and its expectations are above target; ii) emphasize that the restrictive stance must be strengthened to bring core inflation down at the required pace and that, in the face of increasing domestic pressures, the trajectory of the services component will be key for the upcoming decisions; and iii) underline that the Mexican banking system is sound and acknowledge that turmoil in international financial markets could pose a greater challenge for monetary policymaking. Regarding forward guidance, he/she pointed out that the environment of high uncertainty calls for a cautious approach and favors a flexible policy stance. He/she pointed out that, based on current prospects, the reference to future increases may be omitted, emphasizing that monetary policy decisions will depend on the evolution of inflation determinants, the trajectories of inflation forecasted throughout the planning horizon, and on inflation expectations. He/she added that it should be pointed out that the monetary policy stance is expected to remain restrictive over the entire referred horizon. He/she also reflected on the urgent need to comprehensively assess the central bank communication policy. He/she highlighted the significant progress of recent years, from disclosing the Board members vote and publishing the updated forecasts for each monetary policy decision, to including the forward guidance in the central bank policy statements and publishing the full version of each of the member’s interventions three years after the policy decision. He/she stated that all of the above points in the right direction of greater transparency and accountability. He/she emphasized that communication is as important as monetary policy decisions on the reference rate, and that both elements constitute a tool to attain an effective transmission of monetary policy. In his/her opinion, the fact that, for the second time in 18 months, last February's decision took by surprise all private sector analysts cannot go unnoticed. He/she considered that this should lead to an evaluation of the central bank communication policy, its implementation, and the results achieved, in order to move towards a communication strategy that places institutional messages at its heart. He/she argued that said strategy should define the role of the Board members in transmitting institutional messages, and provide specific rules that, while allowing diverse opinions to be shared, set the basis on which monetary policy effectiveness is maintained as the primary goal. One member pointed out that, for this monetary policy decision, it is possible to continue with the monetary tightening as planned. He/she stated that the current context provides an opportunity to slow down the pace of reference rate increases and to consider the possibility of reaching the terminal rate of the current hiking cycle. He/she underlined that since the last monetary policy decision the inflation outlook improved at the margin, mainly due to lower external pressures, which is expected to lead to the materialization of a downward inflation trajectory. In this regard, he/she pointed out that different pressures on inflation justify implementing a restrictive monetary policy stance for a certain period. However, he/she sustained that it is time to focus on tackling domestic-related pressures, especially on services prices. He/she listed the factors that, in his/her opinion, will be key to determine the terminal interest rate: i) that inflation draws closer to its historical average, as in recent readings; ii) that core inflation consolidates a decreasing trend in its merchandise component and services inflation is contained; iii) that short- and medium-term expectations are more stable and gradually approach the target; iv) that the uncertainty associated with the balance of risks for inflation decreases, as it has done marginally; v) that incoming data validate the expected trajectory for inflation and that its forecast undergoes marginal revisions; and vi) that the restrictive level that has been attained is consistent with the complex nature of the current inflation phenomenon. He/she highlighted that the latter is possibly the most important factor. He/she estimated that during the upcoming monetary policy decision it will be determined whether the evolution of data allows to confirm the level of 11.25% as the terminal rate or if an additional adjustment is required. He/she stated that, once said level has been attained, during the next phase of the monetary cycle, the interest rate will need to remain fixed for a period of time enough to consolidate the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she considered that, during such phase, a restrictive monetary policy stance should be maintained with an ex-ante real interest rate of around 7%, considering that the reduction in expected inflation is reflected in increases in the exante real interest rate. He/she stated that Banco de Mexico’s communication must be as explicit as possible, avoiding an insufficiently clear forward guidance; for this reason, he/she pointed out that the monetary policy statement should justify the decision clearly, as well as the future intentions, specifying that these do not represent a fixed commitment and that they are subject to incoming data. Finally, he/she underlined that it is necessary to convey that, with the proposed adjustment, the hiking cycle would be close to ending, depending on the evolution of incoming data. Another member pointed out that headline inflation has decreased slowly and that the core component has shown greater persistence. With the proposed increase, he/she considered that the expected trajectory of inflation, as well as the associated balance of risks, are consistent with slowing the pace of interest rate increases. He/she highlighted three elements to consider for the conduct of monetary policy. First, he/she mentioned that the level of the monetary policy stance attained is historically high and that the ex-ante real interest rate is about to be almost twice the upper bound of the neutral range, which he/she estimated will be proportional to the observed inflation gap. He/she pointed out that said gap is anticipated to continue narrowing, while the ex-ante real interest rate is foreseen to increase insofar as inflation expectations ease. He/she stated that these expectations in the past have declined at a slower pace than the decrease in inflation, and that therefore it is reasonable to expect the real interest rate increase to not be excessive, although sufficient to maintain a significantly restrictive policy stance. He/she noted that, despite the recent episode of volatility, the real exchange rate continues acting restrictively on the economy, and thus overall monetary conditions have reached a level that supports the convergence of inflation. Second, he/she indicated that the monetary policy stance impacts the economy gradually. He/she reminded that the ex-ante real interest rate exceeded its range estimated as neutral six months ago, so monetary restriction can be expected to begin showing its effects more clearly during the second half of the year and reach them fully during 2024. Therefore, he/she pointed out the need to act cautiously so that the restrictive policy stance does not end up having an impact at times when the inflationary gap is not significant. Third, he/she underlined that effective central bank communication contributes to reduce some of these lags. He/she considered it relevant for communication to contribute to a better understanding of the central bank's reaction function for the rest of the year, in order to reduce market uncertainty over the interest rate’s expected trajectory, so that the latter is consistent with the central bank’s forecasts. He/she concluded that it is convenient to outline that, in the current conditions and in the absence of additional and significantly adverse shocks, the policy stance attained will allow to maintain inflation expectations anchored, will avoid second-round effects on price formation, and will be adequate for inflation to converge to the target within the forecast horizon, consistent with the constitutional mandate. One member considered a 25-basis point increase in the reference rate appropriate, given that, although core inflation remains high, inflationary pressures have shown signs of mitigation, which are anticipated to be more noticeable over the following months. Likewise, he/she indicated that the degree of policy restraint already attained must be considered. He/she pointed out that, with this adjustment, the reference rate will have accumulated a 725-basis point increase, bringing the real shortterm interest rate to a clearly restrictive level of approximately 6.5%. He/she stated that the monetary restriction has been reflected in different indicators, such as shorter-term inflation expectations, which have stabilized, and longer-term inflation expectations, which have remained anchored. He/she added that, given the tighter financial conditions, in view of the monetary tightening in Mexico and in other countries, the adjustment in the short-term real interest rate has been transmitted along the yield curve of real interest rates. Additionally, he/she highlighted the real exchange rate appreciation that has been observed since the start of the hiking cycle, and mentioned that this could be reflecting tighter monetary conditions. He/she also underlined three additional elements to consider in this monetary policy decision. First, that monetary policy operates with a lag and some of the transmission channels, such as the exchange rate and inflation expectations, act at a greater speed. He/she added that, since last September, the exante real interest rate has been above the upper limit of the neutral range, and therefore the impact of monetary tightening will be more noticeable over the next quarters. Second, he/she noted that the ex-ante real interest rate will continue increasing insofar as inflation expectations decrease. Third, he/she pointed that, in addition to the reference rate, communication also acts as a policy tool and it can continue strengthening the actions that have already been implemented. He/she concluded that the proposed policy stance will have the necessary strength for inflation to continue converging to the target. He/she indicated that monetary policy actions should prevent this convergence from being compromised and should foster an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets, in accordance with the constitutional mandate. He/she stated that the proposed adjustment would consolidate the monetary policy stance and provide room to evaluate the effects of the significant reference rate increase, so that, in the absence of new shocks, looking ahead it would be convenient to maintain the monetary policy stance that would be attained in this decision. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the challenges stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the persistence of accumulated inflationary pressures and the possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well as the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on the above, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%. With this action, it slows the pace of interest rate increases and the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. For its upcoming decision, the Board will take into account the inflation outlook, considering the monetary policy stance already attained. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%. Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy Communication is a fundamental pillar of monetary policy. In recent years, our central bank has introduced changes and made significant progress in this field. Nevertheless, these have been mainly implemented on a case-by-case basis, according to circumstances, and, on occasions, without previously discussed guidelines. Such is the case of forward guidance. Its purpose is to aid in the formation of expectations aligned to the long-term view of monetary policy, which is conditional on available information, to enable an orderly adjustment of financial markets. However, the forward guidance proposed in this policy statement is limited only to the upcoming decision and omits communicating that we anticipate that the monetary policy stance must remain restrictive for 2 years in order to achieve convergence to the 3% exact target. This reinforces a very short-term view, inevitably partial and incomplete, that does not fulfill the purpose of contributing to the formation of expectations for the horizon in which monetary policy operates. For this reason, I reiterate the urgent need to evaluate our communication policy.