Most members stated that during the third quarter world economic activity continued expanding. Some members highlighted that the rate of growth was greater than in the second quarter. Some members pointed out that it was also higher than anticipated. Most members added that economic growth has been heterogeneous across countries. In this regard, they noted the resilience of the US economy. Some members associated said resilience with the support from private consumption. They mentioned that in the euro area economic activity contracted. With respect to China, some members stated that, during the same period, economic activity surprised to the upside. However, one member noted that, from a longer-term perspective, the Chinese economy has slowed down. Another member indicated that investment in said economy remains weak. He/she added that timely indicators continue suggesting a deceleration in the manufacturing sector in advanced economies and a weakening in the emerging ones. He/she pointed out that for both groups of economies the corresponding indicators for the services sector are trending downwards, although they remain in expansion territory. One member mentioned that in the United States economic growth has been more resilient than expected. He/she added that global growth forecasts by international organizations remained unchanged since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, although for the United States they were revised upwards for 2023 and 2024. Some members considered that the balance of risks to global economic activity remains biased to the downside. One member emphasized the risk associated with challenges in the real estate sector in China. He/she added that, in the United States, uncertainty prevails as to the impact of the tightening of financial and credit conditions, a reduction in households’ excess savings, and the effect of higher interest rates once the refinancing needs of businesses and households arrive. Some members highlighted that labor markets remain tight in several countries. One member mentioned that significant wage-related pressures persist. However, another member stated that these markets continue exhibiting signs of a better balance between supply and demand. He/she pointed out that, in the United States, the non-farm payroll has trended downwards in recent months even with some surprises to the downside, and the unemployment rate has increased slightly. In this context, he/she underlined that nominal wage growth in the United States has moderated. Most members pointed out that headline inflation continued decreasing in most economies. Nevertheless, they indicated that it is still above the central banks’ targets in a large number of these economies. Some members underlined that in certain cases headline inflation has rebounded somewhat. One member attributed the above to the evolution of energy prices. Another member mentioned that various pressures on prices have been easing insofar as the effects of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine have been dissipating. He/she emphasized that the above, along with tight monetary conditions worldwide, have contributed to the decline of inflation at the global level. Most members underlined that overall inflation is expected to converge to central banks’ targets by the end of 2024 or during 2025. As for core inflation, they pointed out that it has declined more gradually than headline inflation. Some members stated that, regarding core inflation components, services’ prices remained subject to significant pressures. Most members emphasized that the geopolitical conflict in the Middle East inflationary outlook. However, they noted that, so far, its effects have been limited. One member stated that geopolitical shocks are often associated with increases in commodity prices, especially those of energy products, and that sometimes they have led to economic contractions and severe inflationary periods. He/she added that the transmission of these shocks typically depends on three factors: their magnitude and duration, the cyclical position of the global economy and the macroeconomic balances that prevail. Another member expressed that, up to now, international crude oil reference prices have declined. Some members argued that, looking ahead, it will be relevant to continue monitoring the evolution of the military conflict and its potential implications for economic activity, inflation, and global financial markets. Most members pointed out that the majority of central banks in advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged. Some members added that these authorities are expected to be nearing the end of their hiking cycles. Nevertheless, one member considered that they have left open the possibility of additional increases. Some members added that the central banks remain cautious and data-dependent. Most members highlighted that the monetary authorities in the major advanced economies are expected to maintain high reference rates for an extended period. One member indicated that the European Central Bank stated in its latest monetary policy decision that such policy would contribute substantially to the convergence of inflation to its target. Another member cautioned about the risk of a premature easing by monetary authorities, which, in his/her opinion, would hinder the attainment of goals within the foreseen horizon. Most members mentioned that, in its November meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged. One member added that this is the second consecutive pause, and that the chairman of that institution highlighted that tighter financial and credit conditions are likely to affect economic activity, the labor market, and inflation. However, he pointed out that the extent of these effects remains uncertain. Another member mentioned that the chairman underlined the dependence on incoming data for subsequent decisions. All members pointed out that, after Banco de México’s previous monetary policy meeting, international financial markets exhibited higher volatility. Most members highlighted that the US dollar registered a generalized appreciation, in a context of greater risk aversion. They added that long-term sovereign interest rates increased significantly worldwide. They pointed out that the expectation that reference rates in the main advanced economies will remain high for a contributed to the above. Some members stated that concerns regarding the financing needs of the United States also affected the above. One member stated that interest rates in the United States reached levels unseen since 2006. He/she mentioned that yield curves exhibited increases in several countries. Another member warned that tighter global financial conditions could significantly impact financing costs, especially for governments with unprecedented high levels of public debt, leaving them with no room for maneuver to face future shocks. He/she underlined that emerging economies continue registering outflows from fixed-income assets and more moderate outflows from equity assets. However, adjustments in financial markets tended to revert in recent days. Some members indicated that this occurred after the release of figures that showed a moderation in the dynamism of the US labor market and after the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decision. One member explained that, so far this year, assets in Asian economies exhibited an unfavorable performance, while assets in Europe and Latin America continued performing positively. Most members underlined that, according to the GDP flash estimate of the third quarter of 2023, higher-than-expected dynamism. Some members indicated that the economy expanded at a rate of represented an acceleration relative to the two previous quarters. Most members stated that the that the economic expansion has been driven by the three sectors of the economy. However, one member mentioned that growth of aggregate activity, excluding the construction sector, has moderated. On the production side, some members stated that industrial production continued expanding. They mostly attributed it to the high dynamism of construction. They particularly highlighted the strength of public construction associated with railway works, and, to a lesser extent, of private construction of industrial, commercial, and service buildings associated with the infrastructure projects in the southern part of Mexico. Meanwhile, some members underlined that manufacturing shows stagnation. One member added that a slight decline in capacity utilization has been observed, except in the automotive industry. Some members indicated that services continued trending upwards, although with a differentiated behavior among sectors. One member added that some of those sectors show declines. highlighted that investment has maintained high growth rates. Some members underlined that gross fixed capital formation is growing at a faster rate than economic activity overall. Most members noted that the dynamism of investment is mainly attributed to non-residential construction, although they equipment has also contributed to it. One member mentioned that expectations generated by the nearshoring phenomenon are fueling these two sectors. However, another member underlined that investment in machinery and equipment has slowed down. Most members highlighted the dynamism of consumption. Some members considered that the favorable performance of this indicator is attributed to the dynamics of the imported goods’ segment. One member noted that domestic goods and services show weakness, which could persist, especially in the case of services. Another member pointed out that consumption has been supported by labor market dynamics, the increase in remittances, certain public policies that have allowed a strengthening of households’ consumption, and by the high growth rate of consumption credit. Some members agreed that domestic spending has gained more relevance in the dynamism of the Mexican economy. One member mentioned that domestic spending is expected to continue contributing to the resilience of Mexico’s economic activity. Regarding the external sector, most members pointed out that manufacturing exports exhibit a heterogeneous behavior across components. significant dynamism of automotive exports and the weakness of non-automotive ones. However, one member pointed out that the latter are at relatively high levels. Another member mentioned that it cannot be ruled out that a greater-than-expected slowdown in the US economy could moderate external demand. One member reflected on the importance of external demand as a driving force for economic activity from a medium-term perspective, especially for the recovery after the shock in the second quarter of 2020. He/she explained that, nevertheless, as the reopening process and the normalization of expenditure patterns advanced, private consumption has gained relevance. Most members indicated that the point estimate for the output gap is positive. Some members mentioned that it is not statistically different from zero. One member pointed out that it has expanded into positive territory. Another member agreed that indicators suggest tight conditions. One member mentioned that, if the economy remains resilient, its cyclical position will exhibit tighter conditions. However, another member underlined that said tight conditions are expected to fade gradually, although it will be important to remain vigilant over the implications for the economy’s price formation process. Likewise, one member argued that the consumption gap indicator has been turning less positive, while the labor market one has stopped increasing, despite remaining at elevated levels. Most members pointed out that the labor market remains strong. They underlined that the unemployment rates remain at historic lows. One member highlighted that the unemployment gap is clearly in negative territory. Another member mentioned that the labor participation rate is high. Some members pointed out that the number of IMSS-insured jobs continued growing. One member stated, however, that these have been increasing at a slower rate, which could be reflecting, in part, the lack of dynamism of manufacturing. Another member considered that the higher levels of employment observed in the northern border’s free zone could be associated with the nearshoring process. Most members stated that annual wage growth remains high. Some members underlined that wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering double-digit annual variations. Nevertheless, some members noted that this wage indicator has started to stabilize. One member added that its growth rate rebounded slightly in September. Another member added that considering the evolution of wages in the National Occupation and Employment Survey respond with some lag to the dynamics of inflation, and thus an adjustment process in wages due to the previously observed high levels of inflation could still be taking place. He/she expressed that, to preserve price stability, it is necessary to remain vigilant to labor dynamics not extending these pressures for longer. One member added that the 12-month moving average of contractual wage revisions for private firms increased to 9.3%. All members agreed that inflation has decreased underlined that headline inflation continues trending downwards. They pointed out that, in view of the progress in the disinflation process, headline inflation registered a level of 4.26% in October 2023. One member stated that this is the lowest figure since February 2021. Another member noted that headline inflation fell 444 basis points from its maximum level of 8.70% registered in August measures are on a downward trajectory, and that the share of the CPI basket items with seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations higher than around 40% in 2022 to approximately 10% in the latest data. One member agreed that various metrics point to the consolidation of a clear and sustained convergence trajectory towards the target. He/she added that variations in headline inflation have been closer to their historical averages and more in line with what was observed prior to the pandemic. Some members asserted that the monetary policy stance has contributed to the progress in the disinflationary process. One member also added the dissipation of shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine. He/she underlined that the disinflationary process has advanced amid a complex external environment and a resilient economic activity in Mexico. Some members considered that the performance of various inflation determinants has improved. One member exemplified the above with the stabilization of nominal wages, the deceleration of consumption, and the improvement in inflation expectations for different terms. He/she added that lower inflation levels will lead to less frequent price revisions. However, another member noted that, although headline inflation has continued decreasing, its decline has slowed down. One member emphasized the significant contribution of the non-core component to the decline in headline inflation over the last year, as well as the equally important role of the base effects. Most members highlighted that the decline in supported by the favorable evolution of the core component. They indicated that the latter continued decreasing and registered 5.50% in said month. One member pointed out that its contribution has gained greater relevance, and that, in recent months, it has accounted for almost the entire decline in headline inflation. Most members noted the 301 basis-point decline in the core component since its highest level registered in November 2022. One member specified that, while it has decreased more gradually than headline inflation, the magnitude of its decline is only comparable to the disinflation observed between the case of headline inflation, various trend measures of core inflation also show an improvement, such as the trimmed mean, which is on a decreasing trajectory, as well as the fraction of the basket with extreme variations, which has declined markedly relative to a year ago. However, one member warned that the annualized monthly rate of this component appears to have resumed an upward trend. Most members highlighted the mixed behavior within the core component. They described that merchandise inflation continues decreasing, while services inflation still does not show a clear downward inflection point. Regarding the former, one member stated that in October it registered since November 2022, when it attained its maximum level of 11.28%. He/she pointed out that over the approximately 550 basis points, while during the disinflationary phase this increase has reversed in less than a year, reflecting a relatively rapid reduction. Some members attributed this good performance to the normalization of supply chains, the lower prices of various commodities, and the foreign exchange rate appreciation. They specified that the appreciation has contributed to ease pressures on imported goods’ prices. Regarding services inflation, most members Some members mentioned that the annual variations in the prices of educational, housing, and tourism services have increased. They added that the remaining services exhibit a high resistance to decline from elevated levels. Most members expressed that services inflation continues being subject to significant pressures. They underlined that cost increases have not been fully passed on to services prices yet. Some members mentioned that this is due to the slow recovery of demand for them. One member added that, in general, the difference in the performance of merchandise and services is attributed to the nature of non-simultaneous shocks and their unsynchronized fading process. He/she added that pressures on services prices also reflect, in part, that their production implies a higher share of labor costs as compared to merchandise. He/she pointed out that said pressures emerged during the second half of member argued that services prices continue to reflect the impact of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine, and that for this reason its evolution is not necessarily explained by domestic pressures. Most members noted that non-core inflation remained at unusually low levels, reaching 0.56% in October. One member recalled that this component shifted from 10.65% in August 2022 to -0.67% in July 2023. However, he/she noted that its rebound has been lower than expected. Most members noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained relatively stable at levels above target. Some members pointed out that they remained above their historical averages. One member underlined that, while their median has exhibited few adjustments, other measures such as the interquartile range and skewness point to an improvement in their distribution. Some members added that short-term expectations have decreased gradually. One member stated that they remain at levels above 4%. Another member pointed out that both their trend and their dispersion have systematically shown a resistance to decline. However, one member mentioned that in October the median of expectations for the next 12 months continued declining with respect to its level in March. Another member warned that the anticipated increase in annual headline inflation for November and December could affect short-term inflation expectations. As for expectations drawn from market instruments, one member indicated that breakeven inflation rose mainly due to the increases in the inflation risk premium for different terms. Most members mentioned that headline and core inflation are still anticipated to trend downwards. They added that the central bank forecasts still foresee inflation converging to the target in the second quarter of 2025. Some members pointed out that these forecasts remained practically unchanged from the previous meeting. One member noted that the expected decline in inflation during actions, as well as prospects that various pressures on inflation will continue to dissipate. Another member stated that he/she expects the mitigation of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine to be reflected in a more noticeable reduction in services inflation. Most members noted that temporary increases in headline inflation are anticipated in November and December. Some members explained that non-core inflation is expected to show additional increases in the coming months. One member indicated that, although a rebound of inflation is anticipated in some periods, it is expected to continue on a downward trend. All members stated that, despite the progress in challenging. In this regard, they agreed that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member considered that this balance has increased its upward bias due to the resilient economic activity, the tight labor market, the persistence of core inflation, inflation expectations that are not reversing, and a procyclical fiscal policy. Another member stated that the balance of risks has improved with respect to that observed in March. He/she partly attributed this to the greater relevance of the risk of an external slowdown that moderates external demand. He/she added that the revision of forecasts at the September policy meeting implied the materialization of the risk on core inflation’s persistence. One member argued that to continue labeling the balance of risks as biased to the upside does not mean that the environment is as adverse as it was last year. He/she pointed out that at that time the upward bias meant the possibility that inflation would increase at an even greater rate than what was being observed, while in the disinflation phase it means that inflation could decrease more gradually than what is foreseen during the forecast horizon. Among upside risks, most members highlighted core inflation’s persistence at high levels. However, one member expressed that this risk might have decreased as a result of the current lower levels of inflation. He/she stated that, based on empirical evidence, the higher the levels of inflation, the greater the probability that high levels of inflation become entrenched in the economy. Consequently, he/she argued that the reduction already shown by the core component might have eased this risk. Most members mentioned as a risk episodes of international financial volatility. One member warned that this could undermine the positive contribution that the exchange rate has had on input costs. Some members highlighted that market structures that have not allowed for greater competition in certain products could contribute to a slower reduction in inflation. As an additional upside risk to inflation, most greater-than-expected resilience of the economy and that the labor market remains tight. One member added that, given that the cyclical position of the economy suggests tight conditions, it will be necessary to remain alert to their implications for the price formation process. In this regard, another member warned that higher-than-expected demand-related pressures are likely to be observed, especially considering that the output gap is in positive territory. One member considered that the dynamism of both aggregate demand and the labor market points to greater pressures on prices and suggests that the disinflationary process could slow down. He/she stated that this, along with the dissipation of the base effect and the expected increase in the non-core component, raise the possibility that inflation remains above the variability range longer than expected. Some members mentioned the pro-cyclical fiscal policy as a risk. One member noted that although a lower deficit than the one approved is expected for 2023, a public balance deficit of 4.9% of GDP is anticipated for 2024. He/she mentioned that, the above, together with changes in the composition of government expenditures, implies substantial challenges for the fiscal consolidation foreseen for 2025. Additionally, he/she argued that the lack of a plan to ensure Pemex's viability in the medium and long terms, beyond the support granted to provide it with liquidity, represents a risk for the sustainability of public finances and for credit ratings. Most members mentioned the possibility of One member considered that due to the still incomplete pass-through of costs and the fact that the adjustment of relative prices between services and merchandise has not yet concluded, services inflation could continue being subject to pressures in the coming months. He/she stated that costs could increase more than expected, due to the aforementioned tightening of the labor market and to idiosyncratic factors, such as the levels of insecurity, the anticipated minimum wage increases, and the effects of Hurricane Otis. Regarding the latter, he/she emphasized that greater weight should be given to climate-related factors in the balance of risks to inflation. Some members highlighted the risk of pressures on energy prices due to the escalation of geopolitical conflicts. As for downside risks, some members underlined the possibility of a greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world economy, as well as a lower pass-through effect from some cost-related pressures. All members indicated that, in line with developments in international markets, volatility increased in domestic financial markets. They highlighted that after the last policy meeting, the Mexican peso depreciated. Most members stated that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market deteriorated somewhat. One member added that for some weeks the Mexican peso lost part of its attractiveness despite maintaining a high interest rate differential, given the increase in its volatility, higher than that of other currencies. However, another member noted that, considering the events throughout 2023, the Mexican peso continued standing out among its peers due to its resilient performance. Most members expressed that recently, once risk aversion in international markets decreased, the peso reversed part of the The majority noted that, since the previous policy meeting, interest rates on government securities increased for all terms. They pointed out that, in line with developments in international financial markets, these adjustments tended to reverse in the last few days. Some members highlighted that Mexico’s sovereign rates exhibited a high correlation and sensitivity to the evolution of US Treasury bonds. One member pointed out that the stock market registered a negative performance, affected by the industrial sector. Another member asserted that sovereign risk premia decreased, showing a behavior different from that of other emerging economies. One member mentioned that the tightening of financial conditions and its potential effects on domestic financial markets must be monitored. Some members argued that the implied expectations for the path of the reference rate in TIIE swaps adjusted upwards and exhibited some volatility, discounting with a greater probability that the first interest rate cut takes place between the March and May decisions and that subsequent decreases will be gradual. Regarding financing in the economy, some members noted that total financing continued increasing. One member highlighted that its growth rate in real terms rose to 2.8%. Some members pointed out that the expansion is attributed to the domestic component. decreased. Some members highlighted the increase in credit to consumers and to firms. One member indicated that, according to information from the third quarter, there has been an increase in the demand for credit, although in certain cases the general conditions or lending approval standards have tightened. He/she stated that the dynamism in credit reflects the favorable performance of the economy and the strength of the labor market. Another member indicated that, based on October figures, the financial conditions index in Mexico tightened somewhat and remains in restrictive territory, although at relatively low levels. He/she mentioned that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels, although those corresponding to consumption have recently increased marginally. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it deemed that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference some time. The latter, taking into account that although the outlook remains complicated, progress on disinflation has been made. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member argued that while the current inflationary outlook is less adverse than the one faced in 2022, it remains complicated and with upside risks, and thus monetary policy should continue to be conducted with a cautious approach. He/she considered that the reference rate should remain at its current level, taking into account the revised forecasts from the September policy decision, the pressures on prices, mainly of services, and the levels of headline and core inflation that still prevail. However, he/she asserted that such levels reflect not only the road that remains to be covered, but also the significant progress in disinflation. In this regard, he/she highlighted the decrease in headline and core inflation since the third and fourth quarters of 2022, respectively, and that, looking forward, disinflation is expected to remain underway. In this context, he/she argued that the possibility of adjusting the reference rate downwards could begin to be evaluated in the policy meetings of the first quarter of 2024. He/she noted that such option would be on the table and that the decisions to be taken would be subject to available information. He/she added that acting cautiously will be required given the challenges that still prevail, so that when macroeconomic conditions allow for downward adjustments, these would be gradual. He/she noted that, depending on the evolution of the inflationary outlook, a cycle of continuous decreases would not necessarily take place. In this regard, he/she pointed out that decisions should be such that the monetary policy stance remains solid. In particular, he/she specified that the restrictive stance should continue to contribute to the reduction of inflation in order to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she reiterated that monetary policy’s priority must continue to be to reduce inflation and consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. He/she stated that such a policy is consistent with the primary mandate of price stability and that it is for the benefit of Mexico’s population. significant progress has been made in the disinflationary process, an environment of high uncertainty and risks still prevails. He/she stated that it is not yet possible to declare victory in the battle against inflation and that Banco de México must not drop its guard. In this context, he/she considered that the reference rate should remain at its current level. He/she pointed out that, looking ahead, several factors may hinder the expected path of inflation and complicate the conduction of monetary policy. Among these factors, he/she highlighted a higher-than-expected growth; a pro-cyclical fiscal policy; and the possibility of fiscal pressures derived from the need to support the population affected by Hurricane Otis; all of this with a positive point estimate for the output gap and with an outlook for it narrowing further. Regarding the external front, he/she underlined the lengthening of the Federal Reserve's strategy of maintaining higher interest rates for a longer period, which could trigger new episodes of depreciation. He/she also mentioned the possibility of a prolongation or escalation of geopolitical conflicts that could affect commodity prices and the stability of financial markets. He/she reiterated that given the increase in the upward bias of the balance of risks for inflation, it is necessary to maintain the level of monetary restriction attained. He/she pointed out that the statement of this decision should maintain a cautious tone, underline the high level of uncertainty, and highlight that the upwards bias in the balance of risks for inflation has increased. He/she indicated that, although there is the possibility of adjusting the monetary policy stance in the first quarter of next year, it is subject to assumptions related to the inflationary outlook, which can change rapidly under the present adverse environment, given the risks mentioned above. He/she expressed that, for this reason, it is neither prudent nor necessary to bring forward a signal that could change soon, especially when the market has already internalized the possibility of a first cut to the reference rate between March and May of next year. He/she mentioned that a flexible and data-dependent approach should be maintained, and that such communication should be evaluated once again in the next policy decision. One member considered that, while the reference rate should remain at its current level, in the policy decisions of the first quarter of 2024 a discussion regarding the possibility of a fine-tuning of the reference rate could begin. He/she argued that such discussion could take place depending on available information suggesting that the risks that have been pointed out have not materialized, and that inflation remains on the foreseen trajectory. He/she highlighted that progress in disinflation must be acknowledged. He/she noted that, due to the reduction in 12-month inflation expectations, the ex-ante real interest rate has increased by almost 80 basis points since March. He/she argued that in the next months said rate should be maintained between inflation to the target; for this reason, the fine-tuning, in his/her opinion, would take place in order to prevent the ex-ante real rate from moving out of that interval. He/she stated that Banco de México should use more and better forward guidance, in line with the recommendations of international organizations. He/she stated that the period during which the reference rate will remain fixed should no longer be categorized as “extended”, and it should rather be indicated explicitly that it will remain unchanged at least until the end of the year. He/she expressed that it should be made clear that next year's policy decisions will be subject to the evolution of incoming data, in order for expectations about the first cut to the reference rate not to be anticipated or postponed in an unjustified manner. He/she noted that analysts estimate a first adjustment to the rate in March 2024, while, according to market instruments, this would occur between March and May. He/she pointed out that expectations should be monitored so that they do not diverge significantly as a reflection of the greater uncertainty about the next reference rate adjustment. He/she recommended communicating that, although monetary policy normalization seems distant, occasional and gradual adjustments during the first quarters of next year are not ruled out. He/she pointed out that, given the domestic pressures, when conducting monetary policy, the main objective should be the absolute policy stance. Regarding the relative stance, he/she stated that the interest rate differential between Mexico and the United States is sufficient to counter financial volatility, although he/she warned that this has started to affect the exchange rate, which could reduce the positive contribution it has had on input costs. He/she added that the lack of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies could delay the transmission of monetary policy and hinder its normalization. He/she argued that, in his/her opinion, monetary policy transmission in Mexico is less effective than in other countries, due to the low levels of financial depth and inclusion, low credit penetration, the high levels of informality, and the lack of competition in the financial system. He/she pointed out that, this same lack of competition in other sectors has allowed those firms with market power to continue increasing their prices, despite the fact that the supply shocks which drove those increases have dissipated. He/she stated that the above has slowed down the decline in inflation. Another member stated that the reference rate should still remain at its current level for some time, and that the restrictive monetary policy stance should probably be maintained throughout the forecast horizon in order to mitigate risks, consolidate the downward trend in inflation, and continue lowering its expectations. In this regard, he/she highlighted that the disinflationary process has advanced, particularly in the last twelve months, at a speed unseen since the 3% target was set, supported, in part, by the restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she added that price dynamics have started to come close to their historical pattern and that the decrease in inflation cannot be attributed to short-run factors alone, and thus, in general, the observed determinants of inflation have been more consistent with what Banco de México has foreseen. However, he/she stated that inflation expectations have decreased gradually, which could be because in Mexico the formation of inflation expectations seems to be more of a retrospective process rather than a prospective one. He/she mentioned that this is more noticeable in the behavior of business sector expectations. He/she pointed out that in economies where the formation of expectations is of a more retrospective nature, monetary tightening has a lesser effect on inflation than in economies where there are more prospective conditions. He/she considered that the monetary policy transmission channels continue operating in the right direction, although with a heterogeneous impact on economic activity and inflation, and thus they require some time to continue contributing to the disinflationary process. He/she also recalled that the balance of risks for inflation is still biased to the upside. He/she mentioned that, taking all of the above into consideration, an equilibrium must be achieved between the progress in disinflation and the existing risks within the forecast horizon. He/she argued that, given the increase in the ex-ante real interest rate and the tighter monetary conditions, which are reflected in the real exchange rate and in market instruments, it would be possible to evaluate, later on, whether the observed and anticipated disinflationary process are compatible with lower nominal interest rate levels. He/she argued that, given the environment of uncertainty surrounding decision-making, monetary policy’s approach should remain prudent, cautious and gradual, in line with the challenges that continue to be faced, in order for inflation to converge to the target, and consistent with seeking an orderly behavior of markets, the financial system, and the economy as a whole. One member mentioned that the monetary policy stance is sufficiently solid and that, along with the mitigation of inflationary shocks, it has improved the inflationary outlook. Highlighting the progress made, he/she pointed out that the ex-ante real rate is at a clearly restrictive level of around 373 basis points above the neutral range. He/she also underlined that, since March, when the rate reached its current level, headline and core inflation have, both, accumulated improvement in the inflationary outlook has been observed in its determinants; thus, the lower inflation level will signify less frequent price revisions, wages have stabilized and consumption has decelerated, while inflation expectations continue showing improvements. Furthermore, he/she stated that its balance of risks, without ignoring that it remains biased to the upside, has improved relative to March given the latest forecast revision and certain downside risks that have gained relevance, such as a possible deceleration of the global economy. However, he/she argued that challenges remain, such as the core component’s persistence, due, in part, to the behavior of services, which continue to be affected by the shocks of the pandemic and the conflict in Ukraine. He/she stated that monetary policy has been consistent with an environment characterized by a resilient economic activity and an inflation partly stemming from shocks over which monetary policy has no effect. He/she pointed out that, in this complex environment, monetary policy has prevented expectations from becoming unanchored and a contamination of the price formation process. He/she argued that, considering the improvements in the inflationary outlook and that the transmission channels are operating and will continue to have an incidence on inflation in the following quarters, there is room to discuss cuts to the reference rate. He/she mentioned that the challenge is to adjust the monetary policy stance in order to be consistent with the fact that inflation, while still above target, is already trending downwards. He/she stated that, considering the expected progress on the inflationary outlook, the first reference rate cut could occur at the beginning of the first quarter of 2024. He/she mentioned that, in a context in which the disinflationary process may not be linear, the solid monetary policy stance would continue operating even if rate adjustments are implemented. He/she added that, given the prevailing environment of uncertainty, adjustments would be gradual and not necessarily continuous. He/she deemed it adequate to communicate that the reference rate will remain at its current level for some time and that looking ahead a restrictive policy stance that ensures the convergence of inflation to the target should continue. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it deemed that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference rate must be maintained at its current level for some time. The latter, taking into account that although the outlook remains complicated, progress on disinflation has been made. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy Although inflation has been decreasing, its convergence to the target in the second quarter of current half of the year, the disinflationary process has slowed down. Core inflation has fallen mainly due to the decline in merchandise inflation as services inflation has shown a resistance to decline and recently it has increased. In my opinion, the upward bias in the risks to inflation has increased, with a more resilient economic activity, a cyclical position of the economy in positive territory, a tight labor market, core inflation persistence, non-core inflation trending upwards, inflation expectations above our target and not reverting, and a procyclical fiscal policy for 2024. Looking ahead, the commitment to attain fiscal consolidation starting in Under such conditions, I believe we should remain prudent and cautious in our communication and avoid modifying our forward guidance in advance, given the high level of uncertainty regarding inflation’s downward trajectory.