Most members mentioned that global economic activity recovered moderately during the third quarter of the year. One member pointed out that this was mainly due to the rebound in the US economy and the reopening of activities in China. However, some members pointed out that timely indicators of activity at a global level are in their contraction range. Some members warned that there are signs of disturbances in international trade. Most members highlighted the weakening of certain European economies. Some members noted that, in the United States, several indicators have deteriorated. They also highlighted the impact of the rebound in the number of infections on the Chinese economy. Regarding labor markets, most they continued to perform favorably. One member noted that US job vacancies have trended downwards without this resulting in a higher unemployment rate. However, another member pointed out that despite significant wage revisions, the high levels of inflation continue eroding real income. Most members mentioned that global growth forecasts for 2023 continued deteriorating, due geopolitical tensions. Some members pointed out that the downward revisions were particularly observed in advanced economies. Among risks to the global economy, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic, the intensification of geopolitical tensions, and tighter monetary and financial conditions. Some members stated that the probability of a global recession in the coming year remains high. However, one member noted that it is expected to be mild and short-lived. Another member mentioned that the possibility of a significant weakening in global economic activity is latent and uncertainty over whether prevailing conditions will lead to a recession persists. One member considered that the balance of risks for world economic activity remains biased to the downside, especially for systemically important economies. All members highlighted that headline inflation decreased in several economies due to lower pressures on food and energy prices. Most members stated that in some countries the inflationary peak may have already been reached. They pointed out that, in the United States, headline inflation continued decreasing. They noted that pressures on commodity prices and supply chain disruptions have shown signs of easing. One member highlighted that the prices of oil, grains and industrial metals are currently lower than those at the beginning of the military conflict. He/she added that some indicators related to supply chains have already returned to their pre-pandemic levels. He/she added that this has led to a significant decrease in producer price inflation in advanced and emerging economies, which is already beginning to have a favorable impact on headline inflation, and is expected to eventually do so on core inflation. Nevertheless, most members warned that world inflation remains at elevated levels and above the central banks' targets. They highlighted that the core component continued increasing in several economies. Some members stated that this was due to the performance of the services component. Most members stated that a large number of central banks continued raising their reference rates, although some of them are expected to start moderating the pace of their increases. They considered that certain economies are close to ending their hiking cycle, or have already concluded it. One member stated that the implied interest rate trajectory for the next two years for several economies has been adjusted downwards. Another member noted the heterogeneity among the expected interest rate trajectories of emerging economies, although he/she noted that most of them imply reference rates above the neutral range. One member added that, in some cases, downward adjustments are expected starting in the first quarter of 2023, and also noted that Mexico is one of the few economies where upward adjustments in the reference rate are still foreseen in the coming months. He/she considered that, in other countries, continuing to raise reference rates is justified, as inflation is still increasing and has been affected by accelerated economic growth. Meanwhile, some members mentioned that reference rates are expected to remain at high levels for an extended period. One member stated that this would be necessary to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target, which is likely to be postponed until 2024, although this scenario is still subject to a high level of uncertainty. All members highlighted that the Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at its last meeting. Most members noted that said institution slowed the pace of interest rate hikes. increases. Some members mentioned that there is still uncertainty about the terminal interest rate and the possible start of an easing cycle. Most members mentioned that international financial conditions remained tight. However, they noted that medium and long-term interest attributed to prospects of a moderation in the Federal Reserve's monetary tightening. Some members stated that prospects of a sharper economic slowdown also contributed to the above. One member considered that the reduction in longer- term interest rates in the United States was due to its favorable inflation figures. Most members highlighted that stock market indices registered gains. They added that the US dollar depreciated. One member pointed out that it cannot be ruled out that this currency strengthens given the deterioration in international financial conditions. He/she mentioned that emerging economies continue experiencing outflows in fixed income assets and inflows in equities. Another member highlighted the prevailing vulnerabilities and risks for the global financial system given the outlook of tight financial conditions and the high levels of indebtedness. He/she pointed out that, especially in emerging economies, a disorderly adjustment of financial markets could affect their macroeconomic fundamentals and thus deteriorate the inflationary context they are facing. Most members pointed out that, with data as of the third quarter, economic activity in Mexico has already reached its pre-pandemic levels. They stated that growth was driven mainly by the services sector. One member highlighted that this sector was mainly supported by wholesale and retail trade, while the sectors most affected by social distancing have shown a slower recovery. Some members noted that the primary sector also registered a favorable performance. Meanwhile, most members noted that the industrial sector has stagnated somewhat in recent months. However, some members noted a slight recovery in October. Most members stated that the construction sector has shown sluggishness. Some members noted that the manufacturing sector has weakened, which contrasts with its previous dynamism. One member added that mining as well as the electricity, water and gas sector have also exhibited a fragile performance. Most members stated that economic activity is expected to have continued recovering during the fourth quarter, although at a slower pace. Some members pointed out that this moderation is due to the adverse external environment. On the demand side, most members underlined that consumption continued trending upwards consumption of services. One member contrasted the growth in consumption of non-durable goods with the decline in consumption of durable and semidurable goods. Another member warned that forward-looking indicators for this variable show mixed signals about its future behavior. He/she added that retail sales and the real wage bill appear to be stagnant. Meanwhile, one member noted that the consumer confidence indicator rebounded slightly in November, although it is still below its prepandemic level. He/she added that remittances are still high and have accumulated 30 consecutive months of increases. Most members highlighted that investment shows a lack of dynamism. In particular, they noted the weak performance of construction. One member added that investment in transportation equipment is at levels below those observed prior to the pandemic. Some members noted the reduction at the margin in the machinery and equipment component. In this regard, one member pointed out that a clear recovery in investment could foster growth and offset the foreseen weakness in external demand. He/she stated that it would be important to create the conditions for the country to take advantage as much as possible of the reconfiguration of some global production chains, which could also ease some inflationary pressures by increasing the country's productive capacity. Regarding external demand, most members pointed out that exports continued trending upwards. Some members noted that manufacturing exports continue driving the aggregate demand’s dynamism. Nevertheless, one member stated that some items show an incipient slowdown. Another member noted that shipments to the United States slowed at the margin. One member pointed out that the growth of non-automotive manufacturing exports moderated recently. Another member mentioned that imports registered a certain lack of dynamism. Most members agreed that the labor market continues recovering. Some members stated that it has tightened further. One member stated that it does not exhibit slack conditions. Most members noted that unemployment rates remain at low participation rates are at levels similar to prepandemic ones. Some members noted that employment growth has coincided with stagnation in labor participation. One member expressed his/her concern about the interruption of the upward trend of women's participation in the labor market, which, in his/her opinion, represents one of the main scars of the pandemic. Another member highlighted that, although formal employment remained on a positive trajectory in November, average income and the real wage bill decreased at the margin. One member pointed out that different sectors registered nominal wage increases, although he/she noted that real wage growth was moderate and, in some cases, negative. Another member warned that the increase in the minimum wage, as well as wage negotiations in other sectors, could weaken employment, especially in a scenario of lower economic activity. Most members pointed out that slack conditions in the economy are expected to continue there is still a significant amount of slack given that during the third quarter GDP remained considerably below its long-term trend trajectory. Another member warned about measurement problems in calculating potential GDP. All members highlighted that headline inflation continued decreasing in November to 7.80%, due to a reduction in its non-core component. Some members pointed out that it has been below the central bank's forecasts. One member highlighted that in the last three months it has also been below analysts' expectations. Another member mentioned that, in November, the monthly inflation rate was below its historical average for the first time since December 2021, and therefore, in his/her opinion, pressures at the margin seem to have started to ease. He/she pointed out that, with this figure, inflationary pressures have been trending downwards for five consecutive months. However, some members noted that other central trend measures of price changes continue trending upwards, with no sign of reaching an inflection point. One member pointed out that the decline in annual headline inflation is the result of a specific group of components and it is not yet generalized, which implies a challenging outlook. However, he/she added that, at the margin, extreme upward variations in some components of headline inflation have started to moderate. All members mentioned that core inflation maintained its upward trend, reaching 8.51% in November. Some members pointed out that this level had not been reached since August 2000. Some members stated that this upward trend has continued for 24 consecutive months. However, some members highlighted that the latest core inflation readings have been below analysts' expectations. One member added that it was close to Banco de México's forecast and that it has moderated marginally. Another member pointed out that core inflation still reflects the effects of the cumulative shocks from the pandemic and the military conflict, which have been deeper and longer lasting than estimated. One member expressed concern about estimates of the persistence of core inflation being at their highest levels since 2010. Regarding the components of core inflation, all merchandise inflation, especially that of food merchandise. One member pointed out that the latter continued being the main source of pressure on prices and registered the highest monthly increase for the month of November since 2008. Another member expressed his/her concern about the dynamics of food merchandise and food services, given that these components affect the most vulnerable population to a larger extent. Some members highlighted the increase in non-food merchandise inflation registered in November. One member highlighted the favorable effect of the "Buen fortnight of November. Another member pointed out that even after eliminating the seasonal effect, the annualized rate of this component is above 6%. One member stated that a substantial improvement in the behavior of merchandise prices led to a reduction in the core component's pressures at the margin, relative to its historical average. Some members pointed out that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations of food and non-food merchandise prices have exhibited greater stability, which led to a smaller number of CPI items registering variations higher than 10%. Meanwhile, most members mentioned that services inflation All members highlighted the reduction in non- core inflation. Regarding its components, they emphasized the decline in energy inflation, as well as in that of some agricultural and livestock products. One member pointed out that the favorable performance of these components was due to the correction observed in their international references. Another member stated that the annual inflation of this component has been decreasing for three consecutive months. He/she added that the monthly rate of this item remains substantially below its historical average. One member mentioned that the monthly variation in November was the sixth lowest for a corresponding month since 1982. All members agreed that some of the global shocks that have affected inflation have shown signs of easing. Most members highlighted the pressures. One member stated that a necessary condition to reduce the inflationary wave is that global pressures come to an end. In this regard, he/she highlighted the reduction of inflation in the United States and other countries. Another member pointed out that, in this context, Mexico stands out from other emerging economies for its relatively lower levels of inflation, especially in the energy and services components and, less markedly, in food and other goods. One member indicated that, despite signs of improvement, some prices remain elevated, and that the lagged effects of past increases could be exerting pressure on production costs. Another member pointed out that the decline in international energy prices will not be fully reflected in Mexico because of the mechanics of the fiscal incentive on gasoline prices. Some members mentioned that in the last seven months, producer prices have declined. One member pointed out that producer price inflation has a lagged impact on core inflation. Another member noted signs of relief in the five reductions exhibited by the latest readings of industrial sector intermediate goods’ prices. Some members mentioned that there are domestic pressures that are reflected in core inflation dynamics. They highlighted that supercore inflation continued trending upwards. One member stated that this could reflect pressures due to lower slack conditions. He/she warned that the prices of non-tradable goods could be affected by the increase in the prices of tradable goods. Another member pointed out that the persistence of inflation expectations at high levels shows that observed inflation has acquired an inertia that cannot be explained exclusively by external pressures. He/she added that it is necessary to acknowledge the presence of signs of domestic inflationary pressures, and therefore greater attention should be paid to their measurement and surveillance. Most members highlighted the decline in short- term inflation expectations. All members noted that medium-term expectations remained stable, although above the target. However, some members mentioned that, although expectations for the next four years remain at high levels, these seem to be affected by those for 2023 and 2024, given that if implied expectations for the following 3 to 4 years are estimated, they lay at 3.5%. One member pointed out that this suggests that there are no signs of a possible unanchoring. All members noted that considerable changes either, although they remained at levels above the target. One member added that their distribution has started to concentrate at around 3.6%. Another member warned that, although the deterioration of mediumand long-term expectations has decreased, both could remain at the upper range of the variability interval. One member mentioned that both mediumand long-term expectations continued at historically high levels. With respect to expectations drawn from market instruments, another member pointed out that long-term expectations remained stable at a level of 3.27%. One member stated that the breakeven inflation rate is at levels below those observed in the previous monetary policy decision. However, another member mentioned that the current levels are still high. Most members pointed out that forecasts for headline inflation were revised downwards for the first two quarters of the horizon, and then marginally upwards until the fourth quarter of 2023, due to a slight increase in the trajectory for core inflation. Some members stated that inflation would be close to reaching its peak. One member noted that this responds to the fact that various global price indicators have trended downwards. Some members pointed out that inflation is foreseen to continue trending downwards over the following quarters. One member mentioned that the absence of demand-related pressures stemming from an expansionary fiscal policy will favor a faster convergence of inflation to its target. Another member pointed out that the trajectories reflect the monetary policy that has been implemented and the prevision that the effects of the pandemic and the military conflict on inflation will dissipate gradually. However, he/she added that, although the inflationary shocks are anticipated to moderate, there is no certainty as to the pace at which they could dissipate. Among upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted greater cost-related pressures. One member pointed out the persistence of core inflation at high levels and external inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic and the military conflict. Another member highlighted possible demand-related pressures given the higher growth prospects, as well as pressures caused by the avian flu outbreak and weather-related factors. Most members mentioned that the minimum wage increase for 2023 could affect the inflation forecast. For this reason, some members warned that the central bank should remain vigilant. One member stated that the announced increase in the minimum wage is considerable and that, at the margin, it could affect inflation, given that the fraction linked to it within the wage distribution of IMSSinsured workers has practically doubled over the last three years. He/she added that, despite the above, increases to the minimum wage do not seem to have contaminated the dynamics of the rest of wages. Another member pointed out that annual wage variations and contractual revisions are not compatible with changes in productivity and that there is a risk that businesses could transfer their higher costs onto consumers. He/she indicated that minimum wage increases seem to be affecting wage negotiations in other sectors of the labor market. He/she added that labor cost pressures seem to derive not only from the incomplete recovery of labor participation, but also from the strong recovery of employment. One member noted that statistical estimates consider wage dynamics as the factor exerting the most pressure on inflation during 2022. He/she underlined the pressures that could result from the recently approved increase in the number of paid vacation days. Regarding downward risks, another member mentioned the lower inflationary pressures that could derive from a greater deceleration of the world economy and a better functioning of supply chains. Most members pointed out that, although some shocks have shown signs of subsiding, the balance of risks remains biased to the upside. One member stated that, in his/her opinion, it shows a slight improvement. Another member considered that there are elements which indicate that this balance has started to be distributed closer around Banco de México’s central forecast. Most members stated that the Mexican peso continued showing resilience, although with some volatility. Some members highlighted its recent depreciation against the US dollar. One member stated that the trading conditions of the currency in terms of its depth and volume have continued improving and exhibited levels close to pre-pandemic ones. Nevertheless, another member indicated that the Mexican peso exchange rate benefitted from expectations of a less restrictive monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. One member added that Mexico’s solid fiscal and external account balances, in addition to the historic inflow of remittances, have also strengthened the peso. Most members highlighted that medium- and long-term interest rates decreased significantly. One member underlined that the above has also been observed in the yield curve of real interest rate instruments and that government debt market conditions have performed favorably. Meanwhile, another member pointed out that the sovereign risk premium has decreased once again. Some members acknowledged that the stock market declined marginally. One member specified that this was due to contractions in the financial and telecommunication sectors. Some members noted that the positive performance of financial markets is associated with the preservation of solid macroeconomic fundamentals, such as sound public finances and external accounts at reasonable levels. One member pointed out that, as compared to other emerging economies, Mexican bonds are attractive due to their high yields, better accessibility and market infrastructure, and low risk of default. He/she added that this has already been reflected in a gradual reduction in the spread of Mexican long-term bonds relative to Treasury bonds, which incorporates expectations that Banco de México will eventually reduce its interest rate spread relative to that of the Federal Reserve. Nonetheless, he/she argued that the macroeconomic and financial environment overall faces risks, given the high level reached by both local and external interest rates. He/she indicated that it is necessary to remain vigilant to possible vulnerabilities across certain sectors and segments of the Mexican financial system. Another member acknowledged that, if the Federal Reserve decides to maintain its reference rate at high levels for a longer time than currently anticipated by markets, it could surprise financial markets and affect both interest rates and the Mexican peso. Some members agreed that commercial bank credit to firms continued expanding, although its recovery has been gradual. However, one member mentioned that, although this type of credit has improved somewhat in its monthly variations, this has not been sufficient for it to return to pre-pandemic levels nor reach a level consistent with its long-term trend. He/she stated that something similar occurs with consumer credit. Nevertheless, some members underlined that this segment has continued growing, as well as credit to households in general. One member highlighted the increase in mortgage credit. Another member stated that commercial banks’ aggregate delinquency rate remains at relatively low levels. One member noted that, considering the adjustment in interest rates, the sources of financial resources have recently exhibited a reconfiguration in households’ asset holdings, since they are opting for acquiring long-term instruments and reducing their liquid assets. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the challenges for monetary policy stemming from the tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the Governing Board decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 10.50%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation and with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board considers that it will still be necessary to raise the reference rate in its next monetary policy meeting. Subsequently, it will assess if the reference rate needs to be further adjusted as well as the pace of adjustment based on the implementation during the current period of inflationary pressures, to assess the approach to be followed in the future. He/she mentioned that during environment, there was no doubt as to the need to attain a restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she pointed out that more forceful measures were adopted as compared to those historically implemented by Banco de México, highlighting the last four 75 basis points increases. He/she stated that, through these actions, the ex-ante real interest rate reached levels above the interval estimated as neutral, and that the nominal reference rate reached a level above observed inflation, placing it at a clearly restrictive level. He/she argued that a delicate balance is being confronted. On the one hand, he/she mentioned the signs of improvement in the inflationary environment, such as the decline in headline inflation and the fact that it has recently been lower than expected. On the other hand, he/she warned that core inflation continues increasing and that the balance of risks remains biased to the upside. He/she added that, with the proposed rate increase, the upward adjustments would shift from 75 basis points to one of 50 basis points, acknowledging the signs of improvement in the inflationary outlook, as well as the cumulative increase in the reference rate during this hiking cycle, whereas continuing to raise the reference rate implies that the environment remains complex and that Banco de México will not be forbearing. He/she considered that, just as in the two previous years, it is difficult to assign probabilities to how different shocks may evolve, and therefore a robust monetary policy is required, suitable under different scenarios. He/she considered that the 50basis-point upward adjustment proposed during this meeting would be a robust action, as it would place the central bank in an adequate position to adjust the pace of increases in whichever direction is required, considering that abrupt changes in the magnitude of reference rate adjustments, although at times are necessary, could potentially cause financial volatility. He/she added that the proposed adjustment would also take into account the importance of gradualness and data dependence under conditions of uncertainty. He/she added that, looking ahead, both caution and flexibility will be required to adjust the monetary policy stance in line with the scenario that materializes. He/she concluded that further monetary policy tightening and the level that the reference rate reaches will be contingent on incoming data and its assessment. Another member stated that the restrictive policy stance reached so far justifies a reduction in the pace of tightening. He/she pointed out that Banco de México’s inflation forecasts were adjusted marginally, and thus inflation is expected to be close to reaching its peak. However, he/she indicated that the observed pressures that drove inflation to maximum levels in over two decades have been more generalized and persistent than anticipated. He/she indicated that, although the narrative to explain the price dynamics in Mexico has focused on external price-related shocks, such as those related to disruptions in global supply chains and the military conflict in Ukraine, it should also be acknowledged that signals of domestic inflationary pressures are becoming increasingly more evident, mainly those related to consumption. This is evidenced by the fact that, whereas economic activity is barely reaching its pre-pandemic levels, different aggregate consumption indicators are already clearly above those of the reference period. He/she pointed out that, despite the cumulative monetary adjustment of at very high levels, indicating that the restrictive monetary policy stance will need to be maintained for a longer period, in order to avoid inflation expectations from becoming unanchored and to guarantee the convergence of inflation to its target in the planning horizon. He/she added that the complex and uncertain environment requires maintaining a cautious and firm monetary policy. He/she stated that there is now a greater risk that inflation will decline faster in the United States than in Mexico. He/she argued that this could imply larger increases in Banco de México’s reference rate for a longer-thanforeseen period. He/she pointed out that it is essential that the monetary policy statement maintains a firm language and explicitly mentions that a reduction in the pace of upward adjustments does not imply the beginning of an easing cycle. He/she added that, on the contrary, it must communicate that, based on available information, it is still considered necessary to maintain a restrictive monetary policy stance over the planning horizon, and until a decreasing and sustained trajectory of inflation is observed and inflation expectations return to levels close to the 3% target. He/she pointed out that the monetary policy statement must continue mentioning that the reference rate will continue increasing and that the magnitude of upward adjustments will be determined based on available information. He/she stated that far from limiting the room for maneuver in the next monetary policy decisions, such language would contribute to monetary policy’s effectiveness and, therefore, minimize the costs of the disinflationary adjustment. One member considered that raising the policy rate is appropriate in order to prevent second-round effects in the price formation process and the unanchoring of inflation expectations. However, he/she added that, although in the current context a restrictive monetary policy stance is required, it is necessary to reduce the pace of upward adjustments significantly and consider the risks to economic activity and financial stability of implementing an excessively restrictive monetary policy. He/she warned that, in an emerging economy such as Mexico’s, the materialization of such risks could affect the price formation process through a more depreciated exchange rate and a deterioration of macroeconomic fundamentals and of productive capacity. He/she stated that the ex-ante real interest rate is unequivocally in restrictive territory. He/she added that it should be taken into account that, given the lag with which monetary policy operates, insofar as inflation expectations decrease, the level of monetary tightening is anticipated to continue increasing automatically as long as monetary easing does not begin. He/she mentioned that, considering the limits of a restrictive monetary policy to control inflation, the level of monetary tightening that has already been reached and the signs of inflationary pressures easing both globally and locally, there is no need to raise the interest rate much further. He/she highlighted that Mexico is one of the few emerging economies where further increases in the monetary policy rate are being considered. He/she stated that it is surprising that more increases are anticipated, considering that: i) inflation has remained contained as compared to other economies; ii) inflation has already started to decline; and iii) domestic inflationary pressures are minimal given that economic activity has not grown at an accelerated pace and has just returned to its prepandemic levels. He/she highlighted that, from an international perspective, and based on a domestic risk-management approach, raising the reference rate much further is not required. He/she sustained that, looking ahead, it will be necessary to act with caution depending on the evolution of the economy. Another member considered it appropriate to slow the pace of upward adjustments as the terminal interest rate of this cycle is closer. He/she noted that it is possible considering: i) the level of monetary tightening that has already been reached; ii) that it is likely that inflation has already reached its peak; iii) that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation has slightly improved; iv) that the deterioration of inflation expectations appears to be decreasing; and v) that the anticipated trajectory for inflation has remained stable for the short term. He/she stated that the reduction in the pace of upward adjustments should not be interpreted as monetary easing, but rather as the implementation of less extreme and aggressive, but still firm, adjustments in view of the considerable challenges and mixed signals of relief and deterioration that must be cautiously considered. In this regard, he/she indicated that the 50-basis point increases in previous tightening episodes have been considered as forceful. Thus, he/she argued that further raises are required, given that: i) the core component that responds more to monetary policy remains to the upside; ii) inflation expectations remain high and with the risk of stabilizing at the upper limit of the target range; and iii) domestic pressures which could complicate the convergence of inflation prevail. He/she warned that cyclical conditions, rather than justifying less monetary tightening, should be considered as an element of caution. He/she mentioned that the monetary policy stance reached a degree of tightening that is consistent with the inflationary challenge, and that, looking ahead, an ex-ante real interest rate of around that said gradualness will depend on: i) core inflation following a clear downward trend; ii) inflation expectations showing less deterioration, with a lower dispersion, and with a correction of its current upside bias; iii) a consolidation of the expected trajectory for inflation and without it presenting significant adjustments, which would strengthen the central bank’s credibility given the consistent errors in the forecast in the recent past; and iv) the room for maneuver offered by the global monetary conditions. He/she pointed out that the weighting of these factors, based on incoming data, will define the reaction function. He/she stated that a 600-basispoint interest rate spread has been maintained between Mexico and the United States, due to the synchronization of the inflationary cycles, and not due to a mechanical relationship. He/she pointed out that the monetary policy stance in both countries has responded to a similar behavior of inflation. He/she added that monetary policy synchronization should continue as long as the trajectories of inflation are similar and there is no certainty as to the levels of the terminal interest rates. He/she stated that sound macroeconomic fundamentals could allow a marginal reduction of the spread in case the inflationary cycles diverge. He/she pointed out that forward guidance should be communicated in a decisive manner and should highlight that the attained terminal rate will be maintained for some, still uncertain, amount of time. He/she underlined that, for this reason, it is necessary to be cautious in determining it. He/she added that neither a monetary easing is to be anticipated over the next months nor that the attained monetary tightening will prevail over the entire horizon in which monetary policy operates. One member mentioned that there are elements suggesting that the balance of risks for inflation, despite remaining biased to the upside, has started to be distributed closer around Banco de México’s central forecast. Among these factors he/she mentioned that: i) inflation has begun registering declining pressures, although it remains at high levels and the core component shows a worrying persistence to the upside; ii) inflation figures have reached levels below those anticipated by specialists, whose expectations have started to decline; iii) the central bank inflation forecasts have been revised marginally and indicate that inflation will continue declining over the following quarters. He/she added that the factors mentioned should be considered in determining the reaction function, taking into account the lag with which monetary policy operates. He/she stated that, for this reason, the pace of rate adjustments should be of a smaller magnitude. He/she added that, if the distribution of corresponding distribution of the ex-ante real interest rate is, entirely in a restrictive territory. He/she argued that the above indicates that the monetary policy stance has consolidated at a sufficiently high level, even under the most pessimistic scenarios. He/she underlined that, with the suggested upward adjustment, the reference rate would continue increasing, despite having already exceeded both observed and expected inflation levels, which would send a signal of the central bank’s commitment to guaranteeing the convergence of inflation in accordance with its forecasts. He/he added that the Mexican economy is highly integrated both financially and economically with the rest of the world, and operates under a flexible exchange rate regime, and that for this reason maintaining a fixed relative monetary policy stance could lead to keeping Mexico’s price formation process dependent on external factors. Therefore, he/she highlighted that Banco de México’s decisions should be consistent with reaching an absolute monetary policy stance that would contribute to the convergence of inflation to its target, regardless of the relative monetary policy stance that this implies. He/she stated that, looking ahead, the ex-ante real interest rate is likely to continue increasing, while, at the same time, a greater tightening derived from the real exchange rate might be observed; and that, therefore, monetary conditions as a whole will remain tight for some time. He/she indicated that, in the future, adjustments to the reference rate will have to be calibrated with caution, considering the monetary policy stance that has already been reached, its transmission mechanisms, and the lags with which monetary policy operates. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the challenges for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the possibility of greater effects on inflation, and the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the Board decided by majority to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 percentage points to 10.50%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times, with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board considers it will still be necessary to raise the reference rate in its next monetary policy meeting. Subsequently, it will assess if the reference rate needs to be further adjusted as well as the pace of adjustments based on the prevailing conditions. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 10.50%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 10.25%. The current ex-ante real interest rate is clearly at a restrictive level. Moreover, given the lag under which monetary policy operates, as inflation expectations start decreasing, the restrictive level is foreseen to increase even further. The restrictive policy stance already attained, together with easing inflationary pressures, suggests that further raising the reference rate is unnecessary. The decline in global inflationary pressures is evident. At the local level, inflation dynamics have also started to ease: there are less pressures at the margin, headline inflation reached its peak in August, and producer price inflation has rapidly decreased. The latter will eventually have an incidence on core inflation. Several emerging economies have concluded their hiking cycles or at about to end them with marginal upward adjustments. Mexico is one of the few economies that has still not concluded such cycle. In countries with high levels of inflation or inflation that has been affected by demand-related factors, it would be justified to continue with said policy. However, that is not Mexico’s case. For this reason, I believe a 25basis point increase is appropriate. What is now needed is to allow the already attained restrictive policy stance to operate.