Most members mentioned that world economic growth moderated during the fourth quarter of 2022. They agreed that this was due to the negative effects of the military conflict in Ukraine, the resurgence of infections in China, and tight monetary conditions. Some members considered that there are signs of disturbances in international trade. One member noted that forward-looking indicators of manufacturing and services for this year are at contraction levels. However, most members stated that labor markets in advanced economies continued showing signs of tightening. Some members highlighted that in the United States the last employment data surprised to the upside. One member argued that, while some indicators associated with financial markets seem to anticipate an economic recession, the employment data appears to be more consistent with a slowdown, rather than a long and lasting contraction. Most members noted that global growth forecasts for 2023 continue pointing to a deceleration. However, they stated that they were revised anticipated. They highlighted the improvement in growth expectations for advanced economies. One member indicated that a heterogeneous behavior is expected among emerging economies. Some members mentioned that the outlook for the Chinese economy improved due to the reopening of its activities. Among global risks, some members pointed out the tight monetary and financial conditions, as well as risks associated with a worsening of geopolitical tensions. One member added the risks derived from the pandemic. Another member considered that the balance of risks for the global economy remains biased to the downside. Most members highlighted that although headline inflation decreased in a large number of economies, it remains high globally. They warned that it remains above the central banks' targets. They attributed the decline in headline inflation to lower pressures on energy prices. Some members added the effect of lesser disruptions in supply chains. One member pointed to the lower costs of maritime transport and decreased scarcity of commodities. Another member considered the decline in durable goods’ prices and the greater stability of inflation expectations. One member highlighted the moderation in food prices. Another member mentioned that the central banks’ actions have begun to have results on the evolution of inflation. Nevertheless, most members highlighted that, in several cases, the core component still does not show a downward inflection point. One member delved into the fact that this is due to the presence of pressures on the prices of services and merchandise. Some members indicated that inflation is expected to converge to the central banks' targets for the end of inflation is expected to decline more slowly in emerging economies, than in the advanced ones. Finally, most members pointed out that, although world inflation is expected to continue declining, several risks and a high level of uncertainty Most members indicated that the majority of central banks continued raising their reference the magnitude of the increases moderated. Some members stated that further increases in reference rates are anticipated. In addition, most members communication, said rates are likely to remain high for an extended period. Some members highlighted that markets continue foreseeing cuts to reference rates of several central banks towards the end of 2023. In this regard, most members warned that a divergence is being observed, between markets' and central banks' forecasts regarding the path of monetary policy, which, in their opinion, poses significant challenges for their communication. They emphasized that this divergence could imply risks for the global financial system. One member mentioned that an abrupt correction of market expectations could become a factor of financial instability in the future. Another member added that in the case of the Federal Reserve there is uncertainty about whether this is due to differences in the anticipated speed of inflation convergence or in the probability assigned to an economic recession. All members stated that, in its last meeting, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Some members pointed out that this represented a slowdown in the pace of tightening. One member pointed out that this occurred in a context of lower figures for both headline and core inflation. Another member noted that the chairman of the Federal Reserve indicated that the reduction in the pace of interest rate hikes will allow to assess the economy's progress toward its goals and to determine the required magnitude of future increases. Most members underlined that said central bank anticipated additional increases. One member pointed out that, regardless, economic analysts had made only small revisions to the possible level of the terminal rate for that institution. Most members mentioned that international financial conditions eased during the period. They argued that yield curves have flattened and the US dollar has depreciated. Some members highlighted that stock market indices increased. Most members pointed out that this easing was partly due to markets’ expectations that central banks could begin to cut their reference rates towards the end of the year. However, they indicated that financial conditions remain at restrictive levels. Some members noted that, in this context, emerging economies registered a positive performance, with capital inflows to different asset classes. One member stated that this was due to a renewed interest in riskier assets and to expectations of high interest rate spreads relative to the Federal Reserve. Some members indicated that, towards the end of the period, markets reversed some of their gains after the release of the US employment report. Most members highlighted that the flash estimate of GDP suggests that the Mexican economy continued growing during the fourth quarter of 2022. However, they noted that it lost momentum as compared to previous quarters. They argued that this was due to a weakening of industrial activities and of services. In contrast, one member noted that primary activities remain showing dynamism. Regarding the components of industrial activity, most members added that the manufacturing sector has moderated due to the slowdown in US demand. In this regard, some members mentioned the fall in non-automotive exports. One member also highlighted the slowdown in automotive exports. He/she pointed out that the mining and electricity sectors registered a lack of dynamism. Another member mentioned that the construction sector has exhibited some recovery. Regarding services, he/she stated that its components continued to perform heterogeneously One member pointed out that the Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its acronym in Spanish) figures for November suggests that the weak performance of the services sector can be attributed to a lower dynamism in commerce and in accommodation and food preparation services. However, he/she specified that the GDP flash estimate suggests an improvement in services in December. Most members foresee that in the next quarters the lower economic dynamism at a global level will result in lower growth rates of domestic economic activity. Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, some members indicated that the output gap is expected to have continued narrowing in view of the recovery of the Mexican economy. One member added that, although it is in negative territory, it is not statistically different from zero. consumption has moderated. However, one member note that it remains elevated. Some members noted that consumption of durable and nondurable goods has weakened. Some members stated that indicators of the determinants of consumption, such as consumer confidence, remittances and the wage bill, remain at high levels. One member warned that in general the slowdown in consumption and services could be associated with high inflation levels in Mexico, which may explain why some of the sectors with the greatest inflationary pressures are also sectors in which activity is lagging. Another member mentioned that despite the slowdown during the fourth quarter of 2022, consumption has grown at rates above those of economic activity, which suggests the presence of demand-related pressures on prices. Most members stated that gross fixed investment remained sluggish. One member pointed out that, from a medium-term perspective, the most dynamic component has been imported machinery and equipment, without which investment would be significantly below its pre-pandemic levels. However, most members noted that, at the margin, construction displayed a slight reactivation. In contrast, some members indicated that investment in machinery and equipment declined. One member argued that the lack of investment has restricted aggregate supply, and coupled with the lack of competitive conditions in many sectors, has resulted in an inelastic demand in the face of price increases. Most members agreed that the labor market continues to strengthen. They described that the participation rate continues recovering and that unemployment rates remain at low levels. One member added that complementary rates, such as under-employment, continue decreasing. Another member noted that the employment rate improved relative to the third quarter, reaching a level similar to that reported prior to the health emergency. One member highlighted that the unemployment rate is below pre-pandemic levels. Some members mentioned that the labor market is showing signs of tightening. Some members considered that the information drawn from business opinion surveys reflects a dynamic and growing labor market, considering the information they provide on the evolution of vacancies, quits, and layoffs. One member indicated that part of the tightening in the labor market can be explained by a greater improvement in employment rates, as compared to labor participation, especially for men, which has contributed to a lower rate of unemployment. He/she argued that, according to the National Survey of Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish), a lower participation rate is observed with respect to the levels observed prior to the pandemic due to a decline in the labor force in both young and older age groups. He/she noted that as age groups transition into the next age range, participation is likely to increase and some signs of tightening may thus decrease. However, he/she warned that this may take a long time. In this context, another member stated that the increase in the IMSS-insured workers average base salary and contractual wage revisions remain at high levels and noted that these wage increases are generating inflationary pressures given the deterioration in labor productivity. All members highlighted that in January headline inflation reached 7.91%. They added that the core component registered 8.45%. Most members warned that, although headline inflation was lower than expected, core inflation surprised to acknowledged that global inflationary pressures have somewhat eased. In this context, one member considered that there are signs that some pressures on inflation in Mexico have indeed started to moderate. In this regard, he/she mentioned that seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly changes in headline inflation have kept declining since August indicators of headline and core inflation are below observed inflation figures, which means that the extreme upward variations in some subcomponents have affected the observed data, although they have begun to stabilize. He/she noted that the number of CPI items showing variations above 10% has continued to decrease. Another member pointed out that, indeed, the current inflationary scenario contrasts with the one observed a few months ago, when upward shocks were generalized. However, he/she stated that, although some shocks have eased, this does not mean that the inflationary problem is close to being solved. He/she highlighted that the environment continues to be characterized by deep and persistent inflationary pressures. One member underlined that inflation in Mexico has developed certain inertia which cannot be explained entirely by external pressures. Thus, most members pointed out that core inflation, which reflects inflation's trend more accurately, still does not show a downward trend. In this context, they mentioned that the inflationary environment All members were concerned that core inflation continues at high levels and remains more persistent than expected. One member added that the inflation dynamics of merchandise and of services warns about the low sensitivity of core inflation to lesser external price pressures, given the easing of the effects of the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine. Regarding core inflation’s components, remains high and that its decline has been gradual, especially that of food merchandise. Some members stated that this component could still be affected by the external shocks related to the pandemic and the military conflict. One member added that, although some of these shocks have partially reversed, international reference prices are still at high levels and register volatility. Most members pointed out that the domestic prices of these goods seem to be facing asymmetric effects from the shocks, since the decline in pressures of international price references is not being passed on to the final consumer at the same rate as that observed with upward merchandise inflation continues to be above 14% in annual terms, no longer as a result of external pressures only, but also of domestic pressures. All members highlighted the rebound in services inflation in January. Some members mentioned that it was larger than expected. One member pointed out that this rebound was almost four times higher than the average registered between 2014 and 2022 for the month of January. Another member stated that this component registered a very significant annualized monthly variation when considering the seasonally adjusted series. In addition, most members noted that the frequency of upward price revisions in services has been increasing. They also highlighted the increase in housing services inflation. One member added that food services continue showing very high monthly price variations. He/she added that those of entertainment and health and personal care services also continue trending upwards. He/she specified that such components should not be affected by the external shocks. When analyzing the pressures being experienced by services, another member indicated that these have been subject to multiple shocks. He/she added that the increase in their prices suggests that external pressures may be taking longer to fade, while other domestic pressures may be becoming more apparent. In this regard, one member noted the accumulation of cost-related pressures associated with the adoption of measures to contain contagions, accompanied by those resulting from the setting of new contracts that take higher prices as a reference. Some members considered that the pass-through of costs to consumers is possibly higher now than in earlier stages of the pandemic. In this regard, most members highlighted that, after the lockdown, the demand for services has increased. Some members expressed concern about the behavior of services inflation indicating pressures from domestic factors. In particular, they stated that increases in services prices, since these are non-tradable, respond to domestic pressures. Some members pointed out that non-core inflation reached 6.32%. Some members stated that the evolution of this component is what has contributed the most to the decline in headline inflation. They noted that both the agricultural and livestock products’ and the energy products’ subindices registered lower annual variations as compared to the previous year. One member underlined that, although agricultural and livestock products’ inflation has declined relative to the levels observed in the third quarter of 2022, it still remains at high levels. Some members indicated that the non-core component was affected in January particularly by the behavior of fruit and vegetables’ prices. expectations for 2023 and 2024 increased once again. One member stated that these differed considerably from Banco de México’s December forecast. Another member highlighted that inflation expectations remain high in general. However, one member pointed out that those corresponding to the next 12 months have decreased slightly. As for longer-term expectations, most members agreed that these declined somewhat, although they remain above target. Thus, one member stated that long-term expectations have remained anchored. Some members mentioned that the referred decreases took place after the increases registered during previous months. One member stated that expectations drawn from market instruments have also decreased. Another member highlighted that the breakeven inflation rate remained above the upper limit of the variability interval set around the inflation target. One member pointed out that the downward revision in expectations, despite being favorable, is still insufficient to ensure the convergence of inflation to its target. All members emphasized that, in view of a slower- forecasts for headline and core inflation have been adjusted upwards for the entire horizon. They underlined that the persistence of core inflation suggests that, looking ahead, its trajectory, albeit downward, will be above the previously anticipated one. Most members underlined that said adjustment responds to the persistence of inflation and to higher-than- anticipated pressures on food merchandise and services’ prices. One member argued that the mitigation of inflationary pressures at a global level is anticipated to result in a downward trend for inflation, although at a slower pace. Some members pointed out that the considerable revision of the inflation forecast required delaying convergence to the target by one quarter. In this context, most members noted that inflation is anticipated to converge to With respect to upward risks to inflation, all members mentioned the persistence of its core component at high levels. One member considered the current synchronization between the high levels of merchandise inflation and the increase in services’ inflation to be a challenge. Some members warned about higher cost-related pressures. In this regard, one member expressed his/her concern about the increased labor costs. Specifically, he/she mentioned that the gap between the minimum wage and the average wage has narrowed, which is accompanied by higher costs of vacation benefits. He/she also indicated the transfer of cargo operations to the new airport as an additional source of risks of possible inflationary pressures. All members underlined that the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside. One member stated that this occurs even despite an environment of economic slowdown and of accumulated increases in the reference rate. Another member warned that the balance has deteriorated as a result of domestic pressures. He/she stated that this increases the fear that the return of inflation to its objective takes even longer than anticipated. Nevertheless, one member highlighted that, although the balance of risks remains biased to the upside, it has not deteriorated, considering the adjustment to the estimated inflation trajectory. Another member underlined the difficulty in determining the pace at which the shocks caused by the health emergency and by the military conflict will dissipate. He/she stated that this stage of disinflation is surrounded by greater uncertainty than what is usually observed during the inflation-reduction stages. Most members agreed that domestic financial markets overall performed in an orderly manner. Some members noted that this was due to a greater risk appetite among international investors. One member highlighted that the Financial Conditions Index for Mexico decreased slightly. Another member underlined that the 5-year default risk premia for Mexico decreased by 20 basis points. Most members mentioned that the stock market were driven by the consumption and industrial sectors. Most members underlined that, since the last monetary policy decision, the Mexican peso has appreciated against the US dollar, reaching its minimum level since March 2020. Some members pointed out that it traded in a narrow range. One member added that it exhibited healthy trading metrics and a considerable trading volume. He/she specified that it has remained within the lower range of the distribution implied by one-month options, which shows its stability and resilience. Another member underlined that the Mexican peso continued to stand out due to its strength among emerging economies’ currencies. Some members mentioned that the wide spread of interest rates between Mexico and the United States adjusted by volatility has contributed to the positive performance of the national currency. One member added that the above has also been supported by Mexico’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals relative to other emerging economies. However, another member noted that risk aversion has increased recently, generating exchange rate volatility. One member observed that it remains sensitive to global factors, especially to the dynamics of US financial assets. Most members mentioned that short-term interest rates increased while medium- and long-term ones decreased. One member underlined that changes in short-term interest rates have reflected the adjustments in the reference rate implemented by Banco de México. Some members stated that the mixed behavior in interest rates resulted in a flattening of the yield curve. One member added that this has deepened the inversion of this curve to historical levels. Another member mentioned a reduction in the yield curve of real interest rate instruments. Regarding financing to the private sector, some members mentioned that commercial bank credit continues expanding, reflecting the positive growth rates of performing loans to consumer and firms. One member added that mortgage lending also increased. He/she pointed out that this dynamism was observed despite the fact that interest rates in those segments have increased following the increments in the reference rate. He/she noted that, in line with Banco de México’s EnBan survey, credit demand by large firms continued increasing during the fourth quarter of market share reported an increment in credit demand via credit cards, as well as for auto and personal loans. He/she added that less relaxed lending standards have been observed for some credit segments. He/she underlined that it is necessary to monitor the evolution of credit and financing conditions. Another member pointed out that delinquency rates remain at low and stable levels. Regarding the composition of savings’ instruments held by the private sector, one member stated that monetary policy actions have had an impact, by increasing the holdings of longer-term instruments. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the persistence of accumulated inflationary pressures and the possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well as the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. In particular, it deemed that, given the dynamics of core inflation, on this occasion it is necessary to continue with the magnitude of the reference rate adjustment of the previous policy meeting, in order to be in a better position to tackle a still complex inflationary environment. Based on the above, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 11.00%. With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Most members of the Board consider that, given the monetary policy stance already attained and depending on the evolution of incoming data, for the next policy meeting, the upward adjustment to the reference rate could be One member pointed out that the described recent evolution of core inflation and its outlook are reasons for Banco de México to act even more cautiously. He/she underlined that upward risks related to the persistence of the core component at high levels and to cost-related pressures have become more evident. He/she expressed concern over the fact that the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside. He/she stated that timely data confirms the complex nature of the inflationary outlook and considered that the disinflationary process will be, at the margin, more difficult than anticipated. He/she recalled that, given a complex outlook, in the previous monetary policy decision it was determined that for the following meeting an additional increase in the reference rate would be required. He/she argued that, although some elements of the economic and financial environment have performed as anticipated, given the unfavorable dynamics of inflation, especially of its core component, in this meeting, it is prudent to continue with the same pace of upward adjustments to the reference rate as in the previous meeting. He/she considered that this would allow to address the complex juncture and the associated upward risks in a timely manner. He/she added that it would also show Banco de México’s firm commitment to fulfilling its primary mandate of price stability, and would prevent any perception of complacency. He/she noted that the ongoing disinflationary process is especially uncertain given the atypical nature of the several inflationary shocks that have been faced. He/she pointed out that, in this context, the available information and its assessment should be key in every monetary policy decision. He/she mentioned that the adopted actions have been timely, given the long-lasting and intense pressures that this central bank has been pointing out. For this reason, he/she reiterated that it has been possible to attain a restrictive monetary policy stance, just as the context warrants. He/she mentioned that, during the upcoming policy decisions, it will be necessary to consider the additional strengthening of the monetary policy stance that would be attained with the current proposed decision. He/she highlighted that, given the complex and uncertain inflationary outlook, this central bank needs to remain vigilant and persevere in its efforts to ensure the stability of the purchasing power of the national currency. Another member underlined that monetary policy should be conducted in a firm and forceful manner, in order to prevent the inflationary process from becoming long-lasting and its painful effects on the economy, especially on lower-income households. He/she warned about the risk that inflation does not decline at a pace consistent with its convergence to the target in the planning horizon. He/she highlighted, as domestic inflationary pressures, consumption dynamics, the labor market tightening, and the high inflation expectations. He/she underlined the significant persistence of core inflation and concerns over the positive correlation between high inflation and its greater persistence. In this context, he/she argued that the proposed 50-basis point adjustment to the reference rate is necessary to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target in the forecast horizon. He/she added that it would send a clear signal of commitment to the constitutional mandate. He/she considered that it would also restate that Banco de México conducts monetary policy autonomously and that there is no coupling with the Federal Reserve’s decisions. He/she added that, given the possibility that inflation decreases faster in the United States than in Mexico, the road ahead for Banco de México would be longer. Regarding the monetary policy statement, he/she added that it is necessary to highlight the deteriorated inflationary dynamics, especially the resistance of the core component to decline, the balance of risks to the upside, the upward revision in inflation forecasts, and the still high level of inflation expectations. In view of the high level of uncertainty, he/she highlighted the importance of being extremely cautious when communicating the forward guidance, considering that it does not represent a commitment. He/she suggested that it must indicate that, depending on the evolution of incoming data, further increases could be required. He/she added that it would be worth mentioning that a restrictive monetary policy stance will need to be maintained in the referred horizon to guarantee convergence to the target. He/she argued that the current monetary policy decision and the accompanying communication will be important for the formation of market expectations. He/she stated that the main monetary authorities at the global level, as well as Banco de México, should communicate more clearly that high inflation, above its targets, could be more persistent than previously anticipated. He/she pointed out that, in such a case, it would be necessary to maintain the tight monetary policy stances until inflation and its expectations show a sustained downward trend. He/she added that a clear and timely communication must contribute to adjust reference rate expectations. This, considering the unfounded optimism that prevails at the global level, including in Mexico, claiming it is possible to return to the inflation target with lower rates. One member argued that, given the highly complex inflationary outlook, a recalibration of monetary astringency is required. He/she mentioned that the convergence of inflation to its target requires the core component to follow a sustained and decreasing trend, especially the food merchandise inflation. He/she pointed out that these prices are the main reference for the public to form their expectations. He/she noted that the synchronization of inflationary cycles between Mexico and the United States required similar adjustments in reference rates, but the inflation differential has now increased. He/she argued that a 50-basis point increase would indicate that the priority is to control inflation in Mexico, rather than maintaining an interest rate differential. He/she argued that, given the lesser weight of the relative stance, the adjustments to the rate differential will result in changes to the absolute stance. He/she stated that such stance must continue to be determined independently, without aiming for a specific level of the relative stance, while being careful that this last one does not reach an overly restrictive level. He/she noted that the change from global to domestic pressures justifies a restrictive monetary policy stance for longer than anticipated. He/she mentioned that the increase proposed in this decision would be unexpected, and that therefore it should be clearly justified. He/she considered that the absolute monetary policy stance, measured through the ex-ante real interest rate, can be characterized by seven stages of the current monetary cycle. He/she stated the first three stages were determined by the sequential increases of 25, 50 and 75 basis points in the reference rate, which consolidated a restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she mentioned that the fourth stage began in December 2022 with a gradual slowdown in the pace of upward adjustments and will end when the terminal interest rate level is eventually attained. He/she stated that its calibration is important, given that it would remain fixed for an extended period and would be subject to the evolution of incoming data. He/she indicated that a balance must be pursued between avoiding an early deceleration of the pace of reference rate increases without previously observing a significant improvement in the inflationary outlook and reaching a terminal rate that is higher than necessary. He/she mentioned that a fifth stage will begin when the terminal rate is achieved. He/she pointed out that during said stage the ex-ante real interest rate will increase as inflation expectations decrease. He/she added that, to prevent the monetary policy stance from becoming too restrictive, it will be necessary to proceed to the sixth stage. He/she explained that, during said stage, the reference rate must begin declining alongside inflation expectations, in order to maintain an ex-ante real interest rate above 6%, but without exceeding 7%. He/she expressed that during the last stage a neutral monetary policy stance would be adopted, once the inflation target is reached. He/she underlined the importance of forward guidance throughout these stages. He/she indicated that it should be highlighted that the forward guidance is data-dependent and that it does not represent an unwavering commitment. He/she added that it should be communicated that the central bank is currently close to reaching the terminal rate, but highlighting that the restrictive monetary policy stance will not yield until commitment with the primary mandate is fulfilled. Another member pointed out that the most recent data on inflation and to a greater extent, their incidence in the expected determinants, defy the anticipated convergence and represent a clear signal that the balance of risks remains biased upwards. He/she found it worrisome that the observed decline in inflation of some merchandise has been characterized by being very gradual, due to the fact that there is an asymmetric and lagged passthrough between inflationary global pressures and the final consumer prices in the economy, specially within the set of food merchandises. He/she mentioned that this occurs in parallel to a deterioration of the inflation of non-tradeable goods in the economy, and thus a failure to act preemptively in view of the abovementioned signals, there would be a synchronization of pressures which would imply relevant challenges for the behavior of core inflation during the second half of the year. He/she considered that, given the significant adjustments in inflation forecasts, which required even the postponement by one quarter of the point-wise convergence to the target, currently it is not feasible to lower the pace of interest rate increases. He/she recalled that, in an inflation forecast-targeting regime, the monetary policy stance must be consistent with the behavior of the expected inflation determinants, and thus strengthening the restrictive monetary policy will consolidate a stance consistent with inflation convergence. However, he/she considered that, given the significant adjustment to the forecasts, the proposed increase in the interest rate, and the notably restrictive level attained by the ex-ante real interest rate, the balance of risks for inflation will be compatible with a slower pace of adjustments in future monetary policy decisions. He/she stated that Banco de México has made unprecedented efforts to consolidate an absolute policy stance that allows to guarantee the convergence of inflation within the forecast horizon, regardless of the relative policy stance. He/she pointed out that, looking ahead, decisions must remain flexible, dependent on incoming data and on the evolution of the balance of risks, in order to maintain at all times congruence with fulfilling the constitutional mandate. One member stated that the inflationary outlook continues posing challenges and considered that it is still not appropriate to slow the pace of interest rate increases. First of all, he/she pointed out that the materialization of the new inflation forecast requires a reference rate that addresses the higher persistence of the core component. He/she highlighted that it would send a clear signal regarding the commitment to the primary mandate, which would contribute to preserve credibility. He/she added that this is also relevant for the effectiveness of the inflation forecasttargeting regime. Second, he/she mentioned that inflation expectations are still negatively affected, although some have decreased at the margin. He/she noted that the proposed decision seeks to contribute to the reduction of inflation expectations and to preserve the effectiveness of this transmission channel. He/she highlighted that the reduction in 12month expectations elevates the ex-ante real interest rate, making the increases in the reference rate more effective. He/she added that monetary policy actions should continue contributing to expectations returning to their historic levels. Third, he/she indicated that the high levels of inflation could result in more persistence. He/she mentioned that the proposed increase seeks to address this risk and prevent second-round effects, the future costs of which will probably be greater if no timely action is taken. Finally, he/she considered that an uncertain environment persists, despite the fact that certain pressures have been mitigated. He/she added that the convergence of inflation to its target faces considerable challenges. He/she stated that, although the monetary policy stance is already restrictive, it needs to be reinforced to consolidate the convergence of inflation to its target. He/she considered that, for the next decisions, it is necessary to take into account the tightening that has been achieved and the fact that monetary policy operates with a lag. He/she pointed out that, the degree of monetary restriction already attained could increase if inflation expectations decline. He/she argued that, looking ahead, the pace of adjustments of the reference rate could be modified, and that it is very close to reaching a level that is appropriate to consolidate a disinflationary process in line with the inflation forecast. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It considered the challenges stemming from the ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the persistence of accumulated inflationary pressures and the possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well as the monetary policy stance already attained in this hiking cycle. In particular, it deemed that, given the dynamics of core inflation, on this occasion it is necessary to continue with the magnitude of the reference rate adjustment of the previous policy meeting, in order to be in a better position to tackle a still complex inflation environment. Based on the above, and with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times with both the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. The Board considers that, given the monetary policy stance already attained and depending on the evolution of incoming data, for its next policy meeting, the upward adjustment to the reference rate could be of lower magnitude. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 11.00%. Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy Domestic price dynamics has become more complex and uncertain. Inflationary pressures have not given in as we had anticipated in December, and we adjusted our forecast with a balance of risks to the upside. In view of inflation’s negative surprise to the upside in January, the lower increase in the reference rate adjustment that we foresaw in December for today’s decision was insufficient. This situation reflects the high uncertainty surrounding the new dynamics of inflation, which shows a greater persistence and greater domestic pressures, as external ones have started to subside. We must therefore be extremely cautious with our forward guidance. It must be credible and feasible, without putting the central bank’s reputation at risk and without undermining the effectiveness of communication with markets. This gains special relevance given the discrepancy between the monetary authorities’ messages of maintaining a restrictive policy stance for an extended period, and more accommodative market expectations. For this reason, our guide must indicate that the road towards consolidating the convergence of inflation to the target continues and, thus, limiting the next decision by referring to a policy rate adjustment of lower magnitude implies a high and costly risk of correction if the assumptions do not materialize.