The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted thatat present China’s economy maintained a steady and rapiddevelopment momentum, but problems such as a potential rebound of fixed assetinvestment, excess money and credit supply and excessive liquidity were notadequately addressed, accompanied by a palpable pressure of price hike. In theinternational market, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis worsened, anduncertainties and risks increased. Following the guidance of the CommunistParty of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC strengthenedfinancial macro control to preserve balances at aggregate level. The economicand financial performance has broadly remained in sound situation.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the factors pushing up prices and the impact ofthe sleet and snow disaster on economic growth, pointed out that prevention ofexcessive increase of general price should become the focus of financial macrocontrol, and a mix of measures ranging from increasing supply and stabilizingexpectations should be taken. At the same time, the urgency of economic restructuringshould be fully recognized, the coordination of the monetary policy with fiscalpolicy, industrial policy, trade policy and financial regulatory policy shouldbe enhanced and economic restructuring accelerated to promote a basicequilibrium of the balance of payments.
Weighing themonetary policy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee heldthe view that a tight monetary policy should be implemented by taking variousmeasures in line with the guidance of the Central Economic Work Conference. Atthe same time, the pace, priorities and intensity of financial macro controlshould be brought in alignment with changes in the economic and financialsituations at home and abroad. Efforts should be made to curb excessive growthof money and credit by adopting various monetary policy instruments, restrainthe excessive growth of money and credit and further improve credit structureto encourage growth in some sectors and discourage in others to ensure creditsupport to agricultural economy, job creation, students, small &medium-sized enterprises and other vulnerable groups. Improvement of themanaged floating exchange rate regime should be effected, continuouslyfollowing the principle of “ making it a self-initiated, controllable and gradualprocess”. Market supply and demand of foreign exchange should be allowed toplay a greater role in the process of increasing RMB exchange rate flexibility,with a view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level. Forceful actions should be taken to push ahead financialreform and innovation to improve competitiveness of financial institutions andefficiency of the financial market in resource allocation.
Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan,Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee chaired themeeting. Other Committee members present at the meeting included Mr. Li Yong,Ms. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Xie Fuzhan, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Liu Mingkang, Mr. Shang Fulin,Mr. Wu Dingfu, Mr. Jiang Chaoliang and Mr. Fan Gang. Mr. Zhang Ping, Mr. Zhu Zhixinand Mr. Su Ning were on business trip and did not attend the meeting.Presidents of the PBC Jinan Branch, Guangzhou Branch and Xi’an Branch alsojoined the meeting.