The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its third quarterlymeeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
After analyzingcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad and discussingthe possible impact of the international financial turmoil on China’s economicand financial development, the Committee held that, as the US sub-primemortgage crisis had caused drastic fluctuations in the global financial marketand spilled over into financial institutions and even the real economy, theoutlook of the global economy was unfavorable, and proper measures should betaken accordingly. At the same time, lessons should be drawn from the currentfinancial crisis to improve China’s banking system and the regulatory regime soas to maintain the stability of the country’s financial system and financialmarket.
The meeting heldthat, as a series of well-targeted macro control measures formulated by theState Council began taking effect, China’s economy kept developing in thedirection intended by the macro control, the financial system remained safe andsound, and the overall situation was good. Further efforts should be made tothoroughly implement the scientific approach to development, adopt flexible andprudent macro policies in line with the changing domestic and internationalsituation, properly manage the orientation, intensity and pace of the macrocontrol as appropriate, thus creating a benign monetary environment for soundand rapid economic growth. Efforts should be made to strengthen coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy andfinancial regulatory policy, accelerate economic restructuring and the shift ofgrowth pattern, mobilize the flexibility of market participants so that theycan play a greater role in improving the self-adjusting ability of the economy,and vigorously expand domestic demand to promote a basic equilibrium of thebalance of payments.
Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan,Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired themeeting. Other Committee members present at the meeting included Mr. Zhu Zhixin,Mr. Li Yong, Ms. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Su Ning, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Liu Mingkang,Mr. Shang Fulin, Mr. Wu Dingfu, Mr. Jiang Chaoliang and Mr. Fan Gang. Mr. ZhangPing and Mr. Xie Fuzhan were absent from the meeting on business leaves.Presidents of the PBC Ji’nan Branch, Guangzhou Branch and Xi'an Branch alsojoined the meeting.