The global outlook remains challenging, with risk appetite towards emerging economies at levels below those seen early this year.
The main risks continue to be associated with normalization of interest rates in some advanced economies and with uncertainty regarding global trade.
They concluded that the data indicate continuation of the recovery of economic activity, at a more gradual pace than envisaged early this year.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members considered that it remains challenging for emerging economies.
However, the assessment was that this stabilization occurred at levels lower that those observed at the beginning of the year, which implies higher risk premia.
The Copoms baseline scenario assumes gradual normalization of monetary policy in central economies.
The Committee members also mentioned the risks to the continued expansion of international trade, with possible impacts on global growth, and on the Chinese economy, in particular.
The main risks continue to relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
They concluded that the data indicate continuation of the The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario recovery of economic activity, at a more gradual pace with Selic and exchange rate paths extracted from the than envisaged early this year.
In The members of the Committee also highlighted the reduction of uncertainties in the domestic front, which led to a decline in risk premia embedded in Brazilian asset prices.
This decline of uncertainties contributed to reduce the degree of asymmetry in the balance of risks for inflation.
Despite this improvement, the Copom members concluded that upward risks to inflation continue to have a greater weight in the balance of risks.
The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory for the next months.
This trajectory should lead to a rise of 12month inflation, reaching a peak around the second quarter of Thereafter, 12-month inflation is expected to decline over the remainder of 2019, towards the target.
With regard to underlying inflation, in recent months its various measures have risen from levels considered to be low, reaching levels that the Committee deems appropriate i.e., generally consistent with the inflation targets.
Recent changes in relative prices, in a context of anchored inflation expectations, seem to have contributed to raise inflation to levels compatible with the inflation targets, without posing risks to the maintenance of inflation at these levels once such relative price adjustments have taken place.
Copom members then discussed the convenience of maintaining in their official documents the message on principles for conducting monetary policy in face of relative price shocks in an inflation targeting regime with anchored expectations.
The Copom has communicated that, in this context, monetary policy should focus only on possible second-round effects of relative price changes induced by occasional shocks.
Committee members pondered that it should already be clear that there is no mechanical relationship between shocks that produce relative price adjustments and monetary policy.
The members of the Committee also discussed the extent of the exchange rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.
They assessed that, with the exception of some administered prices, the level of pass-through has been contained.
The members pondered, however, that the intensity of pass-through depends on several factors, such as the level of economic slack, and the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations.
The Committee will continue to monitor different measures of exchange rate passthrough to both inflation and underlying inflation.
The Copom members assessed that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures at adequate levels, inflation projections close to the target for 2019 and 2020, and high level of slack in the economy still prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural interest rate level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to the economy.
The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus depends on economic conditions in particular, on inflation expectations, the level of economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation projections.
Importantly, the provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment with anchored inflation expectations.
The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess the estimates of this rate over time.
The Copom then discussed the advisability of signaling the future evolution of monetary policy.
Despite the reduction in the degree of asymmetry of the balance of risks, all members considered that the current environment prescribes retaining greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which requires refraining from providing indications of the next steps of monetary policy.
The members of the Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing their commitment to conducting monetary policy in order to anchored inflation expectations and prospects of The members of the Committee also discussed the economic recovery.
They assessed that, with the The members of the Committee also highlighted exception of some administered prices, the level of the reduction of uncertainties in the domestic front, pass-through has been contained.
The members which led to a decline in risk premia embedded in pondered, however, that the intensity of pass-through Brazilian asset prices.
This decline of uncertainties depends on several factors, such as the level of contributed to reduce the degree of asymmetry in the economic slack, and the degree of anchoring of quarter of Thereafter, 12-month inflation is expected to decline over the remainder of 2019, prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., towards the target.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the With regard to underlying inflation, in recent view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide months its various measures have risen from levels stimulus to the economy.
Recent changes in The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
The Copom stresses that the continuation of Copom members then discussed the convenience reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian of maintaining in their official documents the message economy is essential to the reduction of its structural on principles for conducting monetary policy in face of interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess relative price shocks in an inflation targeting regime the estimates of this rate over time.
Committee members Despite the reduction in the degree of asymmetry of pondered that it should already be clear that there is the balance of risks, all members considered that the no mechanical relationship between shocks that current environment prescribes retaining greater produce relative price adjustments and monetary flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which policy.
The members of the should not be interpreted as a change in the conduct Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing their of monetary policy.
This requires flexibility to gradually adjust the conduct of monetary policy when and if needed.
This ability to respond to different circumstances contributes to the maintenance of the environment with anchored expectations, which is fundamental to ensure that the achievement of low inflation persists, even in face of adverse shocks.
The Committee members reiterated their preference for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and enhance Copoms communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
The Committee also notes that the perception of continuity in the reform agenda affects expectations and current macroeconomic projections.
Finally, the Copom members stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, with a smaller weight, The Copom judges that it should base its decisions on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic activity.
It is through such second-round effects that these shocks may affect inflation projections and expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack and by inflation expectations anchored at the targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
This requires flexibility to gradually expectations and macroeconomic projections.
This ability to respond to different The Copom judges that it should base its decisions circumstances contributes to the maintenance of the on the evolution of inflation projections and environment with anchored expectations, which is expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic fundamental to ensure that the achievement of low activity.
Shocks that produce relative price changes inflation persists, even in face of adverse shocks.
The Copom reiterates that economic conditions All Committee members once again emphasized still prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest that the approval and implementation of reforms rates below the structural level.
These efforts are fundamental for the de Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Maurcio Costa resumption of economic activity and for the de Moura, Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Srgio development of the Brazilian economy.
Monetary Policy Decision Taking into account the baseline scenario, the The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
