This includes the economies deteriorates.
In this context, the Copom members once again highlighted the capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its robust balance of payments and the environment of anchored inflation expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
They assessed that those considered that the current environment prescribes measures are at appropriate or comfortable levels, and retaining greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary that inflation projections indicate convergence of inflation policy, which requires refraining from providing indications to target over the course of 2019 and This path is of its next steps.
The members of the Copom reinforced the consistent with inflation expectations, which remain importance of emphasizing their commitment to anchored.
The Copom members emphasized, however, the conducting monetary policy in order to maintain the path existence of risks to the consolidation of this scenario in the for prospective inflation in line with inflation targets.
This contributes to the risk that the high level of economic slack may lead to a increase transparency and enhance Copoms lower-than-expected prospective inflation trajectory has communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the increased, while the risk related to the frustration of next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue expectations regarding the continuation of reforms and to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy has balance of risks, and on inflation projections and decreased.
However, the members highlighted that upside expectations.
Therefore, the Committee The Copom pondered that caution, serenity, and concluded that the balance of risks remains asymmetric, perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the face albeit to a lesser degree.
The Committee understands that decisions conditions with anchored inflation expectations, governed by these principles provide good guidance for underlying inflation measures at appropriate or monetary policy.
The Committee also notes that the The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that perception of continuity in the reform agenda affects would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All expectations and current macroeconomic projections.
Importantly, the of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and with anchored inflation expectations.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee will continue to reassess the estimates of this rate over time.
All members for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, with a smaller weight, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
In the Copoms assessment, the evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation projections and expectations.
