The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The global outlook showed some accommodation recently, but remains more challenging.
The main risks are associated with normalization of interest rates in some advanced economies and with uncertainty regarding global trade.
Risk appetite towards emerging economies remained relatively stable, at a level below that observed earlier this year.
June inflation reflected significant upward pressure from the halt in the transportation sector and other relative price changes.
Recent data corroborate the view that these effects should be temporary.
Measures of underlying inflation are still running at low levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
The Committee judges that the latter risks remain at higher levels.
May 2018 data reflect the effects of the temporary halt in the transportation sector that took place at the end of that month.
Indicators available since then point to subsequent recovery, although some indicators referring to June may still be influenced by that halt.
The baseline scenario entertains the continuation of recovery of economic activity in the Brazilian economy, albeit at a more gradual pace than estimated prior to the halt.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee judges that financial conditions showed some accommodation, but the scenario remains more challenging.
The baseline scenario comprises gradual normalization of monetary policy in central economies.
There is risk of additional impact on emerging economies owing to this process, which may reinforce changes in asset prices and in the volatility of financial conditions in international markets.
The global outlook showed some accommodation recently, but remains more challenging.
Risk appetite towards _premia and increase the path for inflation over the_ emerging economies remained relatively stable, at a relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee of economic activity in light of available data.
Indicators available since then point to The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario subsequent recovery, although some indicators with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted referring to June may still be influenced by that halt.
In this context, the Copom members once again highlighted the capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its robust balance of payments and low inflation environment in the recent past, in addition to anchored expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom pondered the risks stemming from a possible additional deterioration in the outlook for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of expectations regarding the necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory in the short-term.
All members agreed that June inflation reflected significant upward pressure from the halt in the transportation sector and from other relative price changes.
Inflation projections for July and August corroborate the view that these effects should be temporary.
The Committee pointed out that several measures of underlying inflation were running at low levels before those shocks and that relative price changes in a context of anchored inflation expectations may contribute to the convergence of inflation to target, without posing risks to its favorable dynamics once these price changes are over.
The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, in the face of occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative prices, monetary policy should focus on their secondround effects only.
The Committee emphasizes that this prescription requires an environment with anchored expectations.
The Copom members assessed that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures at low levels, inflation projections slightly below target for 2019, and high level of slack in the economy prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural interest level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, Committee members expressed the view that current _ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to the_ economy.
The Committee also debated the conditionalities that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus depends on economic conditions in particular, on inflation expectations, the level of economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation projections.
The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee assessed the effects of the halt in the transportation sector.
It was agreed that these effects are revealing themselves temporary.
Nonetheless, they discussed possible more enduring effects of the shocks faced by the Brazilian economy.
Regarding the balance of risks, on the one hand, the Committee judged that downward risks for the prospective inflation path due to the low level of inflation in the recent past have decreased.
However, the persistence of a high level of economic slack also poses downward risks to inflation.
On the other hand, it discussed the importance of the continuation of the process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian economy for mitigating the risks associated with the deterioration of the scenario for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of the expectations about continued expansion of international trade, with expectations.
The Committee will monitor the different possible impacts on global growth.
In this context, the measures of exchange-rate pass-through to both Copom members once again highlighted the capacity inflation and underlying inflation.
Nevertheless, the projections slightly below target for 2019, and high The Committee also debated the conditionalities the transportation sector and from other relative price that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
Inflation projections for July and August All members agreed that the appropriate level of corroborate the view that these effects should be stimulus depends on economic conditions in temporary.
The Committee assessed the effects of the halt in the transportation sector.
It was agreed that these The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that, effects are revealing themselves temporary.
This context reinforces the importance of monitoring round effects only.
The Copom also highlighted that its over time the evolution of the baseline scenario and its the persistence of a high level of economic slack also Having established how monetary policy should poses downward risks to inflation.
On the other hand, react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices, it discussed the importance of the continuation of the Copom members discussed the extent of the process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian exchange-rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.
All members considered that, in the absence of additional shocks, the inflationary scenario should prove comfortable.
However, the higher level of uncertainty of the current situation generates a need for greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.
This recommends refraining from providing indications on the next steps of monetary policy.
The Copom members reiterated the importance of reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with exclusive focus on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the balance of risks, and economic activity.
Relative price shocks should be tackled only in the secondary impact they may have on prospective inflation.
In particular, they reiterated the importance of insisting on communicating that there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee members reiterated once again their preference for communicating conditionalities on the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and enhance Copoms communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
The Committee also notes that the perception of continuity in the reform agenda affects expectations and current macroeconomic projections.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes The Committee reiterates that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
The Copom judges that it should base its decisions on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic activity.
It is through such second-round effects that these shocks may affect inflation projections and expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack and by inflation expectations anchored around the targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
In the Copoms assessment, the evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
The Copom judges that these risks remain at higher levels.
Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance of risks, and the wide array of available The Copom then discussed the advisability of information, the Copom unanimously decided to The Copom members reiterated the importance of interest rates below the structural level.
Relative price shocks should be tackled only economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the in the secondary impact they may have on prospective medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural inflation.
In particular, they reiterated the importance of interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
It is through such second-round effects the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, that these shocks may affect inflation projections and and on inflation projections and expectations.
These effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack All Committee members once again emphasized and by inflation expectations anchored around the that the approval and implementation of reforms targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship notably those of fiscal nature and adjustments in the between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of policy.
The Copom improvements in the business environment.
These emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic monetary policy will continue to depend on the activity and for the development of the Brazilian evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, economy.
