This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Inflation expectations for 2018 collected by the Focus survey are around 3.9 percent.
Expectations for 2019 and 2020 remain around 4.25 percent and 4.0 percent, respectively.
All members agreed that the recovery of the economy has been more consistent.
In this context, Committee members believe that as economic activity recovers, inflation tends to converge to target.
They reaffirmed the view that, as a result of current levels of slack in the economy, marginal revisions in the intensity of recovery would not lead to material revisions in the expected path for inflation.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee confirmed that the evolution of the global economy has been favorable, with widespread economic growth.
Signs are already emerging that labor market conditions have started to lift wages in some central economies.
There are also prospects that inflation rates in these economies will return to levels closer to their targets.
This reinforces the scenario of continuation of the monetary policy normalization process in central economies, which should take place gradually in the baseline scenario.
But the prospective trajectory of price and wage inflation may make this process more volatile and induce some tightening of global financial conditions.
In this context, Committee members once again highlighted the Brazilian economy's capacity to absorb occasional setbacks in the global economy, given its robust balance of payments, low inflation environment, anchored expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom pondered once more the risk to a lower-than-expected prospective inflation The economy continues to operate with a high level trajectory.
This has so far relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
All Inflation expectations for 2018 collected by the members agreed that the recovery of the economy has Focus survey are around 3.9 percent.
Expectations for been more consistent.
In this context, Committee 2019 and 2020 remain around 4.25 percent and 4.0 members believe that as economic activity recovers, percent, respectively.
This reinforces the scenario of course of continuation of the monetary policy normalization process in central economies, which should take place Under these assumptions, the Copoms inflation gradually in the baseline scenario.
But the prospective projections for 2018 and 2019 stand around 4.2 trajectory of price and wage inflation may make this percent.
In this context, Committee members once again highlighted the Brazilian economy's capacity to absorb occasional setbacks in The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout this and subsequent years and all members agreed that the prospects for inflation have, to a large extent, evolved as expected.
The Committee assessed the current situation of the domestic electric power generation sector and incorporated the recent changes in tariffs into its baseline scenario for inflation.
It also discussed the evolution of fuel prices.
Both prices have become more volatile over the past year.
Regarding monetary policy, there was consensus that, as in the case of other occasional relative price adjustments resulting from supply shocks, with anchored inflation expectations, monetary policy should only address the second-round effects of these shocks.
The Committee reiterates that its reaction to possible changes in relative prices, such as in food and possible adjustments of electric power tariffs and fuel prices, will be symmetric, that is to say, monetary policy will follow the same principles in face of both inflationary and disinflationary supply shocks.
The Copom discussed the levels and the path of inflation, including the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
Some measures of underlying inflation were considered to be at comfortable levels while others at low levels.
The Committee also discussed the extent to which their trajectories are compatible with convergence of inflation towards the target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
On the one hand, the persistence of underlying inflation measures at low levels poses downward risks for the prospective inflation path.
On the other hand, expectation remains that the recovery of economic activity will contribute to lift underlying inflation towards target over the relevant horizon.
The Copom understands that the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy contributes to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee then discussed the next step in conducting monetary policy.
On the one hand, the continuity of the environment with underlying inflation at comfortable or low levels, with an increased risk of its dissemination, would make room for such additional easing.
The same would occur in the case of changes in the balance of risks that result in a lower probability of an increase in risk _premia and_ consequent increase in prospective inflation.
On the other hand, evolution of the economy in line with the Copom's baseline scenario, the more consistent recovery of economic activity, and a worsening of the global outlook would favor the interruption of the easing process.
In this context, the members of the Committee discussed the level of flexibility to be maintained in the communication on the next step for monetary policy.
Some members expressed a preference for a high level of flexibility, favoring more symmetric communication about the next step, while others proposed to signal more strongly the possible interruption of the monetary easing cycle and to maintain freedom of action, but to a lesser extent.
All members concluded to be appropriate to signal that, provided the conjuncture evolves according to the Committee's baseline scenario, the interruption of the monetary easing process seems appropriate from the current perspective.
Although estimates of this rate involve adjustments in the economy.
It focused on assessing should only address the second-round effects of these under what circumstances it would be appropriate to shocks.
On the one low levels.
The Committee also discussed the extent recovery of economic activity, and a worsening of the to which their trajectories are compatible with global outlook would favor the interruption of the convergence of inflation towards the target over the easing process.
On the one hand, the persistence of underlying inflation measures at low In this context, the members of the Committee levels poses downward risks for the prospective discussed the level of flexibility to be maintained in the inflation path.
On the other hand, expectation remains communication on the next step for monetary policy.
The Committee expressed the view that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, measures of underlying inflation running at comfortable or low levels, inflation projections a little below target for 2018 and on target for 2019, and a The Committee reaffirmed its preference for communicating conditionalities on the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality that guides its decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and improve Copom communication.
In this context, the members reaffirmed that the next steps in the conduct of the monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle length, and on inflation projections and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of a fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are fundamental for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Committee judges that this decision is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2018 and, with smaller and gradually increasing weight, The Committee judges that economic conditions prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy contributes to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
Copom views the interruption of the monetary easing process as more appropriate.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, possible reassessments of the extension of the cycle, and on inflation projections and expectations.
The Committee reaffirmed its preference for Copom views the interruption of the monetary easing communicating conditionalities on the evolution of process as more appropriate.
This contributes to additional moderate monetary easing, if the increase transparency and improve Copom Committees baseline scenario and balance of risks communication.
In this context, the members change.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in reaffirmed that the next steps in the conduct of the the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend monetary policy will continue to depend on the on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic balance of risks, and the wide array of available information, the Copom unanimously decided to reduce the Selic rate by 0.25 percentage point, to 6.75 percent per year.
