Expectations for 2019 of the economic activity in light of available data.
They agreed that the pace of the economic activity has softened, at the margin.
This movement occurs The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario amidst a process of consistent recovery, albeit at a with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted gradual pace, of the Brazilian economy.
In the same scenario, the inflation changes in assets prices and volatility of financial projections for administered prices for 2018 and conditions in international markets.
The Committee members also mentioned the geopolitical risks and the risks associated to the continued expansion of international trade, with possible impacts on global growth.
The Copom highlights given its robust balance of payments, low inflation that its reaction to possible changes in relative prices environment, anchored expectations and prospects will be symmetrical, i.e., monetary policy will follow of economic recovery.
The Committee decided to throughout the current and subsequent years.
All monitor the different measures of exchange-rate members agreed that inflation developments remain pass-through to both inflation and underlying favorable, with several measures of underlying inflation.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business The Copom members reaffirmed their cycle and monetary policy.
They also discussed to understanding that economic conditions with what extent these trajectories are compatible with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation the convergence of inflation to the target, in the measures at low levels, inflation projections below relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
On the other hand, the below the structural interest level.
Although recovery in economic activity is still expected to estimates of this rate imply a high degree of contribute to bring underlying inflation towards the uncertainty, Committee members expressed the target in the relevant horizon.
Additionally, risks view that current ex-ante real interest rates provide associated with continuation of the reversal in the stimulus to the economy.
Over time, this should outlook for emerging economies, in a context of contribute to the convergence of inflation to its frustration of the expectations regarding the targets.
The Copom judges that the The Copom understands that the process of recent evolution of these dimensions as a whole, has reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian mitigated the risk of delayed convergence of economy contributes to the reduction of its inflation towards the targets.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee members also discussed the conditional projections for inflation in different The Committee members then discussed the scenarios.
The Copom sees these convergence of inflation towards the targets.
Some levels as comfortable and, taking into account the factors were in favor of this alternative, namely the current balance of risks, deems that the odds that low levels of inflation and underlying inflation and inflation remains below target in the relevant the gradual pace of recovery of the economy and its horizon have diminished.
In favor of this The Committee reaffirmed the understanding option, weighed the change in the balance of risks for that, with anchored inflation expectations, in the inflation due to the external shock, which reduced face of occasional shocks that lead to changes in the chances of inflation remaining below target in The Committee reaffirmed its preference for the relevant horizon, through possible second-round communicating conditionalities on the evolution of effects on inflation.
This made it unnecessary to monetary policy, which better transmits the mitigate the risk of an overly slow convergence of economic rationality that guides its decisions.
Weighing the baseline scenario contributes to increase transparency and improve and the balance of risks, the Committee concluded Copom communication.
In this context, the members that the decision to keep the interest rate at the reaffirmed that the next steps in the conduct of the current level was the most appropriate.
In the that the approval and implementation of reforms end, the understanding prevailed that the focus on notably those of a fiscal nature and adjustments in the best possible decision, given the set of the Brazilian economy are fundamental for the information available at the time, results, over time, sustainability of the environment of low and stable in greater credibility for monetary policy.
Committee members Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of understand that there may be impacts of the other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, external shock on the Brazilian economy, but they efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy emphasized that it is essential to understand that and improvements in the business environment.
The Committee mitigated by the high level of slack in the economy.
External shocks should be tackled only in the The Committee reiterates that economic secondary impact they may have on prospective conditions prescribe accommodative monetary inflation.
In this context, the Committee concluded policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
They also decided to indicate, for the next meetings, that In the Copoms assessment, the evolution of the with comfortable inflation projections and the baseline scenario and, mainly, of the balance of risks current balance of risks, the Committee deems it made it unnecessary to ease monetary policy further appropriate to maintain the interest rate at the in order to mitigate the risk of delayed convergence current level.
Regarding the next meetings, the Committee deems appropriate to maintain its policy rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
