The economy continues to operate with a high level of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The global outlook remained more challenging and showed volatility.
The evolution of risks associated, to a large extent, with normalization of interest rates in some advanced economies led to adjustments in international financial markets.
As a result, risk appetite towards emerging economies has diminished.
In the short run, inflation should reflect significant temporary upward pressures stemming from the halt in the transportation sector and from other relative price changes.
Measures of underlying inflation are still running at low levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
April data suggest more consistent activity relative to previous months.
The temporary halt in the transportation sector in May, however, makes it more difficult to assess the recent evolution of economic activity.
Indicators for May and possibly June , are likely to reflect the effects of the aforementioned halt.
Economic developments over July and August should indicate more clearly the pace of recovery, which may be more or less intense.
The baseline scenario entertains the continuation of recovery of economic activity in the Brazilian economy, albeit at a more gradual pace than estimated prior to the halt.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee considered that the scenario remains more challenging.
The baseline scenario comprises gradual normalization of monetary policy in central economies.
April data suggest more scenario capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate.
The evolution of risks associated, to _premia and increase the path for inflation over the_ a large extent, with normalization of interest rates in relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
As a result, risk in the global outlook for emerging economies.
The appetite towards emerging economies has diminished.
The temporary halt in the transportation The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario sector in May, however, makes it more difficult to with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted assess the recent evolution of economic activity.
The Committee members also mentioned the growing risks to the continued expansion of international trade, with possible impacts on global growth.
In this context, the Copom members once again highlighted the Brazilians economy capacity to withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its robust balance of payments, low inflation environment, anchored expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom pondered the risks stemming from a possible additional deterioration in the outlook for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of expectations regarding the necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory throughout the current and subsequent years.
All members agreed that in the short-term inflation should reflect significant upward pressures stemming from the halt in the transportation sector and from other relative price changes.
The baseline scenario anticipates that those effects should be temporary, resulting from relative prices changes related to the aforementioned shocks.
The Committee pointed out that several measures of underlying inflation were running at low levels in the recent past and that relative prices changes in a context of anchored inflation expectations may accelerate the convergence of inflation to target, without posing risks to its favorable dynamics once these price changes are over.
Nevertheless, the members considered that the evolution of the prospective inflation path in the medium and long terms along with the anchoring of inflation expectations should be followed.
The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, in the face of occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative prices, monetary policy should focus on their secondround effects only.
The Committee emphasizes that this prescription requires an environment with anchored expectations.
The Copom members reaffirmed their understanding that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures at low levels, inflation projections slightly below target for 2018 and 2019, and high level of slack in the economy prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural interest level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, Committee members expressed the view that current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to the economy.
The Copom stresses that the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess estimates of this rate over time.
The effects of the halt in the transportation sector over the scenario were assessed by the Committee.
It was agreed that the baseline scenario encompasses significant temporary effects of this shock on inflation and economic activity and that the assessment of incoming data will be contaminated by these effects.
The Committee discussed possible enduring effects of the shocks faced by the Brazilian economy.
The members agreed that in the short term it will be more difficult to evaluate if the developments of the economy are in line with its baseline scenario for the medium and long terms.
Regarding the balance of risks, on the one hand, the Committee judged that downward risks for the prospective inflation path, due to the low level of inflation in the recent past, have decreased.
On the other hand, it discussed the importance of the continuation of the process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian economy for mitigating the risks associated with the deterioration of the scenario for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of the expectations about these reforms and adjustments.
The Committee will monitor the different international markets.
The Committee members also measures of exchange-rate pass-through to both mentioned the growing risks to the continued inflation and underlying inflation.
In this context, the Copom members The Copom members reaffirmed their once again highlighted the Brazilians economy understanding that economic conditions with anchored capacity to withstand a setback in the international inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures at The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory The Copom stresses that the process of reforms throughout the current and subsequent years.
All and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy members agreed that in the short-term inflation should is essential to the reduction of its structural interest reflect significant upward pressures stemming from the rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess halt in the transportation sector and from other relative estimates of this rate over time.
The baseline scenario anticipates that those effects should be temporary, resulting from The Committee members then discussed the relative prices changes related to the aforementioned evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of shocks.
The members agreed that in the short term it will be The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that, more difficult to evaluate if the developments of the with anchored inflation expectations, in the face of economy are in line with its baseline scenario for the occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative medium and long terms.
This context reinforces the prices, monetary policy should focus on their second- importance of monitoring over time the evolution of the inflation in the recent past, have decreased.
On the other hand, it discussed the importance of the Having established how monetary policy should continuation of the process of adjustments and react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices, reforms in the Brazilian economy for mitigating the Copom members discussed the extent of the risks associated with the deterioration of the scenario exchange-rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.
The Copom members reiterated the importance of reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with exclusive focus on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the balance of risks, and economic activity.
Relative price shocks should be tackled only in the secondary impact they may have on prospective inflation.
In particular, they reiterated the importance of insisting on communicating that there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee members reiterated once again their preference for communicating conditionalities on the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and enhance Copoms communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the business environment.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2018 and, mainly, The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable recovery of the economy.
The Copom judges that it should base its decisions on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic activity.
It is through such second-round effects that these shocks may affect inflation projections and expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack and by inflation expectations anchored around the targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
As for prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., the next meetings, considering the high level of interest rates below the structural level.
It is through such second-round effects their preference for communicating conditionalities on that these shocks may affect inflation projections and the evolution of monetary policy, which better expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These transmits the economic rationality guiding their effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and by inflation expectations anchored around the and enhance Copoms communications.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship context, they reasserted that the next steps in the between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on policy.
