Expectations for economic activity in light of available data.
One 2019 and 2020 are around 4.2 percent and 4.0 member mentioned signs of a slight slowdown, at the percent, respectively.
All members conditional inflation scenarios produced by the Copom agreed that the recovery shows consistency.
In this assumes variations of 4.8 percent for 2018, and 3.8 context, Committee members believe that as percent for economic activity recovers, inflation tends to gradually return to target.
Under these assumptions, the Copoms inflation Signs are already emerging that labor market projections declined to 3.8 percent for 2018 and to 4.1 conditions have started to increase wages in some percent for central economies.
There are also prospects that inflation rates in these economies will return to levels closer to their targets.
This reinforces the scenario of continuation of the monetary policy normalization process in central economies, which should take place gradually in the baseline scenario.
But the prospective trajectory of price and wage inflation may make this process more volatile and induce some tightening of global financial conditions.
In this context, Committee members once inflation projections below target for 2018 and around again highlighted the Brazilian economy's capacity to target for 2019, and a high level of economic slack absorb occasional setbacks in the global economy, prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., with given its robust balance of payments, low inflation interest rates below the structural level.
Although environment, anchored expectations and prospects of estimates of this rate involve a high degree of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom uncertainty, Committee members expressed the view pondered once more the risk for the Brazilian economy that current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus of a reversal in this benign global outlook, in a context to the economy.
The Copom understands that the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory economy contributes to the reduction of its structural throughout the current and subsequent years.
The Committee will continue to reassess members agreed that inflation has evolved more estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee emphasizes that its reaction to possible changes in The Committee then discussed the next steps in relative prices will be symmetric, that is to say, conducting monetary policy.
There was a consensus monetary policy will follow the same principles in face that the evolution of the economy, the baseline of both inflationary and disinflationary supply shocks.
Part of this adjustment could the business cycle and monetary policy were be implemented by reducing the Selic rate to 6.5 considered to be running at low levels.
This had already been reflected in also discussed the extent to which their trajectories are analysts' projections and in the term structure of compatible with convergence of inflation towards the interest rates.
However, the members of the Copom target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy. concluded in favor of the need to make monetary On the one hand, the persistence of underlying policy a little more accommodative.
This conclusion inflation measures at low levels poses downward risks derived from two factors.
First, the Copom judged that for the prospective inflation path.
On the other hand, the dynamics of various underlying inflation measures both the expectation that the recovery of economic signaled a greater risk of delayed convergence of activity will contribute to elevate underlying inflation inflation toward the targets.
In this context, an towards target over the relevant horizon and the risks additional monetary stimulus would mitigate this risk.
This includes reacting appropriate from the current perspective.
In view of the to ensure that inflation converges to target at a proper principle guiding its conduct of monetary policy, i.e., of pace and, at the same time, guaranteeing that the clarifying conditionalities that it deems relevant, the achievement of a low inflation environment endures, Committee also decided to communicate that this even in the event of adverse shocks.
The Committee judges that this the Committee concluded that, by then, it should be decision is consistent with convergence of inflation to appropriate to interrupt the process of monetary target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of easing.
Given the risks facing the economy and the monetary policy, which includes 2018 and, with a uncertainty about the lags in the transmission of gradually increasing weight, monetary policy, the Committee believes that it may require some time to evaluate the evolution of the The Committee judges that economic conditions economy and its reaction to the monetary stimulus prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., already in place, given the relevant horizon at that interest rates below the structural level.
The debate then proceeded on how to communicate this vision to meetings beyond the next.
Some members expressed a preference for indicating The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian that it should be necessary to wait for a few Copom economy contributes to the reduction of its structural meetings, until sufficient information is gathered to assess the behavior of the economy.
The Committee will continue to reassess argued that they did not see a need to commit to such estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee judges that this additional stimulus mitigates the risk of delayed convergence of inflation The Committee reaffirmed its preference for toward the targets.
Beyond the next rationality that guides its decisions.
In this context, the members deems appropriate to interrupt the monetary easing reaffirmed that the next steps in the conduct of the process, with the aim of evaluating next steps, in light monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, of the relevant horizon for monetary policy at that time.
Marques and Tiago Couto Berriel.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
