The main risks continue to be associated with normalization of interest rates in some advanced economies and with uncertainty regarding global trade.
Various measures of underlying inflation are running at appropriate levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.
The Committee judges that the latter risks have increased.
Indicators and information available after the temporary halt in the transportation sector that occurred at the end of May 2018 point to the continuation of economy recovery of the Brazilian economy.
The baseline scenario entertains the continuation of recovery of economic activity, at a more gradual pace than envisaged early this year.
Regarding the global outlook, the Committee judges that the scenario remains challenging for emerging economies.
The baseline scenario assumes gradual normalization of monetary policy in central economies.
The Committee members also mentioned the risks to the continued expansion of international trade, with possible impacts on global growth.
In this context, the Copom members once again highlighted the capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its robust balance of payments and the environment of anchored inflation expectations and prospects of economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Copom pondered the risks stemming from a possible additional deterioration in the outlook for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of expectations regarding the necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
Expectations for of economic activity in light of available data.
Nevertheless, the Copom pondered the risks stemming from a possible additional deterioration in the outlook for emerging economies, in a context of frustration of expectations regarding the necessary The Committee members pointed out that several measures of underlying inflation have increased from levels considered low, reaching appropriate levels i.e., generally consistent with the inflation target.
It is possible that recent relative price changes in a context of anchored inflation expectations have contributed to raise inflation to levels compatible with the inflation targets, without posing risks to the maintenance of these levels once such relative price adjustments have taken place.
The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that, with anchored inflation expectations, in face of occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative prices, monetary policy should only focus on their second-round effects.
The Committee emphasizes that this prescription requires an environment with anchored expectations.
Having established how monetary policy should react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices, the Copom members discussed the extent of the exchange rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.
They assessed that, with the exception of some administered prices, the level of pass-through has been contained.
The members pondered, however, that the intensity of pass-through depends on several factors, such as the level of slack in the economy and the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations.
The Committee will monitor the different measures of exchange-rate pass-through to both inflation and underlying inflation.
The Copom members assessed that economic conditions with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation measures at adequate levels, inflation projections close to the target for 2019, and high level of slack in the economy still prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural interest level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the The Committee also debated the conditionalities that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus depends on economic conditions in particular, on inflation expectations, the level of economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation projections.
Importantly, the provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment with anchored inflation expectations.
The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.
The Committee will continue to reassess the estimates of this rate over time.
The Committee judged that the outlook evolved in line with the baseline scenario.
Regarding the balance of risks, on the one hand, the Committee judged that downward risks for the prospective inflation path due to propagation of low levels of inflation in the recent past have faded.
However, the persistence of a high level of economic slack poses downward risks to inflation.
On the other hand, it discussed the importance of the continuation of the process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian economy and the risks associated with the deterioration of the scenario for emerging economies.
Based on both sides of the balance of risks, the Copom members concluded that this balance is asymmetric, as the latter risks have increased.
The Copom then discussed the advisability of signaling the future evolution of monetary policy.
All members considered that the level of uncertainty of the current environment generates a need for greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which recommends refraining from providing indications on the next steps of monetary policy.
The members of the Copom have, however, considered that it is important to reinforce their commitment to conducting monetary policy in order to maintain the path for prospective inflation in line with the target.
This requires flexibility to gradually adjust the conduct of monetary policy The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory in the Committee members expressed the view that the short-term.
All members agreed that July and August current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to inflation along with projections for subsequent months the economy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of The Committee members pointed out that several stimulus depends on economic conditions in considered that the evolution of the prospective The Copom stresses that the continuation of inflation path in the medium and long terms along reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian with the anchoring of inflation expectations should economy is essential to the reduction of its structural be monitored in order to evaluate possible more interest rate.
However, the persistence of a high Committee emphasizes that this prescription requires level of economic slack poses downward risks to an environment with anchored expectations.
On the other hand, it discussed the importance of the continuation of the process of Having established how monetary policy should adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian economy and react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices, the risks associated with the deterioration of the the Copom members discussed the extent of the scenario for emerging economies.
Based on both exchange rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.
The members of the inflation projections close to the target for 2019, and Copom have, however, considered that it is important high level of slack in the economy still prescribe to reinforce their commitment to conducting monetary accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates policy in order to maintain the path for prospective below the structural interest level.
Although estimates inflation in line with the target.
This requires flexibility of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty, the to gradually adjust the conduct of monetary policy The Copom members reiterated the importance of reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with an exclusive focus on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the balance of risks, and economic activity.
Relative price shocks should be tackled only in the secondary impact they may have on prospective inflation.
In particular, they reiterated the importance of insisting on communicating that there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee members reiterated once again their preference for communicating the conditionalities on the evolution of monetary policy, which better transmits the economic rationality guiding their decisions.
This contributes to increase transparency and enhance Copoms communications.
In this context, they reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
All Committee members once again emphasized that the approval and implementation of reforms notably those of fiscal nature and adjustments in the Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread benefits for society.
The Committee also notes that the perception of continuity in the reform agenda affects expectations and current macroeconomic projections.
Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the business environment.
These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity and for the development of the Brazilian economy.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects current expectations and macroeconomic projections.
The Copom judges that it should base its decisions on the evolution of inflation projections and expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic activity.
It is through such second-round effects that these shocks may affect inflation projections and expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack and by inflation expectations anchored around the targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary policy.
The Copom reiterates that economic conditions still prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.
In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the baseline scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes keeping the Selic rate at its current level.
The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.
This ability to respond to different for prospective inflation and the associated balance of circumstances contributes to the maintenance of the risks and is consistent with the convergence of inflation environment with anchored expectations, which is to the targets over the relevant horizon for the conduct fundamental to ensure that the achievement of low of monetary policy, which includes inflation persists, even in face of adverse shocks.
The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of The Copom members reiterated the importance of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with an economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic The Committee members reiterated once again activity.
It is through such second-round effects and enhance Copoms communications.
In this that these shocks may affect inflation projections and context, they reasserted that the next steps in the expectations, and change the balance of risks.
These conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and by inflation expectations anchored around the the structural interest rate of the economy, with the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy widespread benefits for society.
