Notes and coin, having increased by 0.8% in June, appeared to have decelerated in July to an increase of around 0.2%. That would reduce the twelve-month growth rate to 5.6% from 6.1% in June. Broad moneygrowth remained strong in June. M4 increased by 0.9%, and the three, seven and twelve-month growth rates were all in the range 11.6-11.7% (the seven-month growth rate was calculatedbecause the six-month rate was distorted by the effect ofthe temporary contraction ofthe gilt repo market at the end of1996). Retail M4 grew particularly strongly inJune (1.2%) whereas the rise in wholesale M4 was unusually low (0.4%). That pattern may have reflected sales ofHalifax shares by individuals to financial institutions followingdemutualisation. The twelve-month growth rates ofreal money balances (deflated by RPIX) in June were 3.5% for MO and 8.8% for M4. The sectoral analysis ofmonetary growth in 02 showed that individuals' M4 holdings increased by 1.8%,a n d theirfour-quartergrowth rate went up from7 % to 7.3%. Duringthe first halfo fthe year they increased byaround 4%, compared with 3% in the second halfof1996. The four-quarter growth rate ofICCs' M4 holdings in 1997 02 was 7.9%, down from the peak of11.4% reached in 1996 Q3. ICCs' M4 holdings increased by 3.8% in thefirst halfof 1997, much the same as in the second halfof 1996. However by far the fastest-growing component of M4 had been OFIs' holdings. These had grown much fasterthan individuals' or ICCs holdings during the last2-3 years, and accounted for about one half of the five percentage point rise in the four-quarter growth rate oftotal M4 since 1995 Q2. They increased by 4.7% in Q2 and their four-quarter growth rate had risen to 26.6%. The OF sector contains a wide variety of lypes of financial intermediary, the money holdings of which might be affected by different factors. Overall, the growth ofO F I ' s money had been dominated by life assurance and pension funds and, to a lesser extent, securities dealers. Divisia money aims to identify balances held for transactions purposes. The four-quarter growth rate of aggregate Divisia money was 10.2% ni 197 02; that of personal Divisia money was 78.% (up from 7.4% ni Q1) and that of ICCs' Divisia money was 7.3% (down from 8.6% in Q1),and that of OFIs' Divisia money was 29.4% (up from 23.6% in Q1). M4 lending (adjustedtoexcludethe effect ofloan securitisations) rose by 0.7% in June, and its twelve-month growth rate was unchanged at9.5%. The quarterly sectoral data showed that the four- quartergrowth rate of lending was 7.2% for both persons and ICCs, and 20.2% forOFIs. Within personal lending, unsecured lending continued to accelerate: the twelve-month increasein June was 18.3%. The credit card component ofunsecured lending (about 20% of the total) had been growing at around 20% for the last year or so. The residual component ofunsecured lending(about 80% ofthe total)had grown by17.8% in the twelve months to June, and its twelve-month growth rate had been rising in recent months. Althoughgross mortgage lending by banks and building societies had increased quite sharply over the last couple ofyears, the recent acceleration in net mortgage lending (to a twelve- month increase of 6.2% in June) was more modest. M4 lending toICCs bounced back in Q2 when it rose by 2.0%, after an unusuallysmall increase of0.3% inQ1. Its four-quarter growth rate continued to edge down to 7.2% compared with therecent peak of 15.2% reached in 1996 Q2. M4 lending to OFIs had risen sharply, by 5.3%, in 1997 Q2. Real forward interest rates derived from index-linkedgilt yields suggested that real yields at maturities of two years or so had risen slightly in recentmonths, as did Bank estimates based on surveys ofinflation expectations. Retail sales volumes increased further (by 0.6%) in June after May's strong rise, and their twelve-month growth rate was 5.4%. The annualised growth rate since the start of the year was 8.2%. Though the twelve-month increase in volumes had continued to rise this year, the twelve-month increase in the value ofretail sales had levelled out late in 1996 a ta little below 6%. Spending on durables had been growing faster thanspending on non-durable goods and services, and in June purchasesfrom household goods stores rose by 7.5%, or £140 million. Industry contacts expected that car sales would be very strong in August, and demand for holidays abroad was also reported to be strong. A standard consumption function used by Bank staff did not suggest that up to Q1 there had been any unusual strength in consumer spending (given wealth,income, interest ratesand employment), of thekind that might have been caused by anticipation ofwindfall gains - though the standard erroro fthe equation (around 0.6%) was large enough to absorb any such effects. Nor had the share ofdurables in total consumer spending been unusual up to Q1. It seemed likely that consumer spending in Q2 had been supported tosome degree by windfall gains (some of which might have been anticipated). A survey by the British Retail Consortium of 1200 recipients ofwindfalls reported that of the 32% who planned to sell some orall oftheir shares, 33% were spending money on holidays; 26% were spending on new kitchens, bathrooms or other home improvements; 17% were spending the proceeds in the high street, particularly ongoods for the home (eg carpets, furiture); and 11% were buying cars. It seemed likely that consumer demandhad also been supported by rising financial wealth. Gross financial wealth rose by 10% (£208 billion) in the year to 1997 Q1; 90% ofthe increase was the consequence ofrising asset prices. The Nationwide houseprice index for July showed its largest monthly increase for three years (1.8%), (and its twelvemonth growth rate had goneup to 12.2% from 11.0% in June). The Halifax index, however, rose by only 0.1% in that month, taking the twelve-month growth rate down to 6.4% from 7.1% in June. The recentdivergence between the Nationwide and Halifax estimates ofhouse price inflation was puzzling (the indices are mix-adjusted, so as to excludethe influence ofthe types and locations of the houses which the two institutions were financing). The ratio of house prices to average earnings continued tob e lower than in theearly to mid 1980s, on eithermeasure. The data on housing market activity were generally flat. An exception was mortgage loan approvals, which had been rising, Investment intentions, as indicated by surveys and by reports from the Bank's regional Agencies,remained strong in both manufacturing and services, even thoughrecorded manufacturing investment (whichaccounted for about 12% oftotal investment) waslower in 199701 than a vear earlier. The monthly external trade figures continued to be surprisingly strong in the face of the appreciation of sterling. Import volumesfrom non-EU countries had risen by 7.2% inthe second quarter (export volumes had risen by 5.2%); and there had been a very strong rise in imports of consumer goods, including cars. This was consistent with therecent and prospective pattern of consumer spending. Imports ofservicesmight be boostedby spending ofwindfall gains on holidays abroad. Recent surveys (CBI, BCC, CIPS) suggested that orders formanufactured exports had fallen sharply, and Bank research based on analysis ofthe relationship between responses to the CBI survey and recorded exports suggested that the four-quarter growth rate ofmanufactured exports might have fallen in Q2, while remaining positive; there was a possibility that it might be negative in Q3. There also appeared fromthe BCC surveys to have been a slowdown in services exports. Theinitial estimate of GDP growth in 1997Q2 was 0.9% (non-oil 1.0%), and the estimated four- quarter growth rate had risen to 3.4% (non-oil 3.6%). Manufacturing output had fallen by 0.1% in 02, having risen by 0.5% in Q1. Its four-quarter growth rate was 1.6%, notwithstanding weakening export demand, and surveys suggested t h a t growth was likely t o continue. Construction activity appeared to be rising erratically. Services output was estimated by the ONS to have risen by 1.3% in Q2 and by 4.6% over the year to Q2; the BCC survey for Q2 suggested some moderation in theannual rate of growth. Demand for labour continued to rise. The Labour Force Survey (LES) reported a rise of 91,000 in employment between winter and spring, ofwhich just under two thirds represented full-time jobs. Total hours worked rose by 1%, a n d were up by 1.7% on ay e a r earlier. According to surveys and the Agencies' reports, recruitment intentions wereexceptionally strong in service industries but had moderated in manufacturing. The LFS showed a fall of 74,000inunemployment between winter and spring to 7.2% (on the ILO definition). Short-term unemployment had fallen below its low point of spring 1989. On the claimant count measure, unemployment fel by 36,500 ni June ot arate of 5.7%. Analysis ofthe latest LFS suggested that the labour market had tightened slightly less since autumn 1996 than had previously been thought, and that the Jobseekers' Allowance had had a slightly more powerful effect than previously thought on claims from those not searching for a job. The underlying rate of tightening was nowthought to be the equivalent ofa monthly fall of 25,000-30,000 in the claimant count. The number ofunfilled vacancies reported to job centres rose by 8,000 in June to a new record level of282,000, but the rise reflected a fall in placings (of22,000) which exceeded the fall in new notifications (14,000). The recorded twelve-month growth rate of underlying average eamings fel ot 4_% in May: this was the first month since November in which the figure had not been affected by bonuses. Calculations by Bank staff based on analysis ofsectoral earnings trends and statistical smoothing techniques suggested that the underlying growth rate ofearnings including bonuses was just under 4 %. Since the previous MPC meeting the local authority workers settlement, covering 1.4 million people, for a 2.5% basic increase plus theintroduction ofa minimum wage of£4 per hour, had been agreed. The total cost ofthe settlement was likely to amount to 2.8% ofthe pay bill. Thetwelve-month employment-weighted mean of settlementswas just over 3%, with the private sectorat 3.4% and the public sector at 2.7%. Within the private sector, the service sector was at 3.6% and the production sector at 3.2%. A proposed settlement covering 600,000 construction workers could lead to a jump in the three-month employment-weighted mean of settlements in June. The Bank's regional Agencies had conducted a survey oflabour demand in 136 companies in July. 40%of those surveyed reported that staff numbers had risen over the previous 6 months, while 24% reported that they had fallen. 4 7 % expected staff numbers to rise during the next 6 months, and 16% expected them to fall. Recruitment intentions were particularly strong in service industries, where 66% ofrespondents expected staffnumbers to rise and 7% expected them to fall; in manufacturing 29% of respondents expected staff numbers to rise and 25% expected them to fall. Staff reductions during the previous six months had been mainly in large companies (iecompanies with more than 500 employees). Ofthose surveyed, 34% reported that staffturnover had increased in the past six months and nearly all ofthe others reported no change. 26% ofall respondents (34%in services) reported a shortageofskilledworkersand24%quotedskillshortagesasareasonforadjustingwages. 48%said that skill shortages had intensified in the past 6months (57% in Londonand the South East). 23% reported a deterioration in the quality of applicants for jobs, while 8% reported an improvement: 32% said that skill shortages were inhibiting their ability to meetdemand. On pay, 40% ofcompanies surveyed thought that their settlement would behigher than in 1996, while 10% thought it would be lower. For those expecting higher settlements, the main causes were staff turnover and recruitment problems. 53% ofrespondents (and 61% in the service sector) said that they would pay premium rates to key groups ofskilled workers. A summary of the recent OECD Employment Outlook evidence on job insecurity was presented to the Committee. The OECD drew heavily onsurveys conducted by International Survey Research (ISR), which suggested thatperceived job insecurity had increased internationally over the past five years, and that itwasrelatively high in the United Kingdom. The causes ofjob insecurity might be structural as well as cyclical: I S surveys suggested that insecurity had increased in each year since 1987 in the United Kingdom. Greater job insecurity might lead to lower wage pressure and to higher precautionary savings. Evidence assembled by the OECD showed little change in job instability - for example average job tenure had changed little on balance between 1985 and 1995. Rates of staff retention had not changed much in most countries, and had actually risen a little in the United Kingdom between the late 1980s and early 1990s. Layoffrates in the United Kingdom had been similar in the 1990s recession to those in the 1980s recession, and were now lower than elsewhere in the European Union. The OECD had found little evidence of a statistically significant link between rates of temporary employment (eg on fixed-term contracts) or changes instatutory employment protection and perceptions of job insecurity across countries. The British Household Panel surveycorroborated a rise in job insecurity in the United Kingdom in the early 1990s.The British Social Attitudes Survey, however, suggested no trend in thefear of redundancy in recent years. But it also suggested that in the early tomid1990s a relatively low percentage ofrespondents had thought it would take them less thanthree months to find an acceptable job, though the percentage had risen in 1995. The OECD concluded that there had been a sharp rise in perceived job insecurity across many countries, mainly because the consequences ofjob loss had worsened: benefits paid to those out of work had become less generous and eligibility had been tightened, and entry wages intonew jobs had fallen relative to average earnings. Institutional factors affecting the degree ofcentralised bargaining might also play arole. Accordingto I S data, though job insecurity in the United Kingdom appeared to have been increasing steadily during the current economic recovery, the United States showed a recent recovery in jobsecurity, presumably in response to the continued strength of the labour market. The Bank's commodity price index fell by 1.6% (provisional figure) in June, having risen by 1.1% (revised figure) in May. These variations were partly explained by volatility in oil prices. Non-oil import prices fell by a further 0.2% in May, and prices ofnon-oil imports from non-FU countries rose by 0.1% in June. Producer input prices fell by 0.8% in June a n d by a further 0.4% in July, when theywere 9.0% lower than a year earlier. Producer output prices did not change in June or July,and in July they were 0.6% higher than a yearearlier. Theindex excluding excise duties (PPIY) rose by 0.1% in June but did not change in July, when ti was 0.4% higher than a year earlier. The CBI industrial trends survey did not suggest that producer output prices were likely to accelerate significantly. Non-oil export prices fell bya further 0.2% in May, though prices of non-oil exports to nor-EU countries rose by 0.1% in June. Twelve-month RPIXinflation rose from 2.5% in May to 2.7% in June, with the increase largely accounted for by seasonal food prices. RPI inflation rose from 2.6% in May to 2.9% in June, partly because ofrises in mortgage rates. The BU Harmonised Consumer Price Index in June was 1.7% higher than a year earlier. Food price inflation had been falling during the last twelve months and accounted for half of the fall in RPIX inflation from 3.3% to 2.5% between November 1996 and May 1997. This reflected both favourable supply conditions in 1996 and sterling's appreciation, which hadhad a much greater effect on food prices than on most other goods prices. Looking ahead, supply conditions in 1997 were likely to be less favourable and theeffect of sterling's appreciation on the rate of food price inflation would at some point begin to wear off. The sterling ERI stood at 103.9 (1990 average = 100) at the close of business on 6 August. It had fallenb y around 1/4% since 9 July but had risen bynearly 24% since 2 August 1996. Since 9 July, sterling was up by 1.1% against the Deutsche Mark and down by5%against the dollar. It had fallen by over 1.5% on the BRI on 6 August itself. The main feature of foreign exchange markets during the last month had been the global strength of the dollar, reflecting optimistic assessmentso fthe US economy and the perceived increased likelihood of EMU going ahead on schedule following the French budget package. Sterling fell slightly after the 1/4 percentage point rise in interest rates had been announced on 10 July, which suggested that some in the market had seen a larger rise in interestrates at that time as a possibility. Thereafter, for much of July sterling hadmoved up in parallel with the dollar, but it had weakened after the Bundesbank had announcedfixed rate reposfor the coming two weeks rather thantheexpected four,whichhad encouraged market expectations of higher interest rates in Germany. Analysis ofoptions prices gave no reason ot think that the market attached an unusuallyhigh probability ot the prospect of afal ni sterling, thoughuncertainty had increased as sterling hadappreciated. Likewise, chart analysis suggested no reason to think that sterling had peaked. In the domestic moneymarket, the announcement ofa rise in interest rates on 10 July had very little effect, except for a slight fall in onc-month rates, which suggested (like thesmall fall in sterling)that a larger rise had been seen aspossible. Three-month LIBOR on 6 August was 7.13%; the levels implied by futuresmarkets for September 1997, December1997 andDecember 1998 were 7.28%, 7.45% and 7.33% respectively. Therates implied for December 1998 had fallen by 21 basis points during the month, and rates were nowexpected topeak in the spring. This appeared to reflect aperception that a slowdown in economic growth next year was possible, influenced in particular by the strength of sterling, by the fiscal tightening in the Budget, and by the vote not todemutualise the Nationwide Building Society. Analysis ofoptionprices suggested that the fall in the level of short-term interest rates implied for March 1998 was accompanied by a fall in the probability attached to the prospect of sharply higher rates, while the probability attached t o sharply lower rates was little changed. Short-terminterest rates implied bygilt prices for periods further in the future hadalso fallen since the lastmeeting: the implied profile was gently falling for periods up to10 years, at which point the implied short-term interest rate was around 7.0%. This rate was broadly similar to comparable rates implied for the United States and Germany. Short-term market uncertainty about long-term interest rates (as measured from short termoptions on the long gilt future and interest rate swaps)had decreased during the last month. Future short-term interestrates implied for the average oflarge overseas industrial countries had risen for periods up to two years since 9 July, but hadfallen for longer periods. Therewas no clear relationship betweenrelative yield curve movements and changes in sterling's exchange rate during the month. Analysis ofmoney-market rates suggested that the market saw a material likelihood ofa further increase in interest rates ni August, and of a further rise later this year. Expectations of a rise in August rather than September had been growing in the last few days. It appeared that the market had not regarded substantial movements in sterling as aconstraint oninterest rate changes in the immediate future, though they perhaps had affected themarket view of the longer-term outlook for interest rates. In equity markets, the FT-SE 100 index had risen by 5.5% to 5026 since 9 July, and the FT-SE 250 index by 2.8% to 4517, but the FTSE Small Capitalisation index had fallen by 0.9% to 2189. These indices account for around 75%, 20% and5 % oftotal market capitalisation respectively. During the last threemonths, during which the FT-SE 100 index had risen from 4436 to 5026, the probabilities attached by the market to high absolute levels ofthe FT-SE 100 share index in the future had increased, while the probabilities attached to low absolute levels were littlechanged. In conjunction with this, the probability attached to a large fall from current levels had increased. This section of theminutes summarises the Monetary PolicyCommittee's analysis ofthe data and its policy implications, which it assessed together with the inflation forecast and analysis to be published the following week in the Bank'sAugust Inflation Report. The Committee reviewed the current position ofthe economy. Non-oil GDP was growing at an annual rate ofaround 4%, well above any plausible estimate of capacity growth. Most commentators now estimated that the output gap was close to zero. If that were so, it followed that, unless output growth fell back fairlyrapidly towards trend, a period of below - trend output growth would eventually prove inevitable if the consequent upward pressures on inflation were to berelieved. It was however very difficult tojudge the size of the output gap, and important to examine direct evidence about the extent ofunused resources. Important evidence was to be found in the labour market. The rate ofshort-termunemployment, at 4.5% accordingto the LFS, was lower than at any point sincethe early 1980s, and was close to the rate in theUnited States, while earnings growth was surprisingly low. It was possible that thenatural rate of unemployment - the rate ofunemployment consistent with a stable rate ofinflation- had fallen, perhaps reflecting the cumulative effects ofalmost two decadeso flabour market reforms. The labour market had continued to tighten as the current upswing progressed, with gathering concerns throughout the economy about skill shorlages, as reported bythe Bank's Agencies and others. The Committee recalled its discussion at the previous month's meeting about earnings growth. Having been around 3 3/4% in spring 1996, earnings growth had recently been in a range of 4 1/4-4 1/2%, broadly consistent with the inflation target. It remained surprising that earnings had not accelerated more. The Committee agreed that the possibility of faster earnings growth should be treated as an upside risk to the Bank's central projection ofinflation. The Committee turned ot other key elements of the quarter's data bearing on the outlook for inflation. July's narrow money growth had been weak compared with the past year. Put together with the low May figure, it was possiblethat a lasting deceleration was occurring. It was, however, difficult to interpret the significance of sucha change. On the one hand, it might reflect the flatter growth in retail sales values during 1997: lower retail price inflation had partly offset robust growth in retail sales volumes. On the other hand, if the earlier rapid growth had been caused by adjustment to a low-inflation environment in which individuals wanted to hold higher levels ofcash in relation to income or wealth, some deceleration might be expected. Once the adiustment to low inflation was completed, velocity could begin torise again, and the growth rate ofnarrow money could decline, given the continuing incentive to economise on cash holdings. It was not possible to conclude from just a few months' data that this was nowhappening. Narrow money data were therefore difficult to interpret, at least for the moment. Broad money and credit growth also posed important and difficult questions about the outlook for inflation. Much of the recent growth related to the OFI sector of the economy. There had alsobeen a long-term trend decline ni broad money velocity. Allowing for these factors, could current broad money growth in realterms of 8 1/2% be reconciled with the widely-sharedexpectations ofa slowdown in consumption and activity growth over the next year or so? Put another way, did nominal M4 growth of between 11% and 12%, an increase from thesecond halfo f 1996, indicate arise in inflationtwo years or so ahead once potentially temporary downward pressures on inflation, including sterling's appreciation, had abated or unwound? The Committee notedthat the rates of growth ofthe varioussectoral components of M4 were different, although all were high. In addition, Divisia money - ameasureo ftransaction balances, largely accountedfor by personal sector moneyholdings- had grown by 10.2% in the year to second quarter, a modest increase in the growth rate during the last year. The growth of personal sector and company sector moneycould put upward pressure on inflation via effects on consumption and investment. The Committee concluded that both represented upside risks to the inflation outlook given the lack of supportive evidence for apermanent velocity shift. The Committee discussed the possible implications for future demand and output of the recent rapid growth ofOFIs' money, which accounted for about halfofthe increase in M4 in 1997 Q2. One possibilitywas that the sector was temporarily holding a high level ofbalances compared with long-run demand, perhaps partly as a result ofthe strength of cash-financed merger and acquisition activityand corporate share repurchases during 1995 and 1996. Intermediariesmight have deliberately built up money holdings on a view that the rise infinancial asset prices would not be sustained. If so, that moneycould eventually find its way back into asset markets ifintermediaries eventually concluded that financial market valuations wererobust after all, ands o reinvestedpart oftheir money holdings. Some of the money would then pass tothe company sector (for example via share issues) or to the personal sector (for example as demutualisation shares were sold). In either case, demand forconsumption goods and services could be fuelled and a stimulus provided to investment ifthe cost ofcapital were reduced by further rises in financial asset prices. Alternatively, OFIs' demand for money might have increased because portfolios had been adjusted to achieve desired asset allocations following the sharp rise in equity prices. In that case, intermediaries would not seek to reduce their money holdings unless financial asset prices fell, changing the value of their portfolios and relative prices. The Committee's view was thatbecause so much of the recent acceleration in M4 was attributable to OFIs' holdings, it was perhaps less alarming than ifthe acceleration had been concentrated in either the personal or company sectors, but it represented an upside risk to the inflation outlook nevertheless. The Committee discussed the outlook for consumption and the effect ofwindfall gains to the personal sector via demutualisation, reviewing its analysis at earlier meetings. On the basis of half-yearly growth rates, consumption had been growing at over 4% per annum for more than ayear. A number of factors could plausibly explain this. Household wealth had increased rapidly, via the asset price appreciation discussed in thecontext ofmoneydemand. Consumer confidence remained at almost record levels. Short-maturityreal interest rates had, during 1996 and early 1997, been relativelylow for that point in the cycle. Strong consumption was not therefore asurprise even in the absence of the windfalls. The effect ofthe windfalls on consumption dependedupon the circumstances ofhouseholds and the pattern ofspending. The Committee's assessment was based on a view thathouseholds which were not constrained in their access to credit would treat the windfalls as providing an annuity income. Nevertheless,in theshort run spendingon durable goods- for example cars, furniture, major household appliances- might be boosted. This was a form of investment since durable goods were not instantly consumed, but were paid for upfront, increasing measured consumption expenditure. A minority of householdswere, however, judged likelyt o be credit-constrained. They would be morelikely to increase consumption bymorethan the annuity value when windfallshare allocations were sold for cash or used as newly available collateral for loans. Oncethese initial effects had worked their waythrough, growth in consumption should revert to a rate unaltered by windfalls, though the level ofconsumption would be higher because ofthe annuity effect. The emergingevidence was broadlyconsistent with this story. Retail sales had been strong again in June after a very strong May. The less timely data on sales of durable goods did not show a marked pick-up, but there was a lot ofanecdotal evidence suggesting strength. Though the Bank's analysis seemed consistent with developments so far and with survey evidence, substantial uncertainties remained and the Committee agreed that Bank staffshould encourage further surveys designed to find out how people had in fact used the windfalls once they had been received. The Committee noted that developments in consumer borrowing might also be linked to the windfalls. Unsecured consumer borrowing had been very strong and continued to accelerate. These loans might have been taken out in anticipation ofthe prospective increase in realisable wealth, with growth in unsecured borrowing accelerating as equity prices - and so the value ofwindfalls - rose. It would therefore be important to monitor future patterns o fconsumer credit. The Committee agreed that the windfalls were most likely to have their largest effect on consumption during 1997, and that this should be reflected in the central projection incorporated in the Inflation Report. There was in addition an upside risk from the possibility that there are more credit- constrained households than the Bank had assumed and, separately, from the possibility that behaviour would be affected by expectationso ffurther demutualisations in the future; this risk remained even after the vote of members ofthe NationwideBuilding Society against demutualisation. A more important upside risk to the longer-run inflation outlook stemmed from the rise in wealth brought about by the rise in financial asset prices. The Committee reviewed their July discussion of the effect of the fiscal position. Fiscal contraction had been in place for some time as a result ofBudgets in 1993 and later years, including the most recent Budget in July. The general government deficit was expected by the Government to fall from 4% ofGDP in 1996/97, to 1 1/2% in 1997/98, and to virtual balance the next financial year. It was likely to restrain demand, although the incidence of some ofthe recent measures was delayed. The precise effect, including its timing, was alsouncertain. The assumption made in the Bank's inflation forecast would be thatthe nominal spending control total was met. The Committee reviewed the recent behaviour of sterling. At the close ofbusiness on 6 August it had appreciated by about 5% in effective terms since the May InflationReport, and sobyaround nearly 24% during the previous twelve months. There had been, in comparison, relatively little change since the Committee'slast meeting, though the Committee noted that sterlinghad been volatile in the immediate run-up tothe meeting on account ofspeculation about what it would decide. Looking at the period since May, the Committee observedthat around half of the appreciation was consistent with changes in UK and overseas yield curves (assuming no change in any exchange rate risk premium and in the long run no change in the real exchange rate) and so did not reflect any extra tightening of monetary conditions beyond what was already implied by the yield curves themselves. This element ofthe pound's appreciation could be expected to unwind gradually on the assumption of uncovered interest parity. Explanations of the remainder ofthe appreciation since May were difficult to identifyand assess. It was widely suggested by commentators that it partly reflected portfolio shifts associated with uncertainty about EMU, possibly reducing any risk premium on sterling relative to some other European currencies. Some corroboration for this explanation was offered by the weakness of the Deutsche Mark against other currencies, including notably the US dollar. It was possible that the EMU outlook would become clearer during the coming months, ni which case some of the upward pressure on sterling might be alleviated. However,this couldnot be counted on. IfEMU did not lie behind mucho f sterling's appreciation, it was even less obvious what kind ofnews would affect its level. The Committee agreed that the central projection in the Inflation Report should be based on the assumption that sterling would depreciate by slightly more than would be implied byuncovered interest parity (based on the assumption ofconstant UK interestrates), reflecting agradual and partial unwinding of that element of the appreciationover the last year that was not associated withchanges in relative yield curves. The Committee noted that surveysof business opinion were now showing consistently that export orders were suffering significantly from sterling's rise. The trade performance so farthis year had been apuzzle, but the Committee thought it likelythat the effects of the appreciation would soon be evident inthe data. It wasagreedthat the forecast should incorporate a significant impact from net trade on output duringthe coming year,and that this should feedprimarily into the central projection rather than just as a downsiderisk toinflation. On the other hand, the possibility ofa rapid unwinding of sterling's appreciation representeda n upsiderisk for inflation. The Committee expressed considerable concern about sterling's level and its unbalancing effects on the economy. While members viewed estimates of equilibrium real exchangerates as highly uncertain, it seemed likely that sterling was overvalued. This was at the heart ofthe dilemma discussed at the Committee's previous two meetings and really had two aspects. First, sterling's appreciation was leading t o unbalanced activity, with business judgements about how to react made very difficult by theuncertainty over how long the appreciation would persist. Secondly, it posed adilemma for monetary policy. As discussed in previous Inflation Reports, the appreciationwould have a 'one-off' effect on the price level via import prices and the impact on external demand, and so only a temporary effect on inflation, assuming that sterlingstopped rising and graduallydeclined. But meanwhilethere werepowerful forcesfuelling underlying nominal demand which, ifleft unchecked,would eventually emerge in higher inflation and inflation expectations. Some action toalleviate underlying inflationary pressures had already been taken in the form of the 75 basis points increase in official interest rates since May. The Committee reviewed whether it needed to makeany further changes now in thelight ofthe inflation forecast. Without afurther tightening in monetary conditions, the Committee agreed that the most likely outcome was that inflation would be above the Government's inflation target of 2 1/2% at the Bank's forecast horizon of two years. In addition, the risks to inflation were skewed on the upside, and inflation was likely to be on an upward trend at the end of the periodcovered by the forecast. A 25 basis points increase in rates would reduce the central projection to broadly in line with the target but leave the risks skewed on the upside. TheCommittee agreed thata furthertightening ofmonetary conditions was, on current evidence, needed to put the economy on a course consistent with theinflation target. Before reaching its immediate decision, however, the Committee felt that the policy dilemma was sufficiently acute that it should considerwhether therewere, as is sometimes suggested, alternative policy instruments that might help to resolve the dilemma without introducing unacceptable distortions. Apart from quantitative credit controls, these were of three maintypes: (i)variable reserve requirements on the banking system; (in)changes to debt management; (ji) foreign exchange market intervention. Under the firstheading, Bank staff had examinedthe circumstances in which a call for special deposits from the banking system, which would need to be unremunerated and so act as a tax, would be passed on as an increase in loan rates, while limiting upward pressure on the exchange rate. Borrowers who did not have alternative sources of credit - notably individuals and small businesses - wouldthen be likely to choose to borrow less, and that could restrain spending. But the staffanalysis pointed out that in the current financial environment measures ofthis kind weremost unlikely to be effective. If temporary, the cost might well be absorbed by banks rather than passed on totheir customers. Alternatively, if the cost ofcredit was increased, credit flows were likely to be diverted heavily into unaffected channels given the financial liberalisations ofthe past twenty years. In addition, any expectation of future use of the instrument would create market uncertainty and have serious disincentive andinefficiency effects. The Committee agreed with theanalysis and rejected this course. 63 Nor did the Committee see much attraction in recommending to the Government a change in government debt management policy objectives towards restraining broad monetary growth, either by selling more debt than needed to finance the Government's deficit, ie overfunding, or by skewing the pattern ofissuance to stocks likely to appeal todomestic institutional investors, so possibly absorbing OFI liquidity. The Committee w a s not confident that such a change would contribute usefully to addressing the current policy dilemma. The Committee discussed thepossible merits ofintervention in the foreign exchange markets. Therew a s a consensus that intervention was worth contemplating but only if it was accompanied by credible actions to put the economy on a course consistent with the inflation target. In those circumstances, it could help to bringabout anadjustment in the exchange rate, which might otherwise be more protracted, Having concluded that monetary policy would need to be tightenedagain, the Committee consideredwhether to raiseinterest rates immediately. Arguments for not doing so were the advantages of waiting to gather more information and of avoiding the risk ofputting further upward pressure on the exchangerate. The main argument for moving immediately was the need to hit the inflation target. There was also the potential impact on expectations ofpublishing an Inflation Reportthat, on unchanged rates, would combine a view that the most likely outturn at the two year forecast horizon was that RPIX inflation would be above the 2 1/2% target withthe risks to inflation clearly skewed on the upside. That would create a clear risk of damaging credibility and so increasing inflationary expectations, and of putting further upward pressure on the exchange rate by causing the market to revise upwards their expected path ofinterest rates. By tightening by an extra 1/4 percentage point immediately and sopublishing an Inflation Report showing a central projection around 2 1/2% at the 2 year horizon, theBank might be able to reduce inflationpressures and soaffect market expectations that someo fthe upward pressure on sterling would be alleviated. This was the tacticaljudgement. The Committeeagreed that, on balance, it wasthebetter course and that the pressnotice announcing the move should reflectthe nature ofthe judgement. The Committee then voted unanimously in favour ofa 1/4 percentage point rise in the Bank's repo rate, to be announced immediately.