On June 24, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 89th meeting) in Beijing.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Chinese economy is basically controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged. The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments. Great support has been provided for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy. With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved. The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced tangible results, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly. Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks. So far, major progress has been secured in coordinating pandemic containment and work and production resumption, as marginal improvements have been witnessed in various economic indicators at home. However, the global pandemic and the world economy remains in a severe and complex situation, and preventing a resurgence of COVID-19 at home remains an arduous task, posing risks and challenges to China’s economic development.
It was pointed out at the meeting that it is essential to follow up the world’s economic   and financial developments, enhance the judgment and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and concentrate on running our own affairs well. The PBC will innovate and improve macro regulation, practice the sound monetary policy that is more flexible and appropriate, and put more emphasis on supporting the recovery and sustainable development of the real economy. The PBC will keep the aggregate at an appropriate level to drive a virtuous cycle between finance and the real economy and provide full support for “ensuring stability on the six fronts” (employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and “maintaining security in the six areas” (employment, people’s basic livelihood, market entities, food and energy, stability of industrial and supply chains, and smooth functioning of grassroots administration). A mix of new monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The structural monetary policy tools will be fully leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct accessibility” of policies. The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement new instruments to enable direct support for the real economy, and support eligible locally incorporated banks to defer repayment of loan principal and interest for inclusive MSB loans and to issue MSB credit loans. The financial supply-side structural reform will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their major businesses and responsibilities, advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness. The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform to drive down lending rates, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, especially for MSBs and private enterprises, and increase the proportion of MSB loans, credit loans and loans to the manufacturing sector. With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual cycles with the domestic cycle as the mainstay and international and domestic cycles facilitating each other. Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at the high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk control capability in an open economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, coordinate pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development, and adhere to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability with the pandemic containment becoming a normal. The PBC will strengthen the adjustments of macro policies, ensure the stability of enterprises and the security of employment, take solid steps to ensure stability on the six fronts and fully implement the task of maintaining security in the six areas. Efforts will be made to improve the coordination, transmission and implementation mechanisms for fiscal, monetary and employment policies, so as to effectively offset the impact of the pandemic on economic growth. The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans will be promoted in an orderly manner, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks, resolve risks in the course of reform and development, and hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur.
Yi Gang, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired the meeting. Monetary Policy Committee members including Lian Weiliang, Zou Jiayi, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, Pan Gongsheng, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin and Ma Jun attended the meeting. Ding Xuedong, Chen Yulu and Liu Wei took a leave of absence for duty calls. Representatives from PBC operations offices attended the meeting as observers.