Overall, careful evaluation of the economy’s responses was also needed, as these could be different from what had been the case in the past, particularly during the commodity super-cycle of the early 2010s.
Nonetheless, it agreed to assess a possible extension and changes in access parameters that would facilitate its use to respond to the needs of the economy at the present stage
In this scenario, the impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad was expected to remain moderate, with weak world growth prospects for both this year and next.
Nominal and UF-indexed 2-year bonds had accumulated significant increases, i.e., more than 70 bp in indexed ones since the previous Meeting, where the discussion around a possible transitory reduction of the VAT was among the main factors behind the correction.
In the latter, some impacts on bank credit to companies were already visible.
Accordingly, several central banks had intensified the shift towards the withdrawal of monetary stimuli.
Equally important were the scars that the pandemic would inflict on households and businesses—including the deterioration of their net worth—and its impact on the future dynamism of the economy.
From a demand-side point of view, although on aggregate neither consumption nor investment showed any significant deviations, the larger drop in private consumption of durable goods stood out.
This program considers the strengthening of incentives for the provision of bank credit to small and medium-sized enterprises, and to non-bank credit providers.
In the financial area, several banks surveyed reported less stringent lending conditions, reiterating also the low interest rate levels in place.
Looking ahead, medium-term inflationary pressures were still expected to be contained, in line with a greater widening of activity gaps as a result of the sanitary emergency, in addition to the fall in oil prices observed since the beginning of the year.
Some Board members noted that this option would be justified from a risk management perspective, especially as long as core inflation remained below the tolerance range and low inflation rates were expected for a significant period of time.
In the U.S., incoming data showed that activity was still resilient, with robust private consumption indicators, supported by the momentum that the labor market continued to provide, as well as the dynamics of saving and credit.
All the Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario had evolved as foreseen in March.
The option would always be present to pause and wait for more background data to enhance the diagnosis.
The movements of the former coincided with inventory reductions in the US, while in the latter they were mainly due to supply-side factors, including the markets’ reaction to OPEC announcements.
The Board members agreed that a macroeconomic scenario where activity was above potential and inflation was speeding up, needed monetary policy to continue to go from an expansionary stance to a more neutral one.
On the fiscal front, there was also increased spending packages in some economies, further swelling the debt of governments, in some cases to their bulkiest in decades.
About the labor market, various sources of information saw significant deterioration.
Despite the positive surprise on the mining side, activity in all other sectors had continued to fall at a gradual pace, consistent with what was anticipated in the June Report.
Activity and demand were still in their adjustment process after the strong imbalances accumulated in 2021, with second-quarter data showing declines in both investment and consumption.
In particular, it would place the MPR somewhat above the median of expectations, but within the corridor, which would give full credibility to the Report’s diagnosis and forecasts while, at the same time, it would reassert the Board decision to take every step necessary to ensure compliance with the inflation target.
The mixed signals coming from the labor market were also discussed.
Meanwhile, the neutral MPR had been revised downward by 25 basis points (bp), partly reflecting the fall in neutral rates around the world and despite the opposing effect that could be expected from the higher trend growth.
This process would occur in large part through the adjustment of private consumption and investment, in a context where the vision of a significant contraction in fiscal spending was maintained.
In this context, market expectations for growth as per the Economic Expectations Survey had been revised downward with respect to the information available at the closing of the last Meeting, to 2.8% and 3.2% for this and next year (from 3.2% and 3.4% at the previous closing, respectively).
The consumer confidence index (IPEC) remained in the pessimistic zone, but with some recent rebound.
However, in early March, turbulence in the U.S. and European banking systems abruptly changed the picture, introducing additional concerns.
Some participants added that while there was some degree of surprise about the pace of the economic recovery, the estimates of the current size of the gap and the evaluation of its implications for inflationary pressures were not very different from December’s scenario.
For April, the market estimated that inflation would stand between 0.1% and 0.2%.
All this, despite the strong improvement in the terms of trade during this period.
It was said that it was important to understand the motives behind these expectations, specifically whether they responded to a judgment on the Bank’s capacity to meet the inflation target or there were originated in a different view of the future evolution of the determinants of inflation..
The exchange rate had depreciated sharply (just over +20% since the last meeting), with high volatility.
In particular, because the futures for the Fed funds rate indicated that they would be kept for a longer period and would be reduced more gradually than expected some time ago, while for the monetary policy rate (MPR), although it had changed in the meantime, the trajectory expected by market prices was similar to the one considered last December.
High-frequency figures for the second quarter — credit and debit cards transaction records (Transbank) and imports data— showed that this spending component was stabilizing at the margin.
Central banks and governments had maintained their efforts or made additional economic policy announcements, holding on to their highly expansionary tone.
In this scenario, doubts about when the Fed would begin reducing the interest rates were the main factor behind the movements of global financial markets.
First, a shift from a coordinated global cycle to one that could be quite unsynchronized, especially between China and the United States.
The March Imacec had risen 6.4% annually, having decreased only 1.6% with respect to February, despite the fact that in that month the number of quarantined people had soared to more than 80% of the national population.
In the financial sector, some improvements in supply and demand conditions were reported.
Thus, improved conditions were observed in the North and a more depressed situation in the South.
This occurred in a context where, despite no major surprises in U.S. activity, the markets had intensified their perception that the U.S. economy could slow down more rapidly.
In seasonally adjusted terms, it had risen 2.6% over its April value, showing growth in most economic sectors.
In contrast, consumption had sustained the expected dynamism.
The different measures of expectations for the monetary policy rate (MPR) i.e.
Among other things, the increase in the cost of medium and long-term financing for all types of agents, the fall of the stock market and the depreciation of the peso drew special attention.
Long-term interest rates had shown mixed movements.
There was consensus that the accumulated information brought no surprises with respect to the last Meeting and to expectations contained in the March Report.
Fears about the performance of the world economy, the potential vulnerabilities of some banks and the evolution of credit in developed economies were particularly noteworthy.
All the Board members agreed that this policy response should contemplate extending the current monetary stimulus and taking measures to safeguard the normal functioning of the credit markets and the effective transmission of the greater monetary impulse.
In this sense, it was to be expected that uncertainty would remain relatively high, beyond some reduction.
For this, it was important to analyze the credit markets separately, to figure out how the liquidity injected in one place ended up flowing to another.
All five Board members agreed that the information gathered since the publication of the last Monetary Policy Report outlined a central scenario in which medium-term inflationary pressures would gradually ease in line with expectations.
It was pointed out that the worsening of the economic outlook was more pronounced for emerging economies, particularly because the perception of risk had increased and those countries perceived as most vulnerable had suffered massive capital outflows.
The mortgage segment had decelerated its real annual growth from 8.8% to 7.8%.
In any case, in the medium term, inflation expectations remained at around 3%, even though in the shorter term they were below the Bank’s projections.
June sectoral activity data (INE) showed a below-expected performance in some sectors.
On the other hand, it called for an assessment of the level of pass-through of the peso depreciation of the last few months and the role played by external prices, in a context of a weaker Chinese economy.
All the Board members agreed that at this point it was complex to assess the balance of these impacts, precisely because they were unfolding and were accompanied by higher-than-usual volatility.
Commodity prices moved primarily up.
The estimated impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad considered that our trading partners’ growth would be fairly the same as our previous projection —i.e., around 3% in the period 20242026—, with some improvement in international financial conditions, including low long-term interest rates and somewhat lower terms of trade.
In addition, the risks in the external scenario were high and more drastic adjustments of interest rates in the developed world could not be ruled out, which, if materialized, would further deteriorate the external impulse relevant for Chile.
In August, the seasonally-adjusted total and non-mining Imacec had fallen compared to previous month, due to one-off factors that had affected educational services.
However, medium-term expectations for investment remained less favorable, as suggested by the evolution of the stock market and uncertainty indicators, the abrupt deterioration of local financial conditions, as well as cash management decisions made by big companies.
Moreover, the economy was still immersed in a context where uncertainty was higher than it had been until a couple of years ago and where the prospects for investment and growth were constrained for the coming years.
Just as it had been argued in the Monetary Policy Report, the complex external scenario was already having an impact on Chile, with opposing effects on exports and capital inflows, while the copper price had remained fairly stable.
Incoming international data showed a continuing recovery, consolidating the outlook for this year.
From the monetary standpoint, several central banks had made further cuts in their benchmark rates and incorporated/extended non-conventional measures, which included different provisions for credit support to firms, asset purchase programs, among others.
This change in the rate differential was generating uncertainty in a market where some medium and long-term investors were less present.
Based on this corridor, to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target within the policy horizon, in a few months the MPR had to stand between 275 and 325 basis points above its level prior to this Meeting (2.75%).
It was noted that the effect of the higher oil price on the short-term inflation projections, without being negligible, was not a big factor in this risk assessment.
Whether at the level of countries, economic sectors and/or socioeconomic groups, there were considerable differences in the way the pandemic had impacted their economic situation, which posed challenges as to how to manage the level of monetary and fiscal stimuli without generating imbalances that would put the economy at risk.
For this reason, there was no conclusive information that would allow judging that the beginning of a potential cycle adjustment in the labor market was underway.
This suggested, in part, that agents had adapted better to the sanitary context, which was also expected to be reflected in a lower impact of the quarantines in April and May, which was already evident in the data on mobility, electricity generation and sales with digital invoices and receipts.
Since the March meeting, stock market indexes had risen and risk premiums in an important group of economies (EMBI and CEMBI) had fallen further, while most currencies had appreciated against the dollar and capital was flowing into the emerging bloc.
This difference could be linked to the exchange rate appreciation of previous quarters, whose effects still dominated over those of the most recent depreciation.
This suggested that the MPR would be kept at its minimum level over most of the two-year monetary policy horizon, and that unconventional measures would remain in effect.
According with the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the third quarter, demand for credit had strengthened in most segments.
Core inflation, as measured by the CPIEFE, had been more subdued, but it was expected to accelerate over the months.
In this context, inflation expectations showed no big change.
In this context, the outlook for growth (EES) for this year continued to be revised upwards (4% in July, 3.8% in June), while for the next two years they had changed little and stood at 3.8%.
However, the indicators showed that there were still significant risks latent associated with such an unprecedented shock.
On the one hand, there was the risk of a more abrupt deterioration of the external scenario, with greater implications for Chile.
The Capital Goods Survey showed an increase in major projects for this and next year, with mining projects standing out.
In the volatile component --also unexpectedly high--, the contribution of fuels and some specific items, such as tourist packages, continued to stand out.
In addition, the Internet Job Postings Index was at its highest of the last five years, the annual variation of real wages was close to its 2019 values and employment expectations (IMCE) were in optimistic territory.
However, the validity of one or another path would only be solved in the light of the evolution of the economy.
The Board considered reducing the MPR by 25 or 50 basis points, quickly discarding the latter.
This contrasted with the deterioration of business expectations (IMCE) and capital goods imports.
In Mexico, at the statistical cutoff date, the proposals announced by the newly-elected government generated uncertainty at the fiscal level, while the expansion projections for Argentina had been cut due to the narrowing of monetary conditions, beyond the positive surprise from first-quarter GDP.
In the profile of activity during the year, a somewhat stronger-than-expected fourth quarter had been observed, confirming the transitory nature of previous quarter’s slowdown.
That is, in recent months annual CPI inflation had remained around 2%, both in its headline and core measures.
In terms of inflation, beyond seasonal increases, the numbers remained contained in the developed world, as did its outlook.
Consumer expectations (IPEC) had improved from the previous Meeting, but were still in pessimistic territory.
Thus, a scenario was outlined in which the financial constraints in the developed world would last longer, so the inflationary problem in those economies could be tackled.
In any case, all GFCF components continued to contract year by year.
At the same time, beyond the magnitude of the MPR cut at this Meeting, the change was consistent with the expectations of the markets, which also saw the need to lower the MPR.
In any case, the assessment of the macroeconomic scenario suggested that the inflationary pressures facing the economy were lower than they had been six months earlier.
Increasing the MPR by 25 basis points was also consistent with signals previously delivered and internalized by the market.
All five Board members agreed that the underlying factors that generated uncertainty and influenced the evolution of economic activity and inflation were outside the scope of macroeconomic policies, despite the fact that they could help to mitigate their negative impacts somewhat.
In this context, the Chinese authorities had continued to announce and implement stimulus measures to stabilize the economy into the near future.
For example, the inflationary outlook in the United States was discussed, together with how an increase could lead to faster interest rate hikes in the US, affecting global financial conditions.
As for the latter, there was no doubt that the economy was adjusting.
Towards the end of 2022 and the turn of 2023, markets had become more optimistic, betting on a smooth inflationary control and practically no recession.
The backdrop for this was higher uncertainty regarding several more structural global factors.
In Latin America, economic recovery was lagging, reflecting quite diverse epidemiological, economic and social realities, which also reflected differences in countries’ policy responses.
However, the latter’s reversal of recent days was also mentioned, in the midst of the discussion about the withdrawal of funds from the pension funds.
External financial markets had reduced their appetite for risk, considering, mainly, the aforementioned elements, doubts that had also triggered a higher degree of volatility in the markets recently.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa, and Naudon voted for lowering the MPR by 25bp, to 1.75%.
Also noted was the surge of new geopolitical risks, more difficult to evaluate or anticipate.
The central scenario of the March Monetary Policy Report had revised upward the GDP growth forecast for 2023.
The central scenario of the September Monetary Policy Report considered that our trading partners would grow by an average of 2.6% in 2022 and 2023, i.e., less than expected in the previous Report.
However, this period had been of short duration and its effects had not been very persistent.
In it, it was noted that since the previous Report, both headline and core inflation had remained around 2%, within a context where the macroeconomic outlook had weakened, increasing the risks concerning the timely convergence of inflation to 3%.
It was added that, however, the most important change was in risks, since the likelihood of scenarios of a more marked deviation of inflation had decreased significantly.
And there was no great concern about the recent exchange rate movements in the opinion of many respondents.
Regarding financing conditions, there were interest rate reductions in all portfolios and increases in the real annual variation of commercial and mortgage loans.
About consumption, durables maintained a better performance than nondurables, despite some moderation in recent data, including automobile sales —which in any case were still growing at double-digit annual rates.
Despite some moderation, inflation expectations two years ahead remained above 3%.
In this context, a major challenge would be to maintain the impulse of monetary and fiscal policy, as well as the ability to safeguard financial stability, until the economy was able to achieve a self-sustained growth rate, reducing the gaps and frictions that still remained.
The macroeconomic scenario continued to evolve driven by the spread of Covid-19 and the containment measures needed to protect the populations’ health.
MPR expectations for the end of this year stood at 8% in the case of the EES and at 8.25% according to the FTS.
They added that the sectors where one could assume greater participation of these groups were not those that showed the greatest changes in wage expansion.
All five Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario in which the monetary policy decision was based was virtually a continuation of that in the September Report, meaning that the economy had regained its ability to grow and its capacity gaps were narrowing.
It was added that this also indicated that the economy’s adjustment was progressing in line with expectations, although this was a matter that needed to continue to be carefully monitored.
The Business Perceptions Report, for which data had been collected up to October 18, reported that the business performance of most respondents had been similar to or somewhat better than the previous quarter, with results that were mostly in line with expectations.
In the rest of these economies, the total figures had shown mixed movements, although core inflation remained contained or exhibited some moderation in the margin.
All this certainly contributed to explaining the upward surprises in headline inflation and why core inflation had persisted between 10.5% and 11% in annual terms for several months.
Meanwhile, the global economic outlook was complex, given the high inflationary persistence worldwide and the rate hikes decided by the main central banks.
All five Board members agreed that the new combination of precedents justified the need to increase the monetary stimulus.
In this sense, initiating the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus at this meeting favored a more gradual convergence to the neutral rate, which bought more time to consider the necessary pauses and flexibility that might be required later on.
In local financial markets, the depreciation of the peso stood out, close to 4.5% since the June Meeting, standing at around $ 660 per dollar, in line with the fall in the copper price and the global appreciation of the dollar.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted for holding the MPR at its technical minimum of 0.5% while strengthening the policy orientation, noting that the MPR will be kept at that level over the entire policy horizon.
Discrepancies between the Fed and market projections for the U.S. monetary policy continued to leave room for possible financial turmoil, as did the discussion around the U.S. government’s debt limit.
On the one hand, it was consistent with the path judged necessary for inflation convergence in the Report’s central scenario, and at the same time it allowed room for additional hikes of a smaller magnitude that could be calibrated with information of the months ahead.
Finally, it was also mentioned that a movement in this direction would be completely unexpected and would give an unwarranted sign of urgency regarding the concern about upward deviations of inflation, much less now that CPIEFE inflation had not even reached 2%.
For this reason, there was coincidence that, rather than postponing monetary policy decisions pending the eventual dissipation of threats, the wise thing to do was to remain alert to the unfolding of events and be prepared to respond to the materialization of risks, especially those that involved a contractionary shock on the Chilean economy.
Considering the related risks, it was noted that neither option clearly dominated over the other, and the data that would be known before the next IPoM would help to better gauge their implications.
On the other hand, the fall in the stock of consumer loans was consistent with the increase in household liquidity provided by pension fund withdrawals and transfers from the Treasury.
Both the EES and the FTS anticipated a reduction of 75 basis points (bp) in the monetary policy rate (MPR) for this Meeting.
Capital inflows to emerging economies had tended to moderate, with marginal outflows from Latin America.
This could have complex effect on exchange rate dynamics and commodity prices.
Incoming data on activity had surprised on the downside, with both regular consumption and investment being weaker than expected.
Meanwhile, in the Eurozone it had been announced that the monetary policy framework would be revised during 2020, which could result in an extension of the current mandate of the European Central Bank.
No country in the world had been spared, so most of them were experiencing significant drops in activity this year.
However, the level of consumption would remain below the previous forecast throughout the projection horizon, which explained the expected behavior of domestic demand.
The Brent–WTI average oil price had risen by 10% since the March Meeting, owing mainly to the geopolitical conflicts.
The labor market showed some recovery from mid-year declines; however, the gaps that had been generated by the pandemic were still significant.
The fall in commodity prices was stressed, affecting not only those products most sensitive to the economic cycle, such as copper, but also foods and energy, whose supply forces had been decisive in recent months.
Interest rates in the fixed-income market, both real and nominal, had shown mixed behavior since the previous Meeting, with decreases in UF-denominated instruments, particularly at 2 and 5 years, and increases in the last week, in line with the international scenario and due to pension system affiliates shifting to riskier funds at the local level.
The recent operations of the Finance Ministry had affected performance of longer bonds.
The Board recalled that during the last several meetings a clear message had been delivered regarding the future evolution of the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR), that was, that the rate would be maintained at 11.25% until the state of the macroeconomy indicated that the convergence of inflation to 3% had been consolidated.
Provisions showed no big variations, and remained at their highest levels of several years.
Accordingly, labor income showed a strong recovery from year-before levels.
The central scenario foresaw that the economy would keep improving, that mobility restrictions would not return to mid-2020 levels, and that the fiscal and monetary impulse would continue.
In the United States, despite the recent resilience, a slowdown in activity was expected in the coming quarters.
At the same time, the Board decided to add an extra, unconventional boost of up to 10% of GDP by means of two measures.
Mining activity had declined from the previous month and year.
The two-year nominal rates spike of nearly 110 basis points (bp) stood out, explained by factors such as the change in the economic and monetary policy outlook, especially after the publication of the June Meeting minutes.
Finally, the faster than expected advancement of the fiscal consolidation objectives was worth noting as a positive development in the domestic scenario.
During the policy horizon, the different measures had revised upwards the expected MPR level.
This was especially complex in a context where the political cycle was introducing more uncertainty about the future evolution of the economy, particularly because of its impact on investment.
The US-China trade conflict had intensified, which, coupled with the cyclical state of the US economy and its difference from that of other developed economies, had caused a global appreciation of the dollar and a fall in commodity prices.
trend and potential growth, activity gap and neutral interest rate).
All of this occurred in a context in which headline and core inflation were still low, particularly in their components more closely linked to said gap.
Increased prices of fuels and some foodstuffs had raised inflation of the volatile component to 7.5% annually.
Attention was drawn to the context of much greater uncertainty, which had become persistent and was having negative consequences on investment, trade and other important macro variables.
Considering the frequency of the monetary policy meetings under the rules in place since 2018, this translated into the MPR needing to be raised by between 50 and 75 basis points (bp) over several meetings, making them the plausible options for this occasion.
The options of raising the MPR by 75 or 150bp seemed less plausible to the Board, because they carried a surprise component that could be complex for the market to understand.
If this were compounded by the greater stability of long-term interest rates, the outlook for global financial conditions was very positive.
The services component continued to be more stable.
The IPSA accumulated slim gains and the sovereign risk premium (CDS) showed some decline.
On the one hand, there was the still complex epidemiological evolution, which added uncertainty to the timing and manner in which sanitary restrictions would be eased.
The discussion focused on the behavior of shorter-term UF-denominated interest rates —typically more closely linked to the business cycle—, which had risen significantly in recent months, the origin of which was unclear, but which could end up having a significant impact on the economy.
In June, headline inflation had been in line with forecasts in the last IPoM.
It was argued that neither risk scenario was imminent and neither dominated over the other.
He further noted that although this corridor was created to factor in the uncertainty about the future evolution of the MPR, on this occasion he could ascertain that that it would remain at its technical minimum for several quarters.
However, it did raise a red flag, as it could somehow mean that the transmission of the idiosyncratic peso depreciation was not evolving with the intensity expected in December, or that disinflationary pressures were more acute than expected.
In this context of more persistent inflation, all the Board members agreed that it required a more restrictive monetary policy —in both nominal and real terms— than had been anticipated in the June MP Report.
The main argument for this option was that the evolution of macroeconomic conditions and their immediate prospects were sufficient to push inflation to 3%, which warranted beginning the monetary policy rate normalization shortly.
Plus, the announcements of new fiscal packages, particularly in the United States, which had driven stock market hikes globally, increases in long-term interest rates in developed economies, capital inflows to emerging economies and commodity price rises.
Contributing to this was the behavior of consumption, the fact that investment had picked up somewhat and that the labor market remained resilient.
About the external front, it was said that, far from being resolved, commercial conflicts and political uncertainty in the main economies of the world had intensified and extended into new dimensions of economic relations across countries.
In any case, they stressed the improvements in sanitary indicators and the possibility that stricter containment measures might be relaxed over a shorter time horizon, something that was not thought possible just a few weeks back.
One Board member mentioned that this option could also be valid if less negative effect it would have on the already plummeting investment was considered.
Board members commented on the rationality of the assumption for the MPR’s trajectory as a reference for the Board’s discussion.
The global growth outlook for 2023 remained weak, despite a small upward adjustment.
Both the FBS and the EES estimated that the MPR would not be raised any sooner than May 2021, while asset prices saw it rising by December that year.
This could occur due to the importance of energy as a production input or due to the indexation processes to which the economy was subject.
This was much more consistent with the Report’s baseline scenario and associated risks, allowing for greater certainty regarding the convergence of inflation to 3% in the policy horizon.
Another was that consumer loans were decelerating rapidly, suggesting a more cautious behavior of households, together with credit constraints that were perhaps becoming more stringent on the credit suppliers’ side.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to reduce the MPR by 50 basis points, to 2.5%.
Long-term interest rates —BCP and BCU at 5 and 10 years— saw sharp decreases in the days following the June Meeting, of between 30 and 40 basis points.
Medium- and long-term fixed income rates had declined sharply.
In any case, both large companies and SMEs perceived an increase in their need for working capital.
Therefore, it was still premature to think that the inflationary problem had been solved, so the Bank should remain watchful for developments in the macroeconomic scenario.
It was noted that the conduct of monetary policy was based not only on analyzing inflation, but it also had a component of economic growth.
Board member Céspedes voted for reducing it by 125 basis points.
In the Eurozone, the outlook remained negative, due largely to the impact of the energy crisis and the tightening of financial conditions.
Regarding the price of a barrel of oil, WTI and Brent showed opposite movements (of the order of +5.8 and -3.4%, respectively), significantly reducing the spread between the two.
The evolution of both indicators had been lower than foreseen in the December Report.
In domestic spending, private consumption indicators had continued to consolidate the expected adjustment path.
It had the advantage of clearly stating that, despite how important the shock on inflation was, it was transitory, and monetary policy could accommodate it by further reducing the MPR in the quarters ahead.
Inflation kept rising steadily, to more than 6.5% annually, due mainly to the exceptional expansion of domestic demand and the depreciation of the peso caused by local factors.
It was added that, beyond the Bank’s active response to the strong inflationary outbreak, it was evident that inflation was still high and that its local drivers, particularly consumption, was yet to show clear signs of normalization, beyond the fact that investment showed a clear weakness.
This was associated with the increased household liquidity and the gradual reopening of the economy.
On the supply side, credit constraints had eased for large companies while mortgage lending conditions had tightened somewhat.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for holding the MPR at 0.5%.
All five Board Members agreed that, as the MPR approached its target level, tactical considerations took on greater prominence when evaluating monetary policy options.
However, all the Board members agreed that given the distance that still existed with respect to the neutral interest rate, these considerations were not an obstacle for the two policy options proposed at this meeting (i.e.
On the other hand, such two-step cut could be construed as a scenario that required a reduction of more than 50 bp, which was neither consistent with the Report’s baseline scenario.
Although limited, activity and inflation brought some upward surprises which, coupled with the more positive tone of the external scenario, spurred some concerns about the speed of the economic adjustment and its implications for the convergence of inflation.
The Imacec data for November showed the impact of specific supply-related factors -in sectors such as fishing and mining-, as well as unexpected and transitory disruptions in manufacturing output.
The different market expectations (i.e.
In the former, the persistent contraction of installment loans stood out again.
On the one hand, the somewhat stronger domestic demand, in a context where the higher copper price boosted up the terms of trade.
On the other, the data on pension-fund contributors showed that formal salaried employment had made a full recovery.
Argentina had officially entered a recession in the third quarter of 2018 and partial figures for the fourth quarter pointed to a new contraction.
In contrast, they assigned greater relevance to the costs that could involve a decision that was not backed by a sufficient analysis and projections.
In several regions, construction and real estate were also among the hardest hit.
One of them pointed out that, given the evolution of the macro scenario, this option was not consistent with the monetary policy path required for inflation to converge to the 3% target within two years.
This larger than anticipated drop significantly reversed an earlier trend in which private consumption fell less than projected.
On the day of the Meeting, the metal was trading at around US$3.7 per pound.
In the country, it was mentioned that the unfolding of the macroeconomic scenario was in line with the central scenario of the March MP Report.
The same Board member added that, nevertheless, at the same time there was the risk of it being perceived as the reflection of a more severe situation than had been estimated in the MP Report’s central scenario, which could drive up the entire interest rate curve to undesirable levels.
In fact, both activity and inflation were somewhat higher than expected in December, while inflationary pressures stemming from abroad had increased.
Consumer expectations (IPEC) continued to be pessimistic, with a slight decline in their last figure, especially due to the increase in inflation.
Increased risk aversion had led to declines in world stock markets, while the dollar had appreciated sharply against other currencies and long-term interest rates had shown mixed movements.
However, some early indicators and qualitative background suggested downside risks for the coming months.
On the other hand, fourth-quarter exports had fallen in annual terms, mainly due to supply-side factors that had affected industrial and mining shipments, while agricultural shipments had risen.
On the other hand, news about inflation was not encouraging either.
Inflation expectations two years ahead remained between 2.8% and 3%.
He concluded by noting that the cost of making mistakes in this sense could be high, since it would imply that within a few months a much more steep path of future rates would have to be communicated.
All the Board members agreed that the proper monetary policy conduct implied meeting the inflationary target efficiently, i.e., at the lowest possible cost in terms of activity.
In the labor market, workforce remained abundant, but most respondents did not foresee big changes in their staffing.
However, around a third of the analysts polled in the EES and almost half of the analysts polled in the FTS expected a cut of 100bp or more.
The risk that emerged in this area was about the growth capacity of the world economy, because it could hardly be thought that monetary policy, or other countercyclical measures, had the capacity to continue providing an impulse of the same magnitude as in the past.
It was pointed out that tighter financial conditions than what was being perceived was a risk for the future evolution of activity, the gap and inflation.
On the one hand, INE data showed the unemployment rate at around 10%, high inactivity —which had even risen in May— and employment affected in all its categories.
As for commodities, the price of copper had remained virtually flat since the September Meeting, combining inventory depletions and reduced imports globally.
Or two, with a 50 bp reduction and a neutral bias stating that the next MPR movement will hinge on how certain the Board is about the convergence of inflation to the target.
The median of October’s Economic Expectations Survey (EES) yielded an estimated fall in GDP of 5.5% this year, albeit with a high dispersion of responses.
If it proved persistent in time, it could erode their solvency position, in particular that of SMEs, which would adversely affect economic activity and the labor market.
In the Eurozone, Germany again stood out among the most hurt, with further worsening exports data.
March inflation had been 0.2%, slightly below market expectations (by around one tenth of a point).
First-quarter GDP growth in the Eurozone also slowed down from the quarter before, in line with market forecasts and activity indicators that had lately been unexpectedly low in general.
From the expenditure side, the adjustments in consumption- and investment-related high-frequency indicators continued, including retail trade, imports, and low construction activity.
Although some correction was to be expected, it was clear that on average they would be well above estimates of just a few weeks before.
There was a more positive perception of investment across the different regions, especially those related to mining, forestry and salmon farming.
However, the risk of the possible consequences of high corporate indebtedness had risen.
Among them, the cycle’s maturing process, which had taken quite long; political pressures in different places; the risk of a trade war; and financial stress.
As for private inflation expectations, there was a decrease for the end of 2019 and one year ahead.
The activity gap was significantly revised upwards when removing the transitory effect on activity in the transport sector.
The evolution of the Covid-19 pandemic and the actions taken to contain it presented an unparalleled, massive shock on the global economy.
This situation contrasted with the limited pace of growth observed in the rest of the world, especially due to a greater-than-expected slowdown in China in the second quarter.
The movements in the local financial market remained aligned with expectations that monetary policy would become less contractionary, in a context where global markets had reflected a greater appetite for risk, with a global depreciation of the dollar, an increase in stock markets and a compression of risk premiums.
The reason for this was that in such a scenario inflation would fall gradually, and a relatively rapid decline in the MPR would allow the Bank to promptly produce negative real rates.
On the other hand, in a context of high short-term inflation and a weak economy in the medium term, keeping inflation expectations in line with the target was essential for monetary policy to be able to deal appropriately with this scenario.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 2.5%.
For this reason, and because of its alignment with market expectations for the macroeconomic outlook of the coming months, it was an option that ensured credibility and effectiveness.
The Bank Lending Survey for the first quarter showed that credit supply and demand had generally continued to weaken in all portfolios.
It was also noted that, although a mild revision to world growth could be good news for emerging economies, as it would imply that the main central banks would adopt more expansionary monetary policies, probably the effect of the interest rate decrease would be lower than in other circumstances.
In others, respondents pointed out that the highly volatile exchange rate had led them to postpone adjustments to final prices, and that the pass-through could begin to occur as the large inventories were used up.
Regarding the domestic scenario, it was noted that the most relevant surprise of recent times had been the dynamism of private consumption, which exceeded the already high estimates of September.
These changes were especially important given the risks characteristic of today’s world economy and the hypotheses that had been incorporated into the projections of the domestic scenario.
In addition, the June MP Report would contain an update of the structural parameters of trend growth and the neutral interest rate, which would allow for a reassessment of the activity gap and the degree of expansiveness of monetary policy.
Inactivity had risen substantially, which, together with the Employment Protection Law, had contained an even greater increase in the unemployment rate, although indicators of underutilization had worsened further.
The data showed that investment flows from non-residents were still on positive ground and recent bond issues abroad by both the government and companies had been successful, with no big increases in risk premiums.
However, they remained very sensitive to new information, in a context of greater uncertainty regarding future financial conditions.
At the same time, the outlook implicit in the prices of financial assets anticipated that the MPR would stand at 7.5% next December.
On this last point, abundant liquidity seemed to be playing an important role.
All the Board members agreed that this option was totally consistent with the baseline scenario in the June Monetary Policy Report and, in particular, with the monetary policy strategy outlined there.
They also agreed that the decision to hold the MPR at 1.75% dominated every other option.
Most recently, the latter had been overshadowed by the Coronavirus crisis.
If this was coupled with a still relatively appreciated real exchange rate, it became clear that the risks for inflation were still present.
In construction and other works, among other elements the upward correction of the CBC’s Project Survey reflected that a greater number of economic sectors had increased the number of initiatives for this and the next few years, adding to the high flows that continued to be projected for mining.
In any case, toward the end of the quarter some sectors had surprised positively, such as manufacturing and retail, pointing to some stabilization of the Chinese economy.
In this scenario, excessive tightening of local financial conditions could be counterproductive, and the Board would keep a watchful eye on economic developments.
Its evolution had received opposite influences: on the one hand, from lower activity in China and, on the other hand, from inventory levels, which remained tight.
The upturn was visible in the manufacturing and retail sectors, along with labor market information which, at the margin, was also more positive in some of them.
This scenario had been shaped amid low inventory levels, where replenishment was occurring gradually, and transportation costs ran high.
The main argument against this option was that raising the MPR at this Meeting would be unexpected and, consequently, confusing, opposing the desirable practices of a duly informed and anticipated policy.
Meanwhile, costs had risen for a fraction of interviewees, who attributed this to factors such as shortage of inputs and/or products for sale.
Bank credit remained tight, as could be seen in the performance of real loans in all portfolios.
The postponement of the interest rate cut in the US and the slower reductions central banks elsewhere had affected Chile's interest rate differential with other economies.
In that context, the central scenario of the June Report assumed that the first quarter’s drop in durable consumption represented an advance of the expected trajectory.
That only realized that it was on the right path and that information still had to be accumulated to assess whether the convergence of inflation to the 3% target had been consolidated.
Pending the March figure, which was to be known the day after the Meeting, the CPI’s annual variation had fallen to 11.9% in February, which was still well above the 3% target.
He recalled that in the past, shocks of this kind had generated a response of more—not less—expansionary monetary policy, despite the higher short-term inflation.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) of the fourth quarter again reported a decline in companies’ credit demand for investment and working capital purposes, while the supply was tighter, especially for SMEs.
As for the domestic financial market, it was pointed out that liquidity levels were still high, with interest rates aligned with the message of the MPR being kept at its technical minimum for an extended period and long-term rates that had fallen in response to the monetary policy announcements of the previous Meeting.
In addition, especially in the case of Chile, there was the progress of the vaccination process, which was expected to lead to a significant reduction in sanitary restrictions in the second half of the year.
It was said that, in fact, in recent days greater volatility had been observed and pressures had increased on those economies perceived as the weaker ones.
Primarily, its effects would be channeled through lower external demand and tighter financial conditions.
In this context, the Board had begun to reduce the monetary policy rate (MPR) at its July meeting, lowering it from 11.25% to 10.25%.
In the emerging world, China’s first-quarter GDP had remained as strong as the previous quarter and the mixed marginal numbers had continued to support the deceleration and rebalancing of activity foreseen for the next quarters.
In any case, all these variables remained well below pre-pandemic levels, while important risks remained concerning the performance of activity going forward, mainly considering the recent resurgence of Covid-19 in several countries, and restated confinements in some places.
At the local level, the outlook was somewhat more positive for investment, reflecting that, for now, the greater global uncertainty had not permeated the local economy so much.
The evolution of the local financial market had been marked by external and internal factors, with the latter predominating, possibly related to reduced local uncertainty.
All five Board members agreed that, given the evolution of the macroeconomic scenario and related risks, the MPR needed to move towards a more restrictive level, as reflected in the MPR corridor depicted in the December MP Report.
Local activity had performed below expectations in the June IPoM.
By then, the initial impact on private consumption of the third pension savings withdrawal, which was preliminarily estimated to be less than for the previous two, could also be assessed.
All the five Board members agreed that an increase of 25 basis points in the MPR was sufficiently robust to the different scenarios that had been analyzed for the economy and, therefore, made it the best option.
However, the negative shock caused by the pandemic was very significant, as reflected in the high number of persons and firms whose income source had been affected.
Its contents show that, in line with forecasts, domestic economic activity recovered its growth pace after taking a pause in the third quarter of 2018.
In the fixed-income segment, the 10-year nominal rate had risen by 30 to 40 basis points (bp) more than its developed-economy counterparts since the beginning of March.
In turn, the peso had appreciated more than other comparable currencies and had strengthened around 8% against the dollar.
At the same time, there were also very significant external risks.
Headline inflation had risen above forecasts in the last MP Report, standing at 5.3% annually at September.
Accordingly, the levels of retail activity and vehicle sales (ANAC) were high, while inventories, as reflected in the underlying trade index, had been significantly reduced.
In China, there were doubts concerning the magnitude that the slowdown of activity could achieve and the effectiveness of its stimulus policies, coupled with medium-term risks that might continue to incubate.
In any case, some related indicators had performed somewhat better than expected.
The March Report, where some more information would be available, would allow a better assessment of the implications of this surprise.
The latter had continued to put pressure on supply chains, which reinforced the view that their impact would last longer than previously expected.
In this scenario, the Fed had once again raised the benchmark rate at its September meeting with prospects that, without new developments, it would continue to advance in the monetary normalization.
This had been especially noticeable in countries displaying a more controlled epidemiological situation, either due to the effectiveness of their sanitary containment measures or to the progress of their vaccination programs, which had allowed them to proceed with their reopening plans.
Second, the necessary consistency between exchange rate intervention and monetary policy limited the room for rate reductions over the coming months, as speculation on the latter could generate the kind of volatility the intervention sought to avoid.
There was agreement that the two most important developments in the projection scenario suggested a path for the nominal MPR somewhat above that considered in March, as contained in the June IPoM.
Therefore, in the Board’s opinion, what had to be done was to analyze whether there were any clear signs of said process being consolidated.
The most recent activity and spending data had brought positive surprises, while measures to support its real-estate sector seemed to have reduced the likelihood of a severe contraction in the near future.
It was agreed that the evolution of the labor market required special attention.
The international outlook was still evolving favorably, with global growth projections consolidating steadily.
The change in perspectives on the private consumption side was stressed.
The signals obtained so far made the scenarios that marked the limits of the interest rate corridor of the June Report unlikely.
In particular, it was striking that external and domestic bond issues had eased off considerably since March, considering they had experienced high dynamism in the first few months of the year.
In the Eurozone, inflation had continued to decline, although service inflation remain high.
In his opinion, the degrees of uncertainty were important, and just as more negative scenarios could not be ruled out, neither could more positive scenarios be dismissed.
Salaried employment continued to slightly outpace self-employment.
It was pointed out that in recent weeks the external scenario seemed less adverse for the emerging world.
This latter view could be exacerbated by a decision to apply a 75bp reduction with a downward bias.
While respondents saw no major obstacles in refinancing or deferring existing loans, access to new loans was more difficult, particularly due to risk policies.
This was reasonably consistent with the difficulties in finding workers in certain sectors reported in the preliminary background information leading to the Business Perceptions Report.
In Latin America, despite rather improved confidence indicators in the margin, many economies had seen weak performance in the early part of the second quarter, as was evident in monthly activity figures.
There was consensus among the Board members that both options met the need to continue reducing the MPR, thus reflecting the economy’s progress in resolving the significant macroeconomic imbalances and the process of inflationary convergence.
Several Board Members considered that the option of raising the MPR by 125bp could be understood as being more consistent with risk assessment in terms of inflationary dynamics, while signaling more clearly the concern about the persistence of the deviation of two-year inflation expectations from 3%, the concern about a change in the dynamics of price adjustment by firms and the obvious need for the economy to adjust activity.
In this context, long-term interest rates in developed economies had fallen across the board, risk premiums remained contained and volatility indexes, after a temporary rise, were back to mid-June levels.
In the same context, the stock market returns had worsened and the peso, with ups and downs, had appreciated.
Financial conditions had improved in terms of rates.
In general terms, incoming news in recent weeks tended to confirm the view of the macroeconomic scenario adopted at the May Meeting, including the change in the monetary policy rate (MPR) trajectory anticipated at the moment.
One Board member thought it was appropriated to analyze the option of reducing the MPR by 150bp, but then added that it would be preferable to wait for the next MP Report to implement such a change in the monetary policy strategy.
For this Meeting they considered three options: (i) raise the MPR by 100 basis points (bp); (ii) raise the MPR by 125bp; and (iii) raise the MPR by 150bp.
It was discussed that, in this context, the economy was facing a particularly complex scenario of very significant risks.
And two, it could lead people to believe that the Bank was too lax regarding its commitment with the inflation target.
The decline in annual inflation was positive news.
Thus, part of this effect would be transmitted to the external sector via imports.
By sectors, trade continued to lead as the best performer.
The main arguments in favor and against of each of these options were the following: are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
In their opinion, one should not lose sight of the fact that inflation was still high and the reduction in the core was less marked, suggesting that inflationary pressures had not yet dissipated to a significant degree.
In short, this option was the most appropriate if the aim was to anticipate the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus and to gain room in the face of sensitive scenarios of higher inflation.
Bank credit continued to show poor dynamism.
It was agreed that the Bank had no limitations to act in the foreign exchange market, but that any action in this matter should be analyzed on its merits, referring to the functioning of such market and its potential repercussions on other segments of the financial market.
In the view of several Board members, the biggest difference stemmed from a tactical and communicational component: in particular, the need to inform the market of the change the Bank was observing in the macroeconomic scenario—which would be attained with the publication of the June Report—and to prepare it for the adjustments that would occur shortly.
The services CPIEFE was still low, while the goods CPIEFE had risen further.
All five Board Members agreed that the background information presented suggested that, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to 3% over the policy horizon, it would be necessary to have a higher MPR trajectory than the one estimated in the June Report.
Accordingly, the median of the July Economic Expectations Survey foresaw GDP growth in 2021 at 8.0% (7.0% in June).
In any case, the risks for inflation were perceived as unbiased, as the costs of inflation deviating above or below its convergence trajectory were assumed to be symmetrical.
These included opening a funding facility for the banks conditional on their increase in loans (FCIC), valid for six months, to grant credits charged to it over a term of up to four years with an initial loan amount equivalent to 3% of their commercial and consumer portfolios as reported by the Financial Market Commission (CMF) for 29 February 2020 (benchmark portfolio).
The discussion turned to the uncertainty surrounding the evaluation of structural parameters that sustained monetary policy (i.e.
Both of them satisfied the need to continue to make substantial cuts to the MPR, better reflecting the economy's progress in resolving the significant macroeconomic imbalances and the inflationary convergence process.
Governments, meanwhile, continued to implement substantial spending packages, often focusing on protecting the workers and sectors most affected by the current contingency.
In terms of activity, the conjunctural data and economic outlook of the Eurozone were still moderating and posting lower figures than the market expected, raising doubts going forward.
Since the previous Meeting, the price of most commodities had decreased, especially copper with a near 15% drop.
It was added that this evidence or feeling of capacity gaps in the labor market could be related, on the demand side, with a labor hoarding behavior on the part of companies, while, on the supply side, to the evolution of the labor supply and the participation of different components had been more dynamic than estimated, because, for example, of the strong contribution of immigrant workers.
Real wages continued to falter, in a context of still low demand for workers: the Internet Job postings index was under its historical average and companies hiring expectations (IMCE) remained low, amid persistent pessimism among consumers (IPEC) and entrepreneurs (IMCE).
Increases in demand were observed in all types of consumer goods, which in May was reflected in the strong monthly increase in the Retail Trade Activity Index and the Supermarket Sales Index (controlling for seasonality and at constant prices).
Thus, all these measures were around the upper limit of the MPR corridor in the December MP Report.
Regarding trade, a large number of respondents reported inventory shortages, increased demand and price hikes.
The creation of private salaried employment continued to be quite weak, while the public component showed some moderation at the margin.
Business (IMCE) and consumer (IPEC) confidence remained in pessimistic ground.
Regarding the local economy, the state of capacity gaps was discussed, in particular the different signals that could be seen by observing the evolution of activity, the different components of demand and the evolution of cost and price pressures.
The real exchange rate (RER), using the 1986=100 base measurement, was estimated to have approached 89 in April and in the first days of May, a level similar to those of the previous Meeting.
The Board ruled that the plausible options were an MPR cut of 25, 50, or 75 basis points.
In this sense, some services stood out, which could have been affected by the extension of quarantines, lagged openings and/or because part of them continued to be imputed.
The unemployment rate and the annual expansion of nominal and real wages continued to be around 7%, 4% and 1%, respectively.
Furthermore, the 50bp-cut option had the great advantage that it was widely expected, so it would cause no significant changes in market prices.
There were also lower prospects for world growth and tightened financial conditions.
In this context, the Board members coincided that the options of raising the MPR by 100 or 125 bp seemed to be the most appropriate.
One such challenge would be the capacity to implement a massive and efficient vaccination process, while following all sanitary measures, until the risks of contagion and its most severe impacts were well under control.
Regarding investment, the rebound in capital goods imports continued to give signs of recovery.
On the contrary, the goods component of the CPIEFE had been above expectations, although largely motivated by the tourist package item.
Some Board members said that the possible negative effect on demand would dominate in the evolution of inflation, while in the opinion of other Board members the effects on the productive capacity and the potential impact on demand of some proposals should not be ruled out, therefore the impact on inflation in the medium term was still uncertain.
In addition, the prospects for greater dynamism of investment and a strong expansion of private consumption suggested that this process would continue in the coming months.
While the peso depreciation put upward pressure on inflation in the short term, this was contained by the sharp fall in oil prices, while in the medium term, inflationary pressures were clearly determined by the weakening of the economy and increasing capacity gaps.
About the options of lowering the MPR by 25 or 50bp, all the Board members agreed that both were consistent with the baseline scenario and posed less communication problems because they left the door open to new adjustments given the expansionary bias considered in either of the two.
The National Statistics Institute (INE), meanwhile, reported that the percentage of imputed prices during the pandemic had continued to decline.
This continued to respond to the abundant household liquidity and advances in the reopening of the economy.
The GFCF growth forecast for the period 2024-2026 was somewhat lower than the one considered in June, reflecting the weak investment in the non-mining sectors.
All this occurred within the context of still pessimistic household and business confidence.
All five Board Members agreed that the background information accumulated since the last Meeting indicated that the MP should be further reduced.
One was the magnitude of the contribution of fiscal expansion to the cycle, as there could be tensions between short-term needs and medium- term sustainability of the fiscal accounts.
The large-scale investment project surveys stood out, showing a significant increase in the amounts foreseen for the upcoming years.
There were also differences across multiple sources of information.
Board member Pablo García voted for cutting 25 basis points off the MPR, to 2.25%, as he believed that what should prevail in monetary policy decisions in general were the macroeconomic fundamentals, which, in his opinion, suggested that the previous cut had not been enough because activity and demand indicators showed less-than-expected growth for the next few quarters; inflation was still low and had surprised with lower numbers in a large group of services; plus the external scenario was gradually weakening.
All the Board members noted that in favor of this option was the fact that it limited the risks about the convergence of inflation described in the last Monetary Policy Report, which were still fully present.
The financial markets had been strained by sharp price movements, which in some cases had gone beyond what one would expect given the country risk.
December’s inflation had been at -0.1%, affected mainly by a fall in the prices of its most volatile items.
Overall, growth prospects had not changed significantly for 2024-2025.
All in all, expectations about the economic situation of households one year ahead are still positive.
In particular, due to the upward revision of potential and trend growth, which occurred along with a fall in the neutral rate, in a context of low inflation and economic slowdown.
In any case, these figures were still considerably lower than historical ones and were below the previous year.
In previous meetings, this option had been justified mainly under a risk management argument to lower inflation that could affect its convergence to the goal in the policy horizon.
Containing inflationary pressures would require withdrawing the domestic demand stimulus measures deployed during the crisis.
For example, if the international scenario deteriorated further, as had happened in the past, an additional monetary push could be required, due to its medium-term disinflationary impact.
In addition, market expectations showed downward adjustments in the short term, while remaining in the two-year 3% target.
This, because although there was reason enough to think that the growth projection would be revised going forward, this derived in part from specific factors and it was still unclear how capable the economy was to resume a growth pace that would allow it to close the gap.
In addition, the data was difficult to interpret, particularly because of doubts about how much of it was due to the measures taken in association with the pandemic; how much was a reflection of something more persistent resulting from the scars of the crisis; and how much was simply statistical noise with no macroeconomic content.
The unemployment rate showed no major changes, while the annual change in real wages remained negative.
In the money market, the banks’ abundant liquidity in dollars kept the local cost of dollar financing contained.
Although some of this was due to some sector-specific factors, also noteworthy was the deceleration of consumption and a deterioration of its fundamentals, including the lower dynamism of private salaried employment, and that consumer expectations had fallen since early in the year.
It was said that it was important to try to figure out which factors were affecting the evolution of wages, because its effects on inflation looked different under the assumption that the biggest impact would be on costs or the wage mass.
The doubts regarding the projected evolution of the output gap and its implications for inflation and monetary policy were discussed.
All the Board members agreed that beyond the decision of this Meeting, the recovery of the economy and the achievement of the inflation target required monetary policy to remain expansionary during the coming quarters, lending counter-cyclical support to the economy.
The latter was partly linked to higher interest rates in the segment, a phenomenon that had also been mentioned in the IPN.
Goods production had maintained the high growth of previous months.
Actually, this caution was evident in the postponement of the normalization process, in light of new elements in the evolution of inflation and the interpretation of its fundamentals.
In any case, global inflation was still high, as the persistence of the core data continued to indicate, and inflationary pressures remained quite significant.
It was affecting consumer and business confidence, financial asset prices and the value of the dollar, signaling a perception that negative effects would last longer.
In the local financial system, the high volatility of the trajectory of the Chilean peso stood out, ranging between CLP 655 and 700 per dollar, to settle at CLP 670 at the time of the meeting, fairly unchanged from the previous instance.
It was said that the announcements on fiscal policy and its implications on the structural balance that the Administration had to make within the first 90 days of its mandate were key to analyze the matter.
Since the last Meeting, annual inflation had risen to 3.1% and its core component (i.e.
Broadly, these showed that the evolution of the macroeconomy had reduced the risks facing the convergence of inflation to 3% in the policy horizon.
Inflation expectations showed no big change.
Their behavior would be decisive for investment to be reactivated beyond large-scale public and private projects.
As for portfolio risk, between April and May the Financial Market Commission data showed no significant change in bank arrears of 90 days or more.
The unemployment rate had reached 8.9% in the moving quarter ending in October, outpacing its historical average.
To this end, while maintaining the residual financial conditions of the FCIC 2, it would be necessary to adjust the access conditions, incorporating the new definitions of Fogape, focusing on gross flows —as the aim was not necessarily to increase the companies’ leverage— and extend collaterals.
In this Board member’s view, this could be justified if it was kept in mind that, including the peso appreciation, the trends suggested that inflation was set to decline going forward, although it was recognized that there was not enough information.
Among the multilateral measures, the MER-5 showed a slightly lower rise than the exchange rate, while the MER and MER-X showed more limited movements.
Part of the difference was explained by the decline in service-related activities and another part by the impact of some on-off supply elements, related to the availability of fishery resources in the industry, the effect of a climatic shock and maintenance downtime in mining operations.
It was noted that this made it especially necessary to update those estimates over the course of this year.
The presence of immigrants had also helped to contain wage pressures according to some respondents.
There was agreement that the challenges for monetary policy were also considerable in this context.
It was noted that the surprise in services CPIEFE inflation suggested a rather widespread tendency in its components more related to wages, pointing to a potentially greater impact of immigration on its evolution.
These results were explained by a specific set of elements, including the depreciation of the peso, external price increases and some local inflation-based repricing.
At its December Meeting, the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed) had raised range of the fed funds rate by 50 basis points (bp), to 4.25%-4.5%, in the context of a still tight labor market, which continued to pose an important upward risk for inflation.
As for local financial conditions, there was agreement that they were still tight.
Regarding qualitative information, credit conditions had tightened, as reflected in the Bank Credit Survey of the fourth quarter of 2019, which reported that credit supply was perceived as more restricted in all portfolios, particularly in the consumer and large company segments, together with weaker demand, mainly for consumer credit.
This was true both for what was happening with the sharp depreciation of the peso and the evolution of the external scenario.
It was noted that something similar happened with inflation, which had been particularly volatile in recent months, making it difficult to read.
Private consumption posted a quarter-on-quarter decline, after its significant expansion in the first quarter of the year.
At the same time, consumer confidence (IPEC) at June was still in optimistic territory.
Some members added that doubts about the evolution of wages were also an antecedent that enhanced the validity of this option.
Monetary policy had played a crucial role in this, allowing a reduction of MPR based on progress in the convergence of inflation.
In this context, two-year inflation expectations had remained at 3% for several quarters.
The Board had made a series of decisions to mitigate the effects of this new scenario, including a cut of 75 basis points off the MPR at a special meeting held on 16 March and the implementation of a package of extraordinary measures aimed at ensuring adequate access to credit and the normal functioning of financial markets.
It was noted that the scenario was still favorable in terms of global growth and financial conditions, however significant changes had been observed in commodity prices and exchange rates.
Accordingly, and with a less favorable external scenario after the excessive growth of 2021, the economy would expand at a rate below its potential in 2022 and 2023, with contractions in private consumption and investment.
While Chile’s economic indicators were yet to reflect the effects of these disruptions, the progression of the virus in other countries pointed at significant impacts on the affected firms’ sales and cash flows.
The Bank Lending Survey of the second quarter reflected that supply conditions remained fairly stable, while demand was perceived to be weaker in large companies and with moderate rebounds in the segments of construction companies and housing credit.
In cumulative terms, both measures were in line with forecasts.
It was noted too that, despite the temporary nature of some elements, data from the beginning of the year made it possible to project somewhat stronger growth in activity in 2024, as reflected in the growth range of the central IPoM scenario.
Regarding external developments, in the immediate future, an inflationary impact was to be expected due to the price rise of some commodities and the higher exchange rate.
In China, the recovery of activity had continued to lose traction, amid fundamentals that pointed to less dynamism going forward.
The European Central Bank had also continued to raise its benchmark rates and communicated that its future decisions would continue to be reviewed on a meeting by meeting basis.
All five Board members agreed that the option of cutting 75bp off the MPR was fully consistent with the central scenario of the September MP Report and the general monetary policy stance that had been delivered at the previous Meeting.
Real consumer and commercial loans again showed annual contraction rates, which in April were at –2.1% and –5.3%, respectively.
It could also be argued that the option to keep the MPR unchanged would allow collecting additional high-frequency information prior to taking this first step.
All five Board members agreed that, from the analysis of the background information submitted in the preparation of the March MP Report, it could be concluded that there was still no evidence of consolidation of said inflationary convergence.
The aim was to limit the negative impact on the situation of firms, households and financial institutions and to underpin the recovery in the second half of the year.
In general, all this showed that the impacts of the various shocks that had affected the Chilean economy were going to linger on for quite some time.
Also, that other sources of information, delivered with lags, had still not shown such behavior, so it was necessary to wait for more data to become available.
Vice-Governor García voted for raising it by 125bp.
On the other hand, headline inflation had fallen again, driven by its more volatile components.
The median of the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) remained around 3.5% for the third month in a row, while 90% of the respondents expected inflation to be higher than 3%.
Moreover, their short- and medium-term implications were also diverse and much of the analysis was aimed at evaluating these different trade-offs.
Also, the cost outlook that was reflected in the IMCE business confidence showed increases in recent months.
The close of the 2022 National Accounts, which would be released in March, would give valuable information to assess the state of the adjustment the economy required to bring down inflation.
In December 2022, headline and core annual inflation had been at 12.8% and 10.7%, respectively, both figures down from the previous month.
It was worth noting that, as expected, part of the higher growth early in the year had come from supply factors that had been reversing.
Mining had also underperformed in annual comparison, although production levels remained high.
These pressures had also increased by the rise in international inflation and the idiosyncratic depreciation of the peso.
In this context, the evolution of macroeconomic conditions made it necessary to reduce the monetary stimulus, a process that the Board estimated it would continue to undertake gradually and cautiously, while the uncertainties coming from the external scenario were still high.
Monetary incentives from central banks remained high, while many policymakers had reaffirmed their commitment to keep them in place, scale them up and/or adopt new measures if necessary.
They also agreed to adapt the FCIC, by opening a third phase covering an amount of US$10 billion in effect for six months.
The risk premiums had receded, while the dollar had tended to weaken against other currencies.
All the Board members agreed that the background information known since the October meeting was, for the most part, consistent with the decision announced at the time.
The implications of the outcome of the constitutional plebiscite were discussed, noting that, although this was an important milestone in the process, the road to a new institutional framework was long and would not be free of challenges.
The projections in the central scenario of the September MP Report contained few changes with respect to June’s.
the Financial Brokers Survey and the EES) anticipated that the benchmark rate would remain at 1.75%, at least until the first half for 2021.
In this context, the main central banks had attenuated the restrictive character of their monetary policy communication.
In this new stage, he continued, it was reasonable to recalibrate the parameters and modalities in order to increase the complementarity of this new FCIC with the existing guarantees in COVID loans, as well as to consider the role of non-bank credit intermediaries that depend themselves on bank financing.
Given the difficulties in making projections, many had decided to postpone their investments.
The full Board agreed that the turning points of monetary policy would be based primarily on an assessment of the state of the economy and not on specific dates.
Although the CDS and EMBI had declined since the last Meeting and long rates stood at low levels, it was undeniable that, as of the second quarter of this year, the dollar and longer-term interest rates were on an upward trend.
World growth projections showed minor changes, although it was still necessary to bear in mind that several economies were performing somewhat better than expected.
In fact, 10-year US Treasury rates had risen by nearly 70 basis points (bp) since the last meeting, to decade-long highs.
In the weeks following the December Report, progress had been made on the legislative agenda, both on political and economic issues, and even on issues related to the protection of public order.
For this reason, it was necessary for the Bank to remain very vigilant of the evolution of the process and its effects on the markets.
Measured by the new benchmark CPI calculated by the INE, inflation was significantly below the forecast.
Moreover, the prevailing vision was that not all the layoffs due to the pandemic would be reversed.
In the developed world, the poor performance of the US in the first quarter (-4.8% q/q annualized) stood out, as it had been far below the markets' expectations.
Business expectations (IMCE) continued to reflect the prospect of cost increases going forward.
However, it was stressed that there were doubts about what were the implications of this greater activity in terms of inflationary pressures.
The Board agreed that monetary policy should complete the withdrawal of the full monetary impulse adopted during the crisis and open the way to a contractionary stance, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target over the two-year policy horizon.
They also agreed that there was conclusive evidence that the economy was requiring a stronger monetary stimulus that had to be implemented using unconventional measures.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the first quarter reported a more dynamic supply for smaller companies, which was partly related to a lower perception of risk in this segment, aided by the continuity of credit support measures.
Lending interest rates continued to decline, except for a minor rise in consumer loans due mainly to composition effect.
The fundamentals of consumption, in general, showed a similar behavior to that of previous months.
Regarding domestic credit, market interest rates were still low and real credit growth remained limited, with a rise in the commercial segment in recent months, due to greater loans in installments.
This process, however, had been accompanied by significant and prolonged episodes of violence, which had triggered major disruptions in the productive system, severely reducing activity and weakening employment.