At the same time, the CPI accumulated a somewhat smaller-than-expected increase, mainly in the non-volatile goods component.
The Board recalled that the process of monetary normalization had already begun almost a year ago, so that a good part of the adjustment deemed necessary to resolve macroeconomic imbalances had already been made.
However, if the tightness of external financial conditions persists, the medium-term effects on activity and inflation would be negative.
Domestic spending behavior was consistent with that of activity.
All this pointed to a scenario in which inflationary pressures were evidently higher than previously estimated.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for raising the monetary policy interest rate by 75 basis points, to 1.5%.
It was said that the most striking change was the risk of a disorderly recovery from the Covid-19 crisis in different dimensions.
Consumer loans had continued to reduce their annual contraction (–14.6% real annual contraction in June), in response to abundant household liquidity, and flows in the mortgage portfolio were stable in the margin.
Some data suggested that the greater dynamism of these items seemed to be mainly concentrated in mining.
Background information for this Meeting was contained in the March Monetary Policy Report, to be released the following day.
There were a number of factors at work here.
They also agreed that a clearer assessment of these issues should be made as the bill advanced in its legislative process, which together with the fine-tuning of the diagnosis on the economy’s evolution would be priority tasks until the September Monetary Policy Report.
In Chile, although infections had declined and mobility had increased since mid-year, improvements in activity had been slower than expected in September.
One Board member pointed out that it was important to keep in mind the existence of a trade-off between the effectiveness of the decision and the communication noise that a surprise would cause, which had already been present when it was decided to lower the MPR at the June Meeting.
Finally, the risks associated with the rise in long-term interest rates in Chile and elsewhere were discussed.
In Japan, the manufacturing and services outlook had also moderated, although it remained above the pivot of expansion.
In the US, incoming data remained dynamic, with a still tight labor market that was sustaining consumption in the short term.
All the Board members agreed that the options proposed reflected the need to speed up the pace at which the monetary restriction would be reduced.
This was consistent with the fading out of some supply factors that had temporarily affected the performance of some sectors in the first half (e.g.
Beyond some limited variations in the margin, the expectations of persons (IPEC) and firms (IMCE) lingered in pessimistic territory.
Moreover, the revisions to the National Accounts showed that the composition of domestic demand was more inflationary than expected, with consumption much higher and investment stagnant for several quarters.
While it seemed impossible to foresee that there would be no associated problems, this did not mean that facilities could not be devised to generate such funding and mitigate the impact on the private sector.
Several Board members pointed out that, while the decision of a 75bp hike might surprise the market, it was totally consistent with a scenario where inflation and projected growth were also higher than what the average analyst assumed.
Furthermore, on the day of the Meeting, the country had learned of Chile’s sovereign risk rating downgrade.
This was related, in their opinion, to fear of contagion, increased income support measures including pension savings withdrawals.
All five Board members agreed that the information accumulated since the publication of the last Report had increased the risks about the timely convergence of inflation to the target within the policy horizon, particularly due to the lower services inflation figures, whose persistence was high compared with other CPI components and the risks surrounding the future evolution of activity and demand, in a context of a highly uncertain external scenario.
Thus, while the data on the number of dependent contributors of the pension fund system (AFPs) suggested that formal salaried employment was already nearing its pre-pandemic level, INE data pointed to a milder rebound.
Although it had returned to one digit after several quarters, it remained quite high.
The activity gap, far from closing, as would be expected in an ongoing adjustment process, was wider than had been expected in late 2022 and early 2023.
Although this responded to a greater labor supply, it also reflected less dynamic hiring.
In the labor market, job creation remained sluggish, with demand for workers still weak, consistent with the evolution of the economic cycle.
Inflation levels remained well above target and the central scenario projections of this Report exceeded those of the previous one.
In any case, preliminary information from the IPN revealed a drop in the number of transactions carried out in October, especially mortgages, with a tightening of lending standards, greater restrictions in terms and in the required down payment, among others.
This recovery had been made possible by the adaptive capacity of businesses and individuals and the great progress made in the vaccination campaign, which had contributed to a significant process of opening up.
In any case, the market had already priced in several additional MPR cuts than expected in the December MP Report, which had shifted the rate curve in the appropriate direction given the changed scenario.
It was noted that the evolution of the labor market confirmed the signs of an adjustment consistent with the economy’s performance and the usual lags between the two.
In China, third-quarter GDP growth (6% annually) had disappointed as once again it reached its lowest figure of several decades.
Moreover, despite a certain upturn in labor supply as seen in lower inactivity and more job postings on the Internet, there was still a big mismatch between the supply of and demand for jobs, especially for lower skilled persons.
kind of decision considering the developments in the macroeconomic scenario.
The March survey of the Capital Goods Corporation reported a cut in the investment forecast for this year, mainly due to the postponement of projects (energy and public works), where everything in the 2018-2021 period adjusted upwards.
In particular, in May the Imacec was back at its prepandemic level, up 18.1% annually.
They also agreed that the wisest decision was to bring the policy rate to its technical minimum of 0.5%.
Most importantly, this had allowed to quantify the effect of the strong immigration flow of recent years on trend and potential growth, increasing both.
Thus, any shock entailing a greater delay in the convergence of inflation would make it difficult to meet the target within the policy horizon and would require sharper cuts to the MPR in the future.
On the contrary, there was still a way to go before the macroeconomy would signal that the process of inflation convergence to the target had been consolidated.
Meanwhile, Universidad de Chile fourth-quarter 2019 saw the unemployment rate for Greater Santiago rising up to 8.8% and slightly negative annual employment growth, influenced mainly by the annual contraction of salaried employment, in a context where administrative data, such as December’s contract termination notices, showed an incipient deterioration.
All this meant that it had become less necessary to hold on to the monetary impulse established when the economic cycle was at its lowest, so now the appropriate thing to do was to continue withdrawing it in order for inflation to converge to the policy target within its medium-term horizon.
Prematurely starting the process of lowering the MPR might have adverse effects on inflationary persistence and, therefore, on economic activity, as sensitivity scenarios could materialize that would force a pause or even a reversal of the process.
At the time —it was recalled— there was debate on whether there was a very strong trade-off between the greater monetary impulse that was necessary in the new macroeconomic scenario and the problems that could endanger the stability of the financial markets.
The price of a barrel of oil had risen by nearly 10% since the last meeting, favored by a greater global appetite for risk, the depreciation of the dollar and the continuous recovery of its demand.
Going forward, the evolution of inflation remained exposed to opposing forces, whose relative impact was still uncertain.
That situation —where the U.S. economy was not performing as well as expected and the Fed was aggressively cutting interest rates— would be a relatively disinflationary medium-term scenario for Chile.
This had triggered episodes of risk aversion with the consequent reshuffling of investment portfolios.
Given the medium-term implications of this scenario, the Board opined that the monetary stimulus should begin to be reduced in the coming months and that by 2020 it would stand around its neutral level, which was estimated between 4% and 4.5%.
Exports had shown greater resilience than expected, particularly in mining shipments and some industrial lines.
Compared with September, beyond some ups and downs, the exchange rate had decreased and the stock market indices had risen.
In this context, stock market indexes rose slightly further in most countries.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon voted for reducing the MPR by 50 basis points, to 2%.
Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for raising the monetary policy interest rate by 150bp, to 5.5%.
It was mentioned that beyond the reasons behind the behavior of inflation expectations, the fact that they remained above 3% in the two-year horizon was a matter of concern.
Consumer confidence and business and investor expectations had continued to worsen, amid Russia’s protracted invasion of Ukraine.
The main argument in favor was that holding the MPR and communicating that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would begin in the coming months avoided upsetting the market, which could convey a sense of haste or delay in the normalization process that was not consistent with the analysis presented in the Report.
On the one hand, there was the favorable evolution of some items linked to business services and wholesale trade and, on the other, a slower rate of construction expansion.
The fall in overall inflation had been driven by volatile prices, and in the core part, by the appreciation of the peso and the adjustment of goods consumption.
In this context, the financial markets reflected this heightened optimism, driving up stock markets, capital inflows to emerging economies and commodity prices.
It was further noted that inflation accumulated in November and December had exceeded somewhat the Monetary Policy Report’s forecasts for both volatile and core inflation.
One participant noted the risks posed by the oil price rise to an economy such as Chile, which is a net importer.
In the Board’s view, reducing uncertainty was imperative in order to spur the economic recovery, reduce the probability of a recession and prevent unemployment from reaching high levels difficult to reverse.
Some Board members noted that, in terms of their macroeconomic effects, both options were practically identical so, in essence, the decision was tactical.
Interest rates remained low for all credit users.
The real exchange rate (RER) base 1986 = 100, had stood at 90.4 in June and, with the information at hand, estimates placed it near 91.6 in July.
Add to this the evolution of inflation expectations and preliminary background from the IPN that signaled the relevance of cost increases and indications of higher pass-through to prices.
The data known since the publication of the December Report pointed to somewhat higher than expected inflationary pressures.
In this context, consumer (IPEC) and business (IMCE) expectations were still on the pessimistic side, but with some improvement.
On the other hand, although the evolution of the external scenario caused some concern, it was important to draw a line between the baseline scenario and its implications for monetary policy decisions and the risk factors.
The entire Board agreed on the need to safeguard the proper functioning of the monetary policy pass-through channels, so the MPR reduction should be accompanied by non-traditional measures to support liquidity and boost credit.
However, the withdrawal of pension savings and fiscal measures had caused effects across all regions and in several sectors and in the repayment of financial obligations.
Market expectations about how far up the MPR would go in the current cycle of hikes had risen again.
On the one hand, the baseline scenario assumed that economic growth would resume its stronger dynamism in 2020.
Household spending on non-durable goods and services had declined, breaking the upward trend of previous quarters.
Nominal exports of goods also continued to be affected, mainly industrial shipments.
This Report noted that the Chilean economy had been advancing steadily in its recovery process after the massive shock caused by the pandemic.
In addition, it coincided with what the markets expected, avoiding surprises that could affect the correct transmission of the boards assessment of macroeconomic conditions and the expected path of inflation.
In addition, he agreed on the difficulties in forecasting or estimating the size of the additional monetary stimulus that would be required without a more detailed analysis of the mediumterm impacts of the latest news.
The perception of the labor market pointed to a stagnation of employment and wage pressures that remained contained.
For this reason, the Board would take every action necessary to meet this objective.
The evolution of several of its fundamentals —such as the lower cost of credit and the increase in the real wage bill— suggested that its recent moderation would not last long.
The macroeconomic scenario had continued to reflect the evolution of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Early-year data showed some increase in annual inflation.
In the corporate bond market, in both the financial sector and the rest of the companies, there were fewer transactions and lower amounts traded, with spreads fairly constant.
In particular, considering that the stimulus measures weighing on the economy were already very significant, that their impact was being greater than anticipated and that such measures had also increased in magnitude.
Despite having grown month on month, services continued to be severely affected by the sanitary constraints.
The Board recalled that in the latest Meeting they had delivered an unequivocal message regarding the future evolution of the monetary policy rate.
In the external scenario, the advances in trade negotiations between China and the United States, particularly after signing the first phase of the agreement, and the positive surprise in incoming activity and demand figures from the main economies —especially the greater stability of manufacturing-related indicators— had a positive impact on financial markets and commodity prices.
The background information presented to the Board and the analysis thereof are contained in June’s Monetary Policy Report.
Furthermore, they agreed that a signal had to be given that the MPR would be kept stable over the coming months, awaiting for more information about the unfolding to the macroeconomic scenario.
It was suggested that another reason that could explain this short-term volatility was the fact that the Central Bank of Chile was one of the first to begin reducing its reference rate, with prospects that the reduction would continue in the future.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon and Céspedes voted in favor of raising the MPR by 100bp to 10.75%.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%.
In the opinion of one Board member, it was possible, for example, to think of a path of MPR increases slower than indicated by the working assumption of the Monetary Policy Report, as considered by market expectations.
All five Board members agreed that, given the macroeconomic context caused by the pandemic, there was no other option than reinforcing the message that monetary policy would remain highly expansionary for a prolonged period of time.
The widened gaps that were derived from the updating of the parameters and the weakness of first-quarter activity and demand were consistent with the low inflationary pressures observed.
One Board member noted that one way of assessing the relevance of reducing the MPR at this Meeting was to review whether or not the process of consolidation was taking place and/or whether the magnitude of the costs being caused by the process of lowering inflation exceeded expectations.
Therefore, they agreed that the monetary policy’s orientation should continue to point at a normalization of the policy rate towards its neutral level, as had been expressed in the December Report.
In that sense, there were elements that interfered in that understanding.
Regarding the labor market, again those surveyed did not intend to make changes in their staff in the near future, with wage pressures that were still generally contained, backed by increased migratory inflows for certain types of jobs according to the respondents' visions.
At the same time, there was downward pressure on inflation in the short term, a sharp deterioration in business and consumer expectations, and a significant expansion in commercial credit since the announcement of the stimulus measures.
This figure had been somewhat lower than the March estimate, while the weakening of the lines most closely linked to services, stood out, which was linked to the demand that was being affected by Covid-19 containment measures.
The labor market continued to lag behind output development.
This responded largely to trade tensions and the appreciation of the dollar, in a context in which China’s activity figures had been weaker at the margin.
The evolution of core inflation was still a matter of concern.
That is, the MPR would be kept at 11.25% until the state of the economy informed that the convergence of inflation to 3% was consolidated.
The UK was stagnant in productive investment, amid generalized falls in different confidence indicators.
On the one hand, the 75bp option could give a feeling of continuity of the Report’s central scenario which was not consistent with the observed changes and which, in a context where inflation expectations had risen, could be counterproductive.
As for investment, various indicators—including wholesale trade, home sales, construction expectations (IMCE)—had improved in the margin, despite being still low, in general.
Interest rates on UF-indexed mortgage loans had dropped from November, to 4.4%, in a context where the Bank Lending Survey for the fourth quarter reflected still stringent supply conditions and further falling demand.
On the monetary side, this included further interest rate cuts in some countries or the extension of unconventional plans, with actions concerning the pandemic being led by the Fed and the European Central Bank.
Commercial banks had applied to nearly 95% of the funds available under phase 1 of the Facility Conditional on Increased Lending (FCIC), and many had used up their full assigned amount.
This, it was concluded, was fully consistent with the idea that, even in a context of gradual normalization, monetary policy would continue to accompany the recovery of the economy, anticipating that the MPR would be below its neutral value throughout the complete policy horizon of two years.
Household expectations had also improved, although their performance and that of other indicators more closely related to private consumption augured a slow rebound in this expenditure component.
All measurements coincided in that the first cut would take place between the July and September meetings, although they differed as to its magnitude.
In the financial markets, the exchange rate had fallen in recent weeks, but its expected trajectory was not perceived to be very different from the one foreseen in the Report.
On the demand side, consumption-related indicators had continued to adjust downwards, with a weak performance of imports of these goods and of retail sales, according to Imacec and digital invoicing data, among other factors.
On the one hand, it raised questions about the size of the activity gap, in a context in which the evolution of activity and demand had not changed much over the last few quarters and the differences with respect to projections had been smaller.
This mechanism would allow, in principle, to reduce certain risk premiums in the capital market, facilitate portfolio rebalancing towards riskier assets, and directly provide liquidity to non-banking institutions, which nevertheless are important mobilizers of private savings.
Regarding two-year inflation expectations, both the Economic Expectations Survey (EEE) and the Financial Operators’ Survey (EOF) were at around 3%.
The Board agreed that the main reason for not changing the MPR at this Meeting was the consistency between the Bank’s actions and their communication, especially in that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be done gradually and with caution.
There was consensus on the importance of specifying that this weakening was not an “externality” of the process of raising rates, but rather a fundamental element to achieve the convergence of inflation to the 3% target.
The US showed narrowing gaps, with investment and consumption fundamentals that remained solid, especially because of a seemingly tighter labor market.
The movements after the December FOMC, associated with the markets’ perception that the U.S. Federal Reserve had to some extent relaxed its monetary policy, had tended to be reversed during the past few weeks.
With respect to the December Report, inflation had been somewhat below projections, mainly because of specific factors, such as lower inflation of some typically highly volatile services.
In line with expectations, annual inflation had peaked in August, when the annual variation of the CPI had reached 14.1%.
In the money markets, financing costs remain contained in both pesos and dollars, despite a reduction in dollar liquidity.
In that context, an additional degree of prudence could help reduce the possibility of facing short-term financial stress.
In addition, these projections were shared by the vast majority of market agents, as was visible, for example, in the Economic Expectations Survey (EES).
At two years, the EES continued to place the MPR at 3.5%.
Wages had risen in real terms at a pace that was consistent with a tighter labor market.
Interest rates on commercial and mortgage loans had increased compared with data available at the previous Meeting.
possible new outbreaks or progress in vaccination—, the fear of new violence episodes as manifested in some surveys, together with financial difficulties in some companies.
With such information factored in, the next movements could be either up or down depending on the true state of the economy and the inflationary outlook.
Bank lending remained subdued in the various segments, with financing conditions perceived to be tighter and demand for new loans lower, according to the second-quarter Bank Lending Survey.
Regarding the 125-bp and 175-bp options, there was agreement among the Board members that both had disadvantages, particularly the former.
Headline inflation had risen to 3.8% annually as of June, which was mainly due to the evolution of fuel prices in recent months, because of both their increase and the low comparison base left by the same period of 2020.
The surveys to purchasing managers (PMI) pointed to significant disparity in manufacturing and services that anticipated a favorable performance in the US and some moderation in the Eurozone, but with activity growth still above potential.
Last but not least, the prices of copper and other commodities had far exceeded projections.
Since the last Meeting, annual inflation had risen to 3% and the core measure (CPIEFE) had remained at around 2.5%.
In particular, it could depend not only on the dynamics of some relevant prices, but also on the evolution of actual activity and potential growth.
There was growing concern about the economic effects of the trade war between the US and its trading partners.
For this reason, they said, it was not strange that the focus was placed rather at the most appropriate time to start the process of withdrawal of the monetary stimulus and the differences were concentrated in periods very close to each other.
The measures aimed at favoring market liquidity had also been effective, contributing to reducing money market spreads in both pesos and dollars.
A second example was taken from mid-2021, at the start of an MPR hike cycle, when there was also considerable debate regarding its pertinence and the pace of the hikes.
However, it was also apparent that there were areas of the economy that had not yet been reached by credit or economic stimuli that matched the scale of their needs.
As for two-year inflation expectations, in both the Economic Expectations Survey (EES) and the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) they remained at 3%.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Soto voted for lowering the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 5.75%.
The copper price had risen about 5% since then, driven by Chinese imports that showed more dynamism in September while inventories continued to show some depletion in the margin.
One participant added that he believed that the main risk continued to be that of a lack of coordination between monetary and fiscal policy in the United States that could be resolved in a disorderly manner, culminating in an overheated economy with excessive credit expansion.
The Bank of England had added 50 bps to its benchmark rate, amid high pressures from wages.
Particularly, it was noted that understanding what this accumulation of lower PI records meant for the future inflation trajectory and for monetary policy decisions was a must.
This decline owed much to the effect of the slowdown in demand, which outweighed the impact of the continued tightness of the market.
On the external front, the progress in vaccinations in the world’s main economies stood out, as it had allowed to gradually overcome the recession.
Investment, on the other hand, had been surprisingly strong, although growth was concentrated mainly in some particular sectors, such as renewable energies.
About the evolution of activity, there was consensus among the participants that its recent evolution reduced the risks of insufficient traction to ensure the convergence of inflation to 3% within the policy horizon.
Among the multilateral measures, the MER posted a depreciation in the period.
In this Report, the Board had updated the structural parameter estimates that were used to assess the state of the economy, their prospects and implications for monetary policy.
On the credit side, lending conditions were still seen as favorable.
It was mentioned that in the local financial markets’ risks seemed to be receding somewhat from their peak.
In particular, he noted that the Bank had adopted extraordinary measures of liquidity provision and had begun a foreign exchange intervention that limited —especially the latter— the countercyclical action that in principle could be expected from monetary policy.
This was partly explained by the difficulties in OPEC+ to reach an agreement on the increase in production quotas.
In this context, MPR expectations in the surveys (EES and FTS) showed increases of 25 to 50 pb one year ahead, while the prices of financial assets pointed to a rise of around 100 pb.
There was consensus among the Board that the key and essential commitment was to fight for inflation to return to 3% in two years, which was the way to avoid excessive and unnecessary costs for the population.
Although the Board considered it important to communicate the launching of the process of withdrawing the monetary stimulus, it also deemed it advisable to emphasize that monetary policy would remain expansionary for a long period of time.
In addition, it provided room for a timely reaction in case some of the risk scenarios came true.
By components, the CPIEFE for services had risen to 3.4% annually, while for goods it had remained unchanged.
All this was consistent with the inflationary pressures affecting each one.
Therefore, lowering the MPR by 50 bp only reinforced the previous message, which the market had made its own after the publication of the Report.
Still, this diagnosis called for some caution, particularly because of the possibility that demand-side factors could have a greater impact on the recent evolution of this price.
For the 2019-2020 period they had some changes, but all consistent with the projections in the current baseline scenario.
The details of the central scenario, sensitivities, risks and future evolution of the MPR were included in the September Report, which served as the basis for the discussion at this Meeting.
This had led the market to anticipate a less contractionary monetary policy path.
All the Board members agreed that the main risk of this option was to take the market by surprise again, since the last two decisions had already done so.
It was reiterated that this not mean that the exchange rate did not have an important role in the inflation targeting framework, since it was a relevant price in the economy, whose movements could have significant effects and which also provided valuable information on how things were going in the macroeconomic and financial scenario.
The sanitary situation had complicated particularly in the United States, where the new quarantines imposed threatened to halt the recovery of mobility and the performance of its economy.
It was said that, actually, the inflation expectations reflected in longer-term market prices had changed very little in response to the peso’s most recent appreciation.
Meanwhile, household demand remained weak —for the consumer and mortgage segments—, related to the users’ worsened income and/or employment conditions.
In any case, many respondents drew attention to the increases in the prices of fuel and electricity.
It was said that one hypothesis that seemed consistent with the observed changes was that immigration was having a somewhat greater-than-anticipated impact on the capacity gaps, reducing inflationary pressures.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted for keeping the MPR at 1.75%.
In general, all sectors were performing in line with expectations, reflecting the heterogeneity that had been the trend in recent months.
This would allow the Fed to go ahead with its gradual process of lowering its benchmark rate, with one or two cuts of 25bp during this year.
Accordingly, they considered the most appropriate options to be (i) hold the MPR, or (ii) lower it by 25bp to 5.5%.
It was noted that the evolution of inflation was consistent with the gradual closing of gaps in the economy and that going forward the gradual withdrawal of monetary stimulus needed restructuring in proper balance with the closing of these capacities.
On the other hand, there was progress in the successive openings in several economies, with numbers that confirmed this gradual recovery in line with projections or even with some positive surprises.
The 10-year nominal interest rate had exceeded 6.5%, a rate unseen in more than a decade.
One Board member pointed out that analyzing the option of making a small reduction to the MPR at this Meeting could be valid.
On the other hand, housing loans continued to show a downward trend.
Thus, the market internalized that the Fed could go faster than previously expected, which pushed the long-term rates up.
In his view, the need to lower the MPR so fast was tempered by the fact that inflation had begun to rise towards the target and the current-account balance measured at trend prices was high.
Also noteworthy were the improved capacity of companies to adapt to the sanitary restrictions, a positive flow of credit oriented to the worst affected companies, a substantial volume of support to households suffering income losses, and substantial progress in the Covid-19 vaccination program.
On public investment, the views were not optimistic.
Given the current monetary policy constraints, this Board member found it doubtful that such a move would be seen as a relaxation of monetary policy.
Thus, since the December Meeting, the peso had appreciated and had become notably less volatile, reflecting the effects of the exchange rate intervention carried out by the Bank.
Activity’s performance was being driven by investment.
In this scenario, several central banks had adopted a less expansionary stance.
As for inflation expectations, it was noted that they had risen for every source and every term, including the 24-month policy horizon.
In particular, to make it consistent with the idea that the MPR was approaching a terminal level, it would need to be accompanied by a clearly neutral bias, which was thought not to be feasible as yet.
The last few weeks had been characterized by the markets’ assessment of the American economy’s growth and the actions of the Federal Reserve (Fed).
About domestic credit, the Bank Credit Survey of the first quarter 2018 had reported a strengthened demand in various segments—especially for consumer loans and commercial credit to big and real-estate companies—, together with marginal improvements in the supply of consumer and commercial loans for large companies.
The fact that the increasing participation of non-residents in the ownership of local bonds during the past year could end up having effects on the evolution of interest rates if the fiscal situation changed was also discussed.
All five Board members agreed that the option of holding the MPR at 1.75% dominated over any other.
The consumer and business confidence indicators endorsed this scenario, standing in highly favorable territory.
Nonetheless, it was noted that the application of new quarantines, lags in the recovery of the labor market and political tensions had significantly deteriorated consumer and, though somewhat less, business expectations.
Business and consumer expectations had continued to recover, although still on pessimistic territory.
The Chilean economy would be affected by lower external demand and tighter global financial conditions.
In several regions, the substantial supply of labor was worth noting, supported by the presence of foreign labor.
Inflation and its short-term outlook had continued to rise and was projected to approach 10% by mid2022.
Finally, political/legislative uncertainty had intensified, as had concerns about the possible resurgence of violence, especially affecting investment decisions.
Although establishing such a conclusion required reviewing multiple dimensions, some of them could be mentioned.
Therefore, intensive work needed to be undertaken to identify non-traditional measures to enhance the monetary impulse and support for financial stability.
There were risk scenarios in which the international situation could deteriorate abruptly and sharply.
This meant leaving no doubt about the need for a normalization of monetary policy, but, in turn, ensuring that this normalization would be done gradually and with caution.
Regarding the former, it was clear that important progress was being made in this process.
As of December, in real terms, the annual growth of consumer loans remained negative (-6.7%) despite continuing to rise, for mortgage loans — — it had not changed much (5.9%) and for commercial loans it had resumed positive values (2%).
The uncertainty surrounding the Brexit had intensified, with little time left for the parties to reach an agreement before the deadline of the actual departure.
The five Board Members agreed that the economic scenario posed significant risks.
Another member added that, if greater weight was given to risk management and the asymmetry of its costs, the 150bp option was the best, as it signaled more decisively the idea of going faster in raising the MPR and positioning it near the upper edge of the corridor.
In Latin America, the decline in volatile components stood out, while core inflation was taking longer to decrease, given the slower progress of services inflation relative to goods inflation.
Two years ahead, they were still around 3%.
It was noted that the volatility of the domestic macroeconomic scenario had decreased significantly since the December Meeting, thanks to several factors combined, in particular the decline of the most violent episodes—and a lower level of disruptions in productive activities—and the extraordinary measures taken by the Bank.
All these factors combined had led to a global appreciation of the dollar and a negative correction in stock markets.
Meanwhile, in Brazil and Colombia the outlook was somewhat more encouraging, both with ongoing reforms that could result in greater dynamism going forward.
If the increase in direct fiscal transfers was added to this, a scenario was configured in which the expansion of consumption was considerably greater than had been foreseen in the June MP Report.
Anyway, he added, the closing of gaps outlined in the last Report remained perfectly possible, because the conditions leading to it had not changed.
On the other hand, activity figures confirmed that the recovery had been faster than expected, even in some services that strongly depended on human interaction.
In the central scenario, this adjustment of fiscal and monetary policies would contribute to a gradual closing of the activity gap, helping to prevent the recent inflation dynamics from having a persistent impact on the price formation process.
Preliminary information in August’s Business Perceptions Report showed that the respondents continued to expect their businesses to improve growth in the second half of this year and over 2020, although their prospects had moderated, because of lower-than-expected results in the first half, and some sources of uncertainty externally and internally.
This latter factor was attributed to the weak performance of the last few years, which had decelerated wage growth and often led to freeze compensations during some quarters.
As for the 100bp option, although it could be justified as a sign of greater concern about the risk scenarios being faced, its counterpart was that it provided less flexibility for the future.
Some Board members said that the message of closing down under uncertain conditions seemed too risky in a scenario as complex as the current one, with a lot of unfolding events.
This was reflected in the upward revision to the growth projection for 2021, which, despite its magnitude, was not enough to absorb the full expansion of domestic demand and yielded the way for the current account to move from a surplus of 1.5% of GDP in 2020 to a deficit of slightly more than 2% of GDP in 2021.
Although the price of an oil barrel remained high, it had been corrected downwards to just over US$100 at the time of the meeting (-15% since the last meeting, for the WTI-Brent average).
As had been the trend previously, this was based especially on the behavior of the automotive segment, whose sales growth was still among its highest in recent years.
Regarding the option to maintain the policy rate unchanged it was mentioned that it could send the wrong signal about the risks that the Board was analyzing.
In this Board member’s view, this was consistent with the scenario in the Report and with suitable degrees of flexibility to deal with risks in either direction.
First, it agreed to open phase 2 of the FCIC for an amount of US$16 billion for a period of eight months.
Thus, the annual CPI variation —spliced benchmark series— was 3.5% for both headline and core inflation—the latter being the CPI without volatiles.
The impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad would remain limited, matching the forecast in the June Monetary Policy Report.
The outlook for global growth had deteriorated, amid still unfavorable conditions, especially for emerging economies.
Particularly important was high corporate and government indebtedness and, probably, increased risk-taking in some sectors in search of higher returns after years of low rates.
Still, more respondents reported some improvement in their activities in December compared to the previous two months.
On the other hand, lower growth in China could hurt Chile’s terms of trade and exports significantly.
In any case, commercial loans continued to grow above numbers of the beginning of the year, thanks to the strong impulse provided by the measures in place.
The Business Perceptions Report continued to show positive expectations for this year according to the bulk of opinions, especially towards the second half, beyond the disparity of businesses’ actual results.
Qualitative sources, such as the BLS and the Business Perceptions Report, reported still high interest rates despite a recent decrease in some portfolios-, higher collateral requirements and contained demand.
Some Board members considered that the 75bp option was plausible, because it was within the upper range of market expectations and was evaluated in a context in which monetary policy had already made a very significant adjustment, while activity and demand were showing the expected weakness, as evidenced by the evolution of consumption, investment, and real wages.
Regarding local conditions, there was general agreement that there were no substantial differences with respect to forecasts in the September MP Report.
In Latin America, with some exceptions, several countries showed increased inflation, although no big changes in monetary policy in the margin.
are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
All five Board members agreed that the scenario where the country was operating was one of seldom seen, extraordinarily high, uncertainty that was sweeping through the real economy and the financial system.
China had closed 2023 with negative inflation and weak demand, especially for consumer spending.
Thus, although with limited movements overall, in the last month several economies had exhibited improvements in their stock markets, spreads and currencies, while a large part of long-term interest rates had declined.
About local activity, in line with the December Monetary Policy Report, partial fourth-quarter figures showed that the economy had regained dynamism, having left behind the specific factors that had slowed it down during the third quarter.
There was consensus in the Board that the options of reducing the MP by 75 or 100bp seemed the most appropriate.
One Board member noted that, beginning with this Report, the MPR corridor had been added to the monetary policy communication tools.
Its immediate impact was severe, it was lasting more than previouly expected and its longterm repercussions were still uncertain.
The contribution of services stood out, with annual growth of 20%, driven by personal services in particular, reflecting the consolidation of eased sanitary restrictions and the boost of the remaining resources from household support measures.
In Latin America, inflation seemed to have reached its peak in most countries, and some central banks had continued to raise their benchmark rates.
The rapid evolution of the macroeconomic scenario, inflation expectations and sensitivity scenarios associated with higher price pressures, set the stage for the Central Bank to act promptly to ensure the convergence of inflation.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon and Céspedes voted for holding the MPR at 11.25%.
Plus the more favorable response of the world markets to the first phase of the US-China trade agreement, coupled with early signs of stabilization or even improvement in developed economies.
Qualitatively, business expectations (IMCE)—excluding mining—had become more pessimistic.
With the MPR at its technical minimum and the commitment to keep it there for an extended period, the additional efforts should focus on a broader and more systematic use of non-conventional policies.
According to one Board member, on this occasion the option had more weight and validity because the news of lower short-term inflation came despite the fact that the economy had been growing more strongly for some quarters.
This, together with inflation expectations aligned with the 3% target, reduced the risks of greater inflationary persistence in the medium term as a result of the cost shock, which pulled down the balance of inflationary risks present at the previous meeting.
Commodity prices had shown mixed movements.
In the emerging economies, China’s GDP had closed 2019 with a 6.1% expansion, in line with market expectations, while short-term activity data showed an acceleration in December from the previous month, including figures from the external sector.
In the U.S., the most recent data had been surprising again, with record-high figures that this high inflation was a persistent phenomenon across the board.
One Board member estimated that in certain aspects the option of a 25bp reduction dominated over the 50bp option.
There was agreement among the participants that the incoming figures since the publication of the September Monetary Policy Report were consistent with the baseline scenario in it and with the monetary policy orientation communicated at the time.
On the other hand, according to administrative data, formal salaried employment had made a full comeback, with an increase in vacancies and, according to the CNSI for the first quarter, the wage bill had recovered.
Moreover, this type of exchange rate movement showed above-average passthrough and persistence on inflation, given the idiosyncratic nature of the shock.
In the Eurozone, different expectations measures backed the region’s weak outlook, especially those more closely linked to the tradable sector, coinciding with the worsening of exports from these economies.
Governor Marcel and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted in favor of holding the MPR at 0.5%.
Externally, the main development since the last Report had been the escalating conflict between the United States and its main trading partners, which had resulted in increased risk aversion, affecting the valuation of assets, currencies and commodities, as well as Chile’s terms of trade, in a context of marked deterioration of global trade figures.
However, the high level of inflation and the greater persistence associated with its main determinants called for a more contractionary monetary policy to ensure such convergence.
The answer was not obvious, because the scale of the shock was causing many scars, particularly to individuals and businesses, whether due to lost jobs and income, solvency problems, or more permanent adjustments that should be made to the operation of some sectors.
High inflation was having a significant impact on the incomes and expectations of economic agents.
Therefore, if this risk had intensified somewhat in the recent past, the probability of a scenario where monetary policy was a little more expansionary than previously thought might have increased.
Preliminary qualitative data derived from the February’s Business Perceptions Report showed some relapse in the latest performance of many businesses, after a significant rebound between the end of the third quarter and early fourth quarter of 2020.
In a context where global inflation was still bounded, global monetary policy continued to be expansionary, with policy rates being held flat or further reduced in most countries.
Primarily, it showed that growth in activity had increased in recent months, particularly in the non-mining sectors.
At the same time, they agreed that the upward bias that accompanied this decision reaffirmed that this process would continue in the months ahead.
For this reason, the operation of the Covid lines would compensate with guarantees part of the risk, helping the credit to flow to the smaller firms.
However, the latest indicators showed a rebound in confidence and outlook, anticipating a faster recovery in the second half of the year, supported by progress in the vaccination processes, the high savings accumulated by households, and the fiscal stimulus plans.
Expectations for the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) contained in both the EES and the FBS continued to foresee it unchanged at is technical lower bound of 0.50% for a protracted period of time, while those implicit in the prices of financial assets anticipated a transitory cut to 0.25%.
In fact, in the weeks leading up to this Meeting it had rather experienced a depreciation.
A second dimension was a scenario in which different economies would accumulate inflation levels not seen in many decades.
This evolution owed mainly to the higher copper price, among other reasons.
Meanwhile, one year ahead the median had risen to 2.7% per year and that of the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) to 2.5%, while two years ahead it remained around 3%.
All the participants in the Meeting agreed that the economy, both externally and internally, had behaved within the framework depicted in the baseline scenario of the last Monetary Policy Report, although risks remained and had even varied on some fronts.
Administrative data showed a significant increase in termination notices and unemployment insurance claims, which was being partially cushioned by the measures announced by the Government.
The information submitted to the Board and the analysis thereof are contained in the March Monetary Policy Report.
It is estimated that it will converge to the 3% target in the early months of 2026, and remain nearby until the end of the projection horizon.
Finally, the US inflationary cycle would feature a gradual convergence to its 2% target, suggesting that the America economy, which had been unexpectedly dynamic lately, was losing speed.
In the Eurozone, manufacturing production and several measures of expectations were showing better performance in the margin.
Feedback from the IPN confirmed this picture.
The main central banks had continued to raise their benchmark rates, despite a mixed outlook for monetary policy.
In this regard, it would be particularly relevant to review the impact that the Covid-related credit lines with State guarantees would have, which at the time of the Meeting -—-early May— had just begun operations, so information was yet to come to light.
Several reasons were brought up to explain why this could be happening, including a different assessment of the neutral MPR and the expected monetary policy trajectory of the U.S. Federal Reserve.
In terms of risk indicators, the banking system’s delinquency rate remained contained overall.
The Board agreed that the risks to the evolution of inflation were still significant and their possible materialization was particularly relevant in a context in which both the annual change in the CPI and its outlook were already high.
It was pointed out that the important thing was not the origin of the disruptions in the financial markets, but to analyze the way in which it could affect financing conditions in Chile.
There was debate around the evolution of inflation in the next few quarters, particularly because of uncertainty regarding which effect would dominate, either the impact of the idiosyncratic depreciation of the peso or the widening of the activity gap.
Furthermore, the tightening of financial conditions, the persistence of the negative supply shock and the worsening economic outlook continued to anticipate an erosion of investment dynamism.
Activity had grown well above estimates.
In his view, the risk of having an inflation rate below the target could become significant in the coming quarters.
All five Board members agreed that the evolution of the macroeconomic scenario and its outlook made it clear that, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target, it was necessary to lower the MPR.
All the participants noted that the recent and expected economic performance and its effects on the closing of the activity gap reduced the risks for inflation.
Real wage growth remained at around 2.5% per year.
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) had stabilized after the sharp drop of the second half of last year.
Regarding the external scenario, it was agreed that it offered no major novelties in its evolution.
Private consumption would regain momentum, although its level at the end of the projection horizon would be lower than in the previous estimate.
CPI data for May and June had been largely in line with forecasts in the June Monetary Policy Report.
This had been compounded by the start of monetary normalization by the authorities in Norway, New Zealand, and various emerging economies.
On the one hand, expectations were very negative, as was the evolution of some investment components and, on the other, credit creation figures remained fairly reasonable, while investment components more closely linked to mining maintained an interesting rate of expansion.
CPI without volatiles) had continued to hover at around 3%.
On the one hand, the effects of the social crisis that had burst out in October were still unfolding, and although the Imacec in December and January had been above expectations, other real and financial variables showed a deterioration in recent months.
In Latin America, low inflation in most countries and price pressures that led to additional moderation provided some leeway for additional monetary easing.
Also, the possible changes associated to the new CPI basket had to be considered.
These divergences had been permeating global financial markets, with opposing movements in interest rates and the depreciation of an important group of currencies, the Chilean peso included.
It was added that, because most of the MPR adjustments had been made in the first part of the year, it was possible to monitor the evolution of the scenario.
In addition, the Fed’s rate hike had been quite aggressive, and doubts as to how this process would continue introduced an additional degree of sensitivity with respect to the Bank’s own decisions and their effects on market financial variables.
On the other hand, the Bank Lending Survey (ECB) for the first quarter showed tighter credit supply conditions for firms and individuals and a perceived weaker credit demand, except for the large company segment.
In particular, that it could generate an even greater tightening in local financial conditions —and there were no forecasts to quantify this effect— or it could be associated with a response to inflationary surprises that had no relation with core inflation.
The opinions gathered in the framework of the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) confirmed a rebound of the economy, whose performance in many cases surpassed that of the previous year.
The U.S. Federal Reserve had begun to signal the need to accelerate this process, given the greater persistence of inflation, while the Bank of England had surprised with a rate hike.
They all agreed that the option to boost the monetary stimulus was no longer relevant, since the downside risks to the convergence of inflation —which had been a topic of concern in recent quarters— had lost strength.
The importance of not losing sight of the fact that this reduction in activity, that should translate into a negative activity gap, was an unavoidable condition for the convergence of inflation to the target was emphasized.
A somewhat lower-than-expected Imacec in July had been offset with a better-than-expected performance in August.
The labor market had shown some recovery, with a rise in employment compared to mid-year.
In turn, the European Central Bank had raised its monetary policy rate by 50bp at its last meeting, and had intensified the restrictive tone of its statement, adding a significant increase in its inflation forecasts.
In fact, it was recalled that, in the central scenario of the June Report, it was anticipated that the MPR would remain below its neutral level throughout the entire policy horizon.
Although the decline in inflation was a global phenomenon, its outlook differed from one country to another.
Private expectations for this year’s GDP growth had improved further thanks to better effective data for activity and demand, significant progress in the national vaccination campaign and in the re-opening of the economy, among other factors.
In addition, all this was taking place in a local context where there was quite significant financial tension, amid an environment of uncertainty and volatility.
Activity was proceeding as expected, which was consistent with an inflationary convergence process in line with estimates in the central scenario of the Report.
This region was facing the most complex situation, with long-standing doubts regarding the handling of the sanitary emergency and deep damage especially on employment, which pointed to a sluggish recovery.
Undoubtedly the shock would have contractionary effects and reduce inflationary pressures in the policy horizon.
All the Board members stressed the need to extend the Bank’s powers and instruments to take action when confronting riskier scenarios, considering the high degree of uncertainty that still hovers over the spread of the pandemic, the performance of the domestic economy, and the dynamics of the financial markets.
Meanwhile, the longer-term rates had risen less than their external counterparts, in a context in which the local risk indicators remained contained.
Although still in pessimistic territory, the expectations of businesses and households had picked up somewhat.
Trade tensions between the US and China had moderated somewhat, but with a limited impact on the markets.
In the area of fiscal policy, it was mentioned that the proposed budget of the public sector for 2019, currently being discussed by the Congress, was consistent with the fiscal consolidation plan announced at the beginning of this Administration.
This discrepancy was in line with domestic uncertainty levels that remained high by historical standards.
Exports remained weak, partly because of the poor performance of some trading partners and the impact of the trade war.
In this scenario, all the Board members considered 50bp and 75bp cuts to be plausible options.
While various sources of information suggested that businesses had sufficient margins to accommodate a rise in imported costs, especially in a context of what they described as lower demand, goods inflation was showing rapid declines in several economies, reflecting the aforementioned global prices factor.
Many of them responded that 2018 had closed with better results than in previous years, although less than they initially expected.
Germany, in particular, had disappointed again according to different data, with its evolution lagging somewhat with respect to other countries in the zone.
Still, given its coherence with the March central scenario, the option of lowering the MPR by 50bp clearly dominated when the two alternatives were contrasted.
The Bank Credit Survey of the third quarter reported tighter conditions for all types of loans, as higher risks were perceived in all segments.
This would likely have an impact on China’s growth outlook, although for now its potential effects were contained, and the copper price was still high.
This could be done in two ways.
This raised a note of caution, because while some countries had significantly reduced the number of cases, others were struggling with a significant increase.
Also present; Beltrán de Ramón, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, Legal Counsel and Attestor; Elías Albagli, Monetary Policy Division Director; Ricardo Consiglio, Financial Markets Division Director; Rosario Celedón, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Michel Moure, Institutional Affairs Division Director; Diego Ballivián, Corporate Risk Division Director; Markus Kirchner, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Lucas Bertinatto, acting International Analysis Manager; Sofía Bauducco, Economic Research Manager; Felipe Musa, Market Operations Manager; Juan Carlos Piantini, Business Strategy Administration Manager; Miguel Fuentes, Financial Stability Manager; Francisco Ruiz, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Juan Pablo Rioseco, acting Communications Manager; Andrés Sansone, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Erika Arraño, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General.
In core inflation, the fall had been more limited (to 10.3% annualized in April), which coincided with still high pressures on the services side.
However, the deflationary effects of potential appreciations of their currencies would still be present and strong.
All the Board members agreed that, as the downward risks in the local economy and particularly in inflation had intensified, the valid options for this Meeting should be to either hold the MPR at 2.5% with an expansionary bias, or reduce it by 25 bp, also with an expansionary bias.
On the domestic front, it was noted that one element that had weighed significantly in recent analyses was the evaluation that the labor market behaved according to the rest of the economy, having succeeded in absorbing a significant increase in the labor supply causing no big rise in the unemployment rate and only a moderate slowdown in wage growth.
Regarding corporate demand, the unrelenting deterioration of investment-related requirements was compounded with a fall in working capital requirements.
The labor market behaved consistently with the trajectory of the cycle, the unemployment rate stood at 8.7% in the moving quarter ending in March, while the labor force was expanding steadily.
In this regard, it was recalled that the Bank had already adopted a major package of measures at the end of last year when the social crisis had significantly affected the domestic markets.
For this year, activity was expected to grow between -0.5% and 0.25%.
Among other factors, this was explained by the reduction in employment and the increase in the labor force.
Although part of this increase is explained by the more volatile CPI items and the depreciation of the peso, inflation of those components of the basket that are most sensitive to the activity gap (i.e.
It was mentioned that there could be risk factors associated with the expected trajectories of monetary policy in Chile and the U.S. and the reduced presence of some important players in the forex market.
On one hand, the new information caused no significant change in the external impulse projected in the Report’s baseline scenario.
This contrasted with the situation in the rest of the world, where an important group of economies remained weak in both their actual and expected performance, including China.
The rise in Covid-19 infections had been significant in many countries, pushing some of them to new records.
There was agreement that the option of raising the MPR by 50bp did not seem consistent with the current macro framework.
In other words, adjusting again the rate based on partial and qualitative background could increase, rather than reduce, uncertainty in the economy if it was not clear how much the macro projections had changed and how deep and persistent the additional monetary stimulus was intended to be.
It was also noted that the external risks had implications for inflation and monetary policy in Chile that could differ in both the short and the long term.
All the Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario could require further monetary stimulus.
Several Board members agreed that the 50bp hike option had the advantage of being the one expected by the market consensus and, therefore, would not come as a surprise.
As global inflation was still increasing central banks had either continued to raise their benchmark rates or signaled a faster hike if the rising inflation proved more persistent.
Meanwhile, the possible negative readings that a MPR cut at this Meeting could open also had to be considered, especially if it was interpreted as a worsening in the Bank’s vision of growth.
It was also noted that global interest rates at different maturities had declined and the peso had appreciated over the course of the past month, due to both changes in the rate differential and a decrease in foreign exchange premiums.
There was important news in the global scenario.
They all agreed that it was imperative to address these questions in order to possibly make adjustments to these measures.
In the Board’s opinion, flatlining the MPR not only was consistent with inflation’s convergence in the policy horizon, but it also contributed to reducing uncertainty within the economy during a troubled period.
Moreover, new data on the consumption trajectory revealed a slower than expected speed of adjustment.
All in all, it was emphasized that this issue should remain under close scrutiny.
Nonetheless, US figures differed from those of other developed countries, in line with discrepancies in terms of activity, with increases in both headline and core measures.
The same behavior was observed in the case of firms (IMCE) across the different economic sectors.
Until then, the economy had behaved in line with projections in the September Report, with annual GDP growth at 3.3% in the third quarter and an annual CPIEFE variation of around 2%.
On the other hand, the inherent pressures of the idiosyncratic depreciation that the peso had accumulated since October 2019 were still present.
These developments occurred in the midst of still high cost pressures, as confirmed by preliminary data for the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) of February 2022, where the persistence of procurement and product availability problems were widely mentioned by the companies consulted and continued to put pressure on margins, while still facing high demand.
The oil price had climbed to around US$85 per barrel (+19% since the last meeting, for the WTI-Brent average).
Also, construction had recovered recently.
In this context, a precautionary attitude would be advisable.
The main constraints to their decisions had to do with the uncertainty of the sanitary situation, the evolution of demand and the political environment.
The business cost outlook (IMCE) remained near record highs.
In pesos, this cost had risen, influenced by adjustments in monetary policy expectations.
This was associated with, among other factors, the dynamic performance of the U.S. economy.
On the other hand, the global Covid-19-related sanitary crisis that had broken out in recent weeks was becoming the main factor reshaping both the global and local scenarios.
However, it was pointed out that this recovery was still very heterogeneous, which was especially evident in the labor market and left no doubt that there were still loopholes to be closed in the economy.
The importance of keeping this in mind was also stressed, as resolving the imbalances was a necessary condition for the economy to grow in a healthy manner while creating jobs and boosting real wages.
This positioned our economy near the positive sensitivity considered in the scenarios of that MP Report.
In any case, it was also pointed out that, particularly in the United States, the macro policy mix seemed to be incubating inflationary risks that were not negligible.
On the one hand, the markets had undoubtedly taken the recent political scenario in stride.
The pandemic continued to be a source of concern, but with somewhat reduced intensity.
That could also be the case with investment, because the background provided by the Capital Goods Corporation Survey tended to reinforce the perception of more dynamic investment.
Regarding fourth-quarter activity, in most regions performance was poor, especially in activities related to tourism, hotels and retail, where establishments in central areas had been the most affected, as they were more exposed to outbreaks of violence.
It was mentioned that, while the stronger peso was a significant development, an important factor to assess its macroeconomic implications —and its persistence— was to understand the reasons behind it.
One Board member agreed that it was difficult to accurately measure the magnitude of the additional impulse, but said that there were several metrics that could shed some light, such as the Covid loans’ outstanding balance that was still available and needed, the sensitivity of the total commercial credit stock to the flow linked to the FCIC, or the exercises regarding the financing needs of the corporate sector.
The Central Bank of Japan, in its latest statement, had ceased to mention that inflation would reach the target in 2019.
Demand had also underperformed in the second quarter, held back by private consumption.
But if consumption remained dynamic, beyond the adjustment in the automobile market, which was something anticipated and desirable, it was possible for inflation to resume its convergence trajectory as the effects of the greater monetary stimulus adopted in the previous Meeting, so a new MPR reduction would be unnecessary.
As for global financial markets, compared with the previous Meeting, long-term interest rates had seen some decline in both developed and emerging economies.
On the expenditure side, retail sales and imports of consumer goods, among other indicators, continued to show a less marked deterioration in household consumption, validating the hypothesis that the first quarter contraction, particularly in durables, was rather a preview of the expected adjustment.
The survey also reported a rebound in firms’ requests for funds, especially for working capital, as was also confirmed by May’s IPN.
In investment, survey information (CBC), capital goods imports and expectations continued to suggest that, beyond the positive surprise of the third quarter, investment would be adjusting downwards.
The evolution of consumption continued to be affected by these dynamics, in particular the sale of non-essential goods.
Meanwhile, concerns about Europe had resurfaced, both because of Brexit-related difficulties and because of greater political uncertainty in the region.
This considered that, on average, the economy would grow above potential during the period 2018-2020.
Governor Costa, Vice-Governor Novy and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Soto voted in favor of lowering the monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, to 6%.
All five Board members agreed that the recent evolution of the economy pointed in the required direction.
In fact, an evaluation of the state of the gaps showed them to be bigger in the sectors linked to goods consumption.
Although this latter risk was nothing new, it presented different dimensions that were not necessarily independent of each other.
At the same time, the option to raise it had to be included if an important increase was anticipated in either, the CPI or the CPIEFE, even if it responded to movements in the most volatile components of the basket.
Also, in the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) of February, most of the respondents saw a tightening of financial conditions, mainly due to some increase in interest rates in certain segments—although they noted that they were still low by the usual standards— and greater difficulties in credit granting requirements.
Food prices had shown mixed movements.
This would improve the current account of the balance of payments.
At the global level, the correct calibration of monetary and fiscal stimuli in terms of their size, scope and permanence emerged as key, so as to strengthen the recovery without generating macro-financial imbalances.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to raise the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, to 2.75%.
Another factor had to do with geopolitical conditions.
In particular, the behavior of salaried employment, the persistent pessimism of expectations and the meager credit growth, most notably of consumer loans, stood out.
Several also pointed to a reduction in labor income resulting from shorter working hours, no overtime, reduced sales commissions, elimination of benefits and wage adjustments, among others.
It was added that the Fed had increased its hawkish tone.
Several Board members recalled that the Report’s central scenario assumed that economic activity would be below potential GDP for several quarters.
Thereafter, the stock would be gradually reduced as the assets in the portfolio matured.
About possible explanations for this behavior, it was mentioned that it was not unusual to see this kind of movements during episodes where the MPR began to be changed after a period of stability.
It was added that core inflation for goods could be responding to a delay in the pass-through of the exchange rate rise of the second half of the year to prices, in which case a reversal should be expected in the short term, provided that the exchange rate stayed longer at its current levels.
All this occurred in a context in which cost pressures continued to be present, linked to the difficulties in the supply of goods, soaring transportation costs and/or the high prices of inputs and commodities.
Since the last Meeting, the IPSA had fallen by nearly 5%, the sovereign risk premium (CDS) had increased and the nominal 10-year interest rates (BTP-10) showed no major variation.
He added that this had been known to happen in the past and its consequences were not positive for either the developed or the emerging economies.
Two years ahead, for the second month in a row the median of the Economic Expectations Survey (EES) was above 3% annually, with 70% of the respondents pointing to a value above 3%.
In addition, annual employment growth continued to be almost entirely accounted for by informal wage earners.
Meanwhile, a more in-depth review of the impact of immigration on the labor market showed that, in principle, in the last two to three years many more jobs had been created than was indicated by the surveys, whose designs did not allow to properly capture demographic changes of such magnitude.
Furthermore, there was agreement that the magnitude of the first move did not impose any conditions on those of the subsequent moves, which could be smaller.
In turn, activity had reduced its annual expansion rate in the first quarter, falling below expectations.
The various measures of expectations available (i.e., taken from surveys and financial asset prices) placed it at 11.25% at the October meeting, and then peaked between 11.25% and 11.5% at December.
This, coupled with the evolution of its other determinants, was behind the significant depreciation of the peso, showing greater than usual sensitivity.
As for inflation expectations two years ahead, both our Economic Expectations Survey (EEE) and Financial Traders Survey (EOF) stood at 3%.
In this regard, one participant mentioned that it was important to note that, despite the good twelvemonth figures and the difficulty to interpret seasonally adjusted figures, activity remained weak, which was consistent with the meager creation of private salaried employment, low cost-side inflationary pressures and general information that had been collected for the Business Perceptions Report.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted in favor of raising the MPR by 125 basis points, to 4%.
It was added that it was important to bear in mind that the advantage of the inflation targeting scheme was that by establishing a two-year horizon, it avoided reacting to shocks that had transitory effect on inflation dynamics and did not jeopardize the achievement of the target.
It could not be ruled out that these phenomena were affecting the price of some Chilean financial assets.
However, in the current circumstances, marked by inflation well above the 3% target, with upside surprises for several months and where everything indicated that inflation had become more persistent, it was very difficult for the Bank not to respond strongly to this news.
By contrast, housing construction and the salmon industry posted good results.
On the demand side, data on retail sales, imports of construction materials and capital goods, among others, again showed weak consumption and investment.
Actually, our country had rapidly moved to phase 4 of the outbreak, which entailed a number of restrictions that would have immediate effects on the economy’s performance.
Most of the firms surveyed in the IPN indicated that the performance of their businesses had remained stable or had declined slightly in recent times, in the context of still strong demand and where some businesses had ended 2021 at new highs.
Meanwhile, some short-term indicators continued to perform below expectations in the Eurozone—although levels were consistent with a recovery of the economy’s growth pace—, while in Japan they pointed to weaker activity.
On the consumer side, the sale of durable goods, again led by automobile sales, kept performing more favorably than non-durables, whose imports were dynamic nonetheless.
In particular, there was an agreement that the weaker demand and supply of commercial credit that had been observed in recent months reflected the fact that the simple availability of new credit for working capital would no longer be enough to meet the needs of companies.
Expenditure fundamentals remained strong with high levels of confidence and a robust labor market.
This figure was in line with forecasts in the June Report, with persistently weak areas more closely related to services, in a context of low inflationary pressures due to the abrupt widening of the activity gap.
At the same time, longterm interest rates were high and were becoming more sensitive to changes in expectations regarding the Federal Reserve’s next decisions.
Governor Costa, Vice-Governor García and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Novy voted for lowering the monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, to 9%.
This, coupled with the announcement of the employment subsidy program, somehow mitigated the risk of a further worsening of the labor market.
Attention was drawn to how it would affect credit volume, especially in economies like the United States, where smaller banks are a significant source of financing.
This was accompanied by a series of fiscal measures and the implementation of a third withdrawal of pension savings.
Regarding the magnitude of the new monetary stimulus, all the Board members agreed that some figure of up to 10% of GDP seemed consistent with what the economy needed to navigate this complex period, to allow inflation to converge to the target and to ensure financial stability.
If this increase in credit were to occur, it would limit the destruction of jobs, resulting in a smoother reactivation of the economy that would allow inflationary convergence and would prevent some adverse effects on the financial system that could aggravate the costs of the pandemic.
This increase was largely explained by a decompression of term premia, associated partly with a market reassessment of the U.S. fiscal outlook.
Meanwhile, the reaction of inflation expectations and interest rates showed that the markets had grasped the specific origin of the inflationary shock and its transitory nature.
The year’s GDP growth exceeded forecasts, ending 2021 with activity significantly outpacing pre-crisis levels and its estimated potential.
Headline inflation had reached 13.7% annually in September, slightly less than in August, while core inflation —the CPI minus volatiles— had risen to 11.1% annually.
On one hand, broadly speaking, the macroeconomic scenario was aligning itself with the assumptions in the December Report.
However, they agreed that it was very complex to explain this are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
Summing up, all the Board members agreed that either option would be a surprise and there was no clear-cut reason indicating the convenience of making a gradual adjustment instead of doing it in one take, while including more information in the statement and in the understanding that the Report’s release would mitigate any possible misinterpretation.
Although this seemed to be largely explained by the high basis of comparison, another possibility was that, once the most difficult stage of the sanitary emergency was over and a sales had recovered, many companies had begun to reduce their future financial burden, either through amortizations or rescheduling.
All the Board members voted for adopting a set of extraordinary measures.
With this information, the markets’ growth expectations, as measured by the Economic Expectations Survey, were consolidated at 4% for 2018, while for this year and the next they were at 3.6% and 3.5%, respectively, almost unchanged since the close of the December Report.
Likewise, the commercial portfolio maintained negative annual growth rates (–4.5% real annual growth in June), relating to the high comparison base left by the Fogape-Covid lines granted during 2020.
Until the time of the Meeting, the effects on local financial markets had been limited.
In that context, real consumer and commercial loans posted changes of –1.3% and –3.7% in April, respectively.
Instead, what was needed was to assess whether these shocks affected the persistence of inflationary dynamics over the policy horizon.
In the main economies, the tightening of lending conditions, together with monetary tightening, were expected to negatively affect activity in the near future.
The Internet Job Postings Index and IMCE hiring expectations continued to reflect higher labor demand, although with some pullback in the latter in April.
The entire Board agreed that the evaluation of the macroeconomic scenario raised no doubts about the need to lower the MPR by 50 bp altogether.
Against this backdrop, the region’s confidence indicators had seen some marginal improvement.
Lending interest rates had risen further in most portfolios.
In particular, although inflation had closed 2018 somewhat below projections, it was adjusting in the foreseen direction.
The information gathered up to the time of the Meeting in the context of the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) also indicated that activity had increased, which also resulted in a more positive outlook for 2021.
On this, it was noted that, beyond the reservations that part of the market or analysts might have about the decision to normalize the MPR, the available data, plus the analysis and the published statement, led to the conclusion that starting normalizing the monetary policy was absolutely consistent with the current macroeconomic scenario and inflation perspectives.
In the labor market, stability continued to prevail, although there were new layoffs reported in some companies and reduced availability of lower-skilled labor.
Meanwhile, the annual change in the stock of consumer loans continued to shrink in March, while mortgage loans continued to grow at around 8%.
However, high-frequency indicators reveal important differences between sectors, as most sectors exhibited poor results in contrast with the dynamism of investment in the mining industry.
However, the latest information known since then had prompted a change in this assessment.