Overall, careful evaluation of the economy’s responses was also needed, as these could be different from what had been the case in the past, particularly during the commodity super-cycle of the early 2010s.
Nonetheless, it agreed to assess a possible extension and changes in access parameters that would facilitate its use to respond to the needs of the economy at the present stage
In this scenario, the impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad was expected to remain moderate, with weak world growth prospects for both this year and next.
Nominal and UF-indexed 2-year bonds had accumulated significant increases, i.e., more than 70 bp in indexed ones since the previous Meeting, where the discussion around a possible transitory reduction of the VAT was among the main factors behind the correction.
In the latter, some impacts on bank credit to companies were already visible.
Accordingly, several central banks had intensified the shift towards the withdrawal of monetary stimuli.
Equally important were the scars that the pandemic would inflict on households and businesses—including the deterioration of their net worth—and its impact on the future dynamism of the economy.
From a demand-side point of view, although on aggregate neither consumption nor investment showed any significant deviations, the larger drop in private consumption of durable goods stood out.
This program considers the strengthening of incentives for the provision of bank credit to small and medium-sized enterprises, and to non-bank credit providers.
In the financial area, several banks surveyed reported less stringent lending conditions, reiterating also the low interest rate levels in place.
Looking ahead, medium-term inflationary pressures were still expected to be contained, in line with a greater widening of activity gaps as a result of the sanitary emergency, in addition to the fall in oil prices observed since the beginning of the year.
Some Board members noted that this option would be justified from a risk management perspective, especially as long as core inflation remained below the tolerance range and low inflation rates were expected for a significant period of time.
In the U.S., incoming data showed that activity was still resilient, with robust private consumption indicators, supported by the momentum that the labor market continued to provide, as well as the dynamics of saving and credit.
All the Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario had evolved as foreseen in March.
The option would always be present to pause and wait for more background data to enhance the diagnosis.
The movements of the former coincided with inventory reductions in the US, while in the latter they were mainly due to supply-side factors, including the markets’ reaction to OPEC announcements.
The Board members agreed that a macroeconomic scenario where activity was above potential and inflation was speeding up, needed monetary policy to continue to go from an expansionary stance to a more neutral one.
On the fiscal front, there was also increased spending packages in some economies, further swelling the debt of governments, in some cases to their bulkiest in decades.
About the labor market, various sources of information saw significant deterioration.
Despite the positive surprise on the mining side, activity in all other sectors had continued to fall at a gradual pace, consistent with what was anticipated in the June Report.
Activity and demand were still in their adjustment process after the strong imbalances accumulated in 2021, with second-quarter data showing declines in both investment and consumption.
In particular, it would place the MPR somewhat above the median of expectations, but within the corridor, which would give full credibility to the Report’s diagnosis and forecasts while, at the same time, it would reassert the Board decision to take every step necessary to ensure compliance with the inflation target.
The mixed signals coming from the labor market were also discussed.
Meanwhile, the neutral MPR had been revised downward by 25 basis points (bp), partly reflecting the fall in neutral rates around the world and despite the opposing effect that could be expected from the higher trend growth.
This process would occur in large part through the adjustment of private consumption and investment, in a context where the vision of a significant contraction in fiscal spending was maintained.
In this context, market expectations for growth as per the Economic Expectations Survey had been revised downward with respect to the information available at the closing of the last Meeting, to 2.8% and 3.2% for this and next year (from 3.2% and 3.4% at the previous closing, respectively).
The consumer confidence index (IPEC) remained in the pessimistic zone, but with some recent rebound.
However, in early March, turbulence in the U.S. and European banking systems abruptly changed the picture, introducing additional concerns.
Some participants added that while there was some degree of surprise about the pace of the economic recovery, the estimates of the current size of the gap and the evaluation of its implications for inflationary pressures were not very different from December’s scenario.
For April, the market estimated that inflation would stand between 0.1% and 0.2%.
All this, despite the strong improvement in the terms of trade during this period.
It was said that it was important to understand the motives behind these expectations, specifically whether they responded to a judgment on the Bank’s capacity to meet the inflation target or there were originated in a different view of the future evolution of the determinants of inflation..
The exchange rate had depreciated sharply (just over +20% since the last meeting), with high volatility.
In particular, because the futures for the Fed funds rate indicated that they would be kept for a longer period and would be reduced more gradually than expected some time ago, while for the monetary policy rate (MPR), although it had changed in the meantime, the trajectory expected by market prices was similar to the one considered last December.
High-frequency figures for the second quarter — credit and debit cards transaction records (Transbank) and imports data— showed that this spending component was stabilizing at the margin.
Central banks and governments had maintained their efforts or made additional economic policy announcements, holding on to their highly expansionary tone.
In this scenario, doubts about when the Fed would begin reducing the interest rates were the main factor behind the movements of global financial markets.
First, a shift from a coordinated global cycle to one that could be quite unsynchronized, especially between China and the United States.
The March Imacec had risen 6.4% annually, having decreased only 1.6% with respect to February, despite the fact that in that month the number of quarantined people had soared to more than 80% of the national population.
In the financial sector, some improvements in supply and demand conditions were reported.
Thus, improved conditions were observed in the North and a more depressed situation in the South.
This occurred in a context where, despite no major surprises in U.S. activity, the markets had intensified their perception that the U.S. economy could slow down more rapidly.
In seasonally adjusted terms, it had risen 2.6% over its April value, showing growth in most economic sectors.
In contrast, consumption had sustained the expected dynamism.
The different measures of expectations for the monetary policy rate (MPR) i.e.
Among other things, the increase in the cost of medium and long-term financing for all types of agents, the fall of the stock market and the depreciation of the peso drew special attention.
Long-term interest rates had shown mixed movements.
There was consensus that the accumulated information brought no surprises with respect to the last Meeting and to expectations contained in the March Report.
Fears about the performance of the world economy, the potential vulnerabilities of some banks and the evolution of credit in developed economies were particularly noteworthy.
All the Board members agreed that this policy response should contemplate extending the current monetary stimulus and taking measures to safeguard the normal functioning of the credit markets and the effective transmission of the greater monetary impulse.
In this sense, it was to be expected that uncertainty would remain relatively high, beyond some reduction.
For this, it was important to analyze the credit markets separately, to figure out how the liquidity injected in one place ended up flowing to another.
All five Board members agreed that the information gathered since the publication of the last Monetary Policy Report outlined a central scenario in which medium-term inflationary pressures would gradually ease in line with expectations.
It was pointed out that the worsening of the economic outlook was more pronounced for emerging economies, particularly because the perception of risk had increased and those countries perceived as most vulnerable had suffered massive capital outflows.
The mortgage segment had decelerated its real annual growth from 8.8% to 7.8%.
In any case, in the medium term, inflation expectations remained at around 3%, even though in the shorter term they were below the Bank’s projections.
June sectoral activity data (INE) showed a below-expected performance in some sectors.
On the other hand, it called for an assessment of the level of pass-through of the peso depreciation of the last few months and the role played by external prices, in a context of a weaker Chinese economy.
All the Board members agreed that at this point it was complex to assess the balance of these impacts, precisely because they were unfolding and were accompanied by higher-than-usual volatility.
Commodity prices moved primarily up.
The estimated impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad considered that our trading partners’ growth would be fairly the same as our previous projection —i.e., around 3% in the period 20242026—, with some improvement in international financial conditions, including low long-term interest rates and somewhat lower terms of trade.
In addition, the risks in the external scenario were high and more drastic adjustments of interest rates in the developed world could not be ruled out, which, if materialized, would further deteriorate the external impulse relevant for Chile.
In August, the seasonally-adjusted total and non-mining Imacec had fallen compared to previous month, due to one-off factors that had affected educational services.
However, medium-term expectations for investment remained less favorable, as suggested by the evolution of the stock market and uncertainty indicators, the abrupt deterioration of local financial conditions, as well as cash management decisions made by big companies.
Moreover, the economy was still immersed in a context where uncertainty was higher than it had been until a couple of years ago and where the prospects for investment and growth were constrained for the coming years.
Just as it had been argued in the Monetary Policy Report, the complex external scenario was already having an impact on Chile, with opposing effects on exports and capital inflows, while the copper price had remained fairly stable.
Incoming international data showed a continuing recovery, consolidating the outlook for this year.
From the monetary standpoint, several central banks had made further cuts in their benchmark rates and incorporated/extended non-conventional measures, which included different provisions for credit support to firms, asset purchase programs, among others.
This change in the rate differential was generating uncertainty in a market where some medium and long-term investors were less present.
Based on this corridor, to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target within the policy horizon, in a few months the MPR had to stand between 275 and 325 basis points above its level prior to this Meeting (2.75%).
It was noted that the effect of the higher oil price on the short-term inflation projections, without being negligible, was not a big factor in this risk assessment.
Whether at the level of countries, economic sectors and/or socioeconomic groups, there were considerable differences in the way the pandemic had impacted their economic situation, which posed challenges as to how to manage the level of monetary and fiscal stimuli without generating imbalances that would put the economy at risk.
For this reason, there was no conclusive information that would allow judging that the beginning of a potential cycle adjustment in the labor market was underway.
This suggested, in part, that agents had adapted better to the sanitary context, which was also expected to be reflected in a lower impact of the quarantines in April and May, which was already evident in the data on mobility, electricity generation and sales with digital invoices and receipts.
Since the March meeting, stock market indexes had risen and risk premiums in an important group of economies (EMBI and CEMBI) had fallen further, while most currencies had appreciated against the dollar and capital was flowing into the emerging bloc.
This difference could be linked to the exchange rate appreciation of previous quarters, whose effects still dominated over those of the most recent depreciation.
This suggested that the MPR would be kept at its minimum level over most of the two-year monetary policy horizon, and that unconventional measures would remain in effect.
According with the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the third quarter, demand for credit had strengthened in most segments.
Core inflation, as measured by the CPIEFE, had been more subdued, but it was expected to accelerate over the months.
In this context, inflation expectations showed no big change.
In this context, the outlook for growth (EES) for this year continued to be revised upwards (4% in July, 3.8% in June), while for the next two years they had changed little and stood at 3.8%.
However, the indicators showed that there were still significant risks latent associated with such an unprecedented shock.
On the one hand, there was the risk of a more abrupt deterioration of the external scenario, with greater implications for Chile.
The Capital Goods Survey showed an increase in major projects for this and next year, with mining projects standing out.
In the volatile component --also unexpectedly high--, the contribution of fuels and some specific items, such as tourist packages, continued to stand out.
In addition, the Internet Job Postings Index was at its highest of the last five years, the annual variation of real wages was close to its 2019 values and employment expectations (IMCE) were in optimistic territory.
However, the validity of one or another path would only be solved in the light of the evolution of the economy.
The Board considered reducing the MPR by 25 or 50 basis points, quickly discarding the latter.
This contrasted with the deterioration of business expectations (IMCE) and capital goods imports.
In Mexico, at the statistical cutoff date, the proposals announced by the newly-elected government generated uncertainty at the fiscal level, while the expansion projections for Argentina had been cut due to the narrowing of monetary conditions, beyond the positive surprise from first-quarter GDP.
In the profile of activity during the year, a somewhat stronger-than-expected fourth quarter had been observed, confirming the transitory nature of previous quarter’s slowdown.
That is, in recent months annual CPI inflation had remained around 2%, both in its headline and core measures.
In terms of inflation, beyond seasonal increases, the numbers remained contained in the developed world, as did its outlook.
Consumer expectations (IPEC) had improved from the previous Meeting, but were still in pessimistic territory.
Thus, a scenario was outlined in which the financial constraints in the developed world would last longer, so the inflationary problem in those economies could be tackled.
In any case, all GFCF components continued to contract year by year.
At the same time, beyond the magnitude of the MPR cut at this Meeting, the change was consistent with the expectations of the markets, which also saw the need to lower the MPR.
In any case, the assessment of the macroeconomic scenario suggested that the inflationary pressures facing the economy were lower than they had been six months earlier.
Increasing the MPR by 25 basis points was also consistent with signals previously delivered and internalized by the market.
All five Board members agreed that the underlying factors that generated uncertainty and influenced the evolution of economic activity and inflation were outside the scope of macroeconomic policies, despite the fact that they could help to mitigate their negative impacts somewhat.
In this context, the Chinese authorities had continued to announce and implement stimulus measures to stabilize the economy into the near future.
For example, the inflationary outlook in the United States was discussed, together with how an increase could lead to faster interest rate hikes in the US, affecting global financial conditions.
As for the latter, there was no doubt that the economy was adjusting.
Towards the end of 2022 and the turn of 2023, markets had become more optimistic, betting on a smooth inflationary control and practically no recession.
The backdrop for this was higher uncertainty regarding several more structural global factors.
In Latin America, economic recovery was lagging, reflecting quite diverse epidemiological, economic and social realities, which also reflected differences in countries’ policy responses.
However, the latter’s reversal of recent days was also mentioned, in the midst of the discussion about the withdrawal of funds from the pension funds.
External financial markets had reduced their appetite for risk, considering, mainly, the aforementioned elements, doubts that had also triggered a higher degree of volatility in the markets recently.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa, and Naudon voted for lowering the MPR by 25bp, to 1.75%.
Also noted was the surge of new geopolitical risks, more difficult to evaluate or anticipate.
The central scenario of the March Monetary Policy Report had revised upward the GDP growth forecast for 2023.
The central scenario of the September Monetary Policy Report considered that our trading partners would grow by an average of 2.6% in 2022 and 2023, i.e., less than expected in the previous Report.
However, this period had been of short duration and its effects had not been very persistent.
In it, it was noted that since the previous Report, both headline and core inflation had remained around 2%, within a context where the macroeconomic outlook had weakened, increasing the risks concerning the timely convergence of inflation to 3%.
It was added that, however, the most important change was in risks, since the likelihood of scenarios of a more marked deviation of inflation had decreased significantly.
And there was no great concern about the recent exchange rate movements in the opinion of many respondents.
Regarding financing conditions, there were interest rate reductions in all portfolios and increases in the real annual variation of commercial and mortgage loans.
About consumption, durables maintained a better performance than nondurables, despite some moderation in recent data, including automobile sales —which in any case were still growing at double-digit annual rates.
Despite some moderation, inflation expectations two years ahead remained above 3%.
In this context, a major challenge would be to maintain the impulse of monetary and fiscal policy, as well as the ability to safeguard financial stability, until the economy was able to achieve a self-sustained growth rate, reducing the gaps and frictions that still remained.
The macroeconomic scenario continued to evolve driven by the spread of Covid-19 and the containment measures needed to protect the populations’ health.
MPR expectations for the end of this year stood at 8% in the case of the EES and at 8.25% according to the FTS.
They added that the sectors where one could assume greater participation of these groups were not those that showed the greatest changes in wage expansion.
All five Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario in which the monetary policy decision was based was virtually a continuation of that in the September Report, meaning that the economy had regained its ability to grow and its capacity gaps were narrowing.
It was added that this also indicated that the economy’s adjustment was progressing in line with expectations, although this was a matter that needed to continue to be carefully monitored.
The Business Perceptions Report, for which data had been collected up to October 18, reported that the business performance of most respondents had been similar to or somewhat better than the previous quarter, with results that were mostly in line with expectations.
In the rest of these economies, the total figures had shown mixed movements, although core inflation remained contained or exhibited some moderation in the margin.
All this certainly contributed to explaining the upward surprises in headline inflation and why core inflation had persisted between 10.5% and 11% in annual terms for several months.
Meanwhile, the global economic outlook was complex, given the high inflationary persistence worldwide and the rate hikes decided by the main central banks.
All five Board members agreed that the new combination of precedents justified the need to increase the monetary stimulus.
In this sense, initiating the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus at this meeting favored a more gradual convergence to the neutral rate, which bought more time to consider the necessary pauses and flexibility that might be required later on.
In local financial markets, the depreciation of the peso stood out, close to 4.5% since the June Meeting, standing at around $ 660 per dollar, in line with the fall in the copper price and the global appreciation of the dollar.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted for holding the MPR at its technical minimum of 0.5% while strengthening the policy orientation, noting that the MPR will be kept at that level over the entire policy horizon.
Discrepancies between the Fed and market projections for the U.S. monetary policy continued to leave room for possible financial turmoil, as did the discussion around the U.S. government’s debt limit.
On the one hand, it was consistent with the path judged necessary for inflation convergence in the Report’s central scenario, and at the same time it allowed room for additional hikes of a smaller magnitude that could be calibrated with information of the months ahead.
Finally, it was also mentioned that a movement in this direction would be completely unexpected and would give an unwarranted sign of urgency regarding the concern about upward deviations of inflation, much less now that CPIEFE inflation had not even reached 2%.
For this reason, there was coincidence that, rather than postponing monetary policy decisions pending the eventual dissipation of threats, the wise thing to do was to remain alert to the unfolding of events and be prepared to respond to the materialization of risks, especially those that involved a contractionary shock on the Chilean economy.
Considering the related risks, it was noted that neither option clearly dominated over the other, and the data that would be known before the next IPoM would help to better gauge their implications.
On the other hand, the fall in the stock of consumer loans was consistent with the increase in household liquidity provided by pension fund withdrawals and transfers from the Treasury.
Both the EES and the FTS anticipated a reduction of 75 basis points (bp) in the monetary policy rate (MPR) for this Meeting.
Capital inflows to emerging economies had tended to moderate, with marginal outflows from Latin America.
This could have complex effect on exchange rate dynamics and commodity prices.
Incoming data on activity had surprised on the downside, with both regular consumption and investment being weaker than expected.
Meanwhile, in the Eurozone it had been announced that the monetary policy framework would be revised during 2020, which could result in an extension of the current mandate of the European Central Bank.
No country in the world had been spared, so most of them were experiencing significant drops in activity this year.
However, the level of consumption would remain below the previous forecast throughout the projection horizon, which explained the expected behavior of domestic demand.
The Brent–WTI average oil price had risen by 10% since the March Meeting, owing mainly to the geopolitical conflicts.
The labor market showed some recovery from mid-year declines; however, the gaps that had been generated by the pandemic were still significant.
The fall in commodity prices was stressed, affecting not only those products most sensitive to the economic cycle, such as copper, but also foods and energy, whose supply forces had been decisive in recent months.
Interest rates in the fixed-income market, both real and nominal, had shown mixed behavior since the previous Meeting, with decreases in UF-denominated instruments, particularly at 2 and 5 years, and increases in the last week, in line with the international scenario and due to pension system affiliates shifting to riskier funds at the local level.
The recent operations of the Finance Ministry had affected performance of longer bonds.
The Board recalled that during the last several meetings a clear message had been delivered regarding the future evolution of the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR), that was, that the rate would be maintained at 11.25% until the state of the macroeconomy indicated that the convergence of inflation to 3% had been consolidated.
Provisions showed no big variations, and remained at their highest levels of several years.
Accordingly, labor income showed a strong recovery from year-before levels.
The central scenario foresaw that the economy would keep improving, that mobility restrictions would not return to mid-2020 levels, and that the fiscal and monetary impulse would continue.
In the United States, despite the recent resilience, a slowdown in activity was expected in the coming quarters.
At the same time, the Board decided to add an extra, unconventional boost of up to 10% of GDP by means of two measures.
Mining activity had declined from the previous month and year.
The two-year nominal rates spike of nearly 110 basis points (bp) stood out, explained by factors such as the change in the economic and monetary policy outlook, especially after the publication of the June Meeting minutes.
Finally, the faster than expected advancement of the fiscal consolidation objectives was worth noting as a positive development in the domestic scenario.
During the policy horizon, the different measures had revised upwards the expected MPR level.
This was especially complex in a context where the political cycle was introducing more uncertainty about the future evolution of the economy, particularly because of its impact on investment.
The US-China trade conflict had intensified, which, coupled with the cyclical state of the US economy and its difference from that of other developed economies, had caused a global appreciation of the dollar and a fall in commodity prices.
trend and potential growth, activity gap and neutral interest rate).
All of this occurred in a context in which headline and core inflation were still low, particularly in their components more closely linked to said gap.
Increased prices of fuels and some foodstuffs had raised inflation of the volatile component to 7.5% annually.
Attention was drawn to the context of much greater uncertainty, which had become persistent and was having negative consequences on investment, trade and other important macro variables.
Considering the frequency of the monetary policy meetings under the rules in place since 2018, this translated into the MPR needing to be raised by between 50 and 75 basis points (bp) over several meetings, making them the plausible options for this occasion.
The options of raising the MPR by 75 or 150bp seemed less plausible to the Board, because they carried a surprise component that could be complex for the market to understand.
If this were compounded by the greater stability of long-term interest rates, the outlook for global financial conditions was very positive.
The services component continued to be more stable.
The IPSA accumulated slim gains and the sovereign risk premium (CDS) showed some decline.
On the one hand, there was the still complex epidemiological evolution, which added uncertainty to the timing and manner in which sanitary restrictions would be eased.
The discussion focused on the behavior of shorter-term UF-denominated interest rates —typically more closely linked to the business cycle—, which had risen significantly in recent months, the origin of which was unclear, but which could end up having a significant impact on the economy.
In June, headline inflation had been in line with forecasts in the last IPoM.
It was argued that neither risk scenario was imminent and neither dominated over the other.
He further noted that although this corridor was created to factor in the uncertainty about the future evolution of the MPR, on this occasion he could ascertain that that it would remain at its technical minimum for several quarters.
However, it did raise a red flag, as it could somehow mean that the transmission of the idiosyncratic peso depreciation was not evolving with the intensity expected in December, or that disinflationary pressures were more acute than expected.
In this context of more persistent inflation, all the Board members agreed that it required a more restrictive monetary policy —in both nominal and real terms— than had been anticipated in the June MP Report.
The main argument for this option was that the evolution of macroeconomic conditions and their immediate prospects were sufficient to push inflation to 3%, which warranted beginning the monetary policy rate normalization shortly.
Plus, the announcements of new fiscal packages, particularly in the United States, which had driven stock market hikes globally, increases in long-term interest rates in developed economies, capital inflows to emerging economies and commodity price rises.
Contributing to this was the behavior of consumption, the fact that investment had picked up somewhat and that the labor market remained resilient.
About the external front, it was said that, far from being resolved, commercial conflicts and political uncertainty in the main economies of the world had intensified and extended into new dimensions of economic relations across countries.
In any case, they stressed the improvements in sanitary indicators and the possibility that stricter containment measures might be relaxed over a shorter time horizon, something that was not thought possible just a few weeks back.
One Board member mentioned that this option could also be valid if less negative effect it would have on the already plummeting investment was considered.
Board members commented on the rationality of the assumption for the MPR’s trajectory as a reference for the Board’s discussion.
The global growth outlook for 2023 remained weak, despite a small upward adjustment.
Both the FBS and the EES estimated that the MPR would not be raised any sooner than May 2021, while asset prices saw it rising by December that year.
This could occur due to the importance of energy as a production input or due to the indexation processes to which the economy was subject.
This was much more consistent with the Report’s baseline scenario and associated risks, allowing for greater certainty regarding the convergence of inflation to 3% in the policy horizon.
Another was that consumer loans were decelerating rapidly, suggesting a more cautious behavior of households, together with credit constraints that were perhaps becoming more stringent on the credit suppliers’ side.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to reduce the MPR by 50 basis points, to 2.5%.
Long-term interest rates —BCP and BCU at 5 and 10 years— saw sharp decreases in the days following the June Meeting, of between 30 and 40 basis points.
Medium- and long-term fixed income rates had declined sharply.
In any case, both large companies and SMEs perceived an increase in their need for working capital.
Therefore, it was still premature to think that the inflationary problem had been solved, so the Bank should remain watchful for developments in the macroeconomic scenario.
It was noted that the conduct of monetary policy was based not only on analyzing inflation, but it also had a component of economic growth.
Board member Céspedes voted for reducing it by 125 basis points.
In the Eurozone, the outlook remained negative, due largely to the impact of the energy crisis and the tightening of financial conditions.
Regarding the price of a barrel of oil, WTI and Brent showed opposite movements (of the order of +5.8 and -3.4%, respectively), significantly reducing the spread between the two.
The evolution of both indicators had been lower than foreseen in the December Report.
In domestic spending, private consumption indicators had continued to consolidate the expected adjustment path.
It had the advantage of clearly stating that, despite how important the shock on inflation was, it was transitory, and monetary policy could accommodate it by further reducing the MPR in the quarters ahead.
Inflation kept rising steadily, to more than 6.5% annually, due mainly to the exceptional expansion of domestic demand and the depreciation of the peso caused by local factors.
It was added that, beyond the Bank’s active response to the strong inflationary outbreak, it was evident that inflation was still high and that its local drivers, particularly consumption, was yet to show clear signs of normalization, beyond the fact that investment showed a clear weakness.
This was associated with the increased household liquidity and the gradual reopening of the economy.
On the supply side, credit constraints had eased for large companies while mortgage lending conditions had tightened somewhat.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for holding the MPR at 0.5%.
All five Board Members agreed that, as the MPR approached its target level, tactical considerations took on greater prominence when evaluating monetary policy options.
However, all the Board members agreed that given the distance that still existed with respect to the neutral interest rate, these considerations were not an obstacle for the two policy options proposed at this meeting (i.e.
On the other hand, such two-step cut could be construed as a scenario that required a reduction of more than 50 bp, which was neither consistent with the Report’s baseline scenario.
Although limited, activity and inflation brought some upward surprises which, coupled with the more positive tone of the external scenario, spurred some concerns about the speed of the economic adjustment and its implications for the convergence of inflation.
The Imacec data for November showed the impact of specific supply-related factors -in sectors such as fishing and mining-, as well as unexpected and transitory disruptions in manufacturing output.
The different market expectations (i.e.
In the former, the persistent contraction of installment loans stood out again.
On the one hand, the somewhat stronger domestic demand, in a context where the higher copper price boosted up the terms of trade.
On the other, the data on pension-fund contributors showed that formal salaried employment had made a full recovery.
Argentina had officially entered a recession in the third quarter of 2018 and partial figures for the fourth quarter pointed to a new contraction.
In contrast, they assigned greater relevance to the costs that could involve a decision that was not backed by a sufficient analysis and projections.
In several regions, construction and real estate were also among the hardest hit.
One of them pointed out that, given the evolution of the macro scenario, this option was not consistent with the monetary policy path required for inflation to converge to the 3% target within two years.
This larger than anticipated drop significantly reversed an earlier trend in which private consumption fell less than projected.
On the day of the Meeting, the metal was trading at around US$3.7 per pound.
In the country, it was mentioned that the unfolding of the macroeconomic scenario was in line with the central scenario of the March MP Report.
The same Board member added that, nevertheless, at the same time there was the risk of it being perceived as the reflection of a more severe situation than had been estimated in the MP Report’s central scenario, which could drive up the entire interest rate curve to undesirable levels.
In fact, both activity and inflation were somewhat higher than expected in December, while inflationary pressures stemming from abroad had increased.
Consumer expectations (IPEC) continued to be pessimistic, with a slight decline in their last figure, especially due to the increase in inflation.
Increased risk aversion had led to declines in world stock markets, while the dollar had appreciated sharply against other currencies and long-term interest rates had shown mixed movements.
However, some early indicators and qualitative background suggested downside risks for the coming months.
On the other hand, fourth-quarter exports had fallen in annual terms, mainly due to supply-side factors that had affected industrial and mining shipments, while agricultural shipments had risen.
On the other hand, news about inflation was not encouraging either.
Inflation expectations two years ahead remained between 2.8% and 3%.
He concluded by noting that the cost of making mistakes in this sense could be high, since it would imply that within a few months a much more steep path of future rates would have to be communicated.
All the Board members agreed that the proper monetary policy conduct implied meeting the inflationary target efficiently, i.e., at the lowest possible cost in terms of activity.
In the labor market, workforce remained abundant, but most respondents did not foresee big changes in their staffing.
However, around a third of the analysts polled in the EES and almost half of the analysts polled in the FTS expected a cut of 100bp or more.
The risk that emerged in this area was about the growth capacity of the world economy, because it could hardly be thought that monetary policy, or other countercyclical measures, had the capacity to continue providing an impulse of the same magnitude as in the past.
It was pointed out that tighter financial conditions than what was being perceived was a risk for the future evolution of activity, the gap and inflation.
On the one hand, INE data showed the unemployment rate at around 10%, high inactivity —which had even risen in May— and employment affected in all its categories.
As for commodities, the price of copper had remained virtually flat since the September Meeting, combining inventory depletions and reduced imports globally.
Or two, with a 50 bp reduction and a neutral bias stating that the next MPR movement will hinge on how certain the Board is about the convergence of inflation to the target.
The median of October’s Economic Expectations Survey (EES) yielded an estimated fall in GDP of 5.5% this year, albeit with a high dispersion of responses.
If it proved persistent in time, it could erode their solvency position, in particular that of SMEs, which would adversely affect economic activity and the labor market.
In the Eurozone, Germany again stood out among the most hurt, with further worsening exports data.
March inflation had been 0.2%, slightly below market expectations (by around one tenth of a point).
First-quarter GDP growth in the Eurozone also slowed down from the quarter before, in line with market forecasts and activity indicators that had lately been unexpectedly low in general.
From the expenditure side, the adjustments in consumption- and investment-related high-frequency indicators continued, including retail trade, imports, and low construction activity.
Although some correction was to be expected, it was clear that on average they would be well above estimates of just a few weeks before.
There was a more positive perception of investment across the different regions, especially those related to mining, forestry and salmon farming.
However, the risk of the possible consequences of high corporate indebtedness had risen.
Among them, the cycle’s maturing process, which had taken quite long; political pressures in different places; the risk of a trade war; and financial stress.
As for private inflation expectations, there was a decrease for the end of 2019 and one year ahead.
The activity gap was significantly revised upwards when removing the transitory effect on activity in the transport sector.
The evolution of the Covid-19 pandemic and the actions taken to contain it presented an unparalleled, massive shock on the global economy.
This situation contrasted with the limited pace of growth observed in the rest of the world, especially due to a greater-than-expected slowdown in China in the second quarter.
The movements in the local financial market remained aligned with expectations that monetary policy would become less contractionary, in a context where global markets had reflected a greater appetite for risk, with a global depreciation of the dollar, an increase in stock markets and a compression of risk premiums.
The reason for this was that in such a scenario inflation would fall gradually, and a relatively rapid decline in the MPR would allow the Bank to promptly produce negative real rates.
On the other hand, in a context of high short-term inflation and a weak economy in the medium term, keeping inflation expectations in line with the target was essential for monetary policy to be able to deal appropriately with this scenario.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 2.5%.
For this reason, and because of its alignment with market expectations for the macroeconomic outlook of the coming months, it was an option that ensured credibility and effectiveness.
The Bank Lending Survey for the first quarter showed that credit supply and demand had generally continued to weaken in all portfolios.
It was also noted that, although a mild revision to world growth could be good news for emerging economies, as it would imply that the main central banks would adopt more expansionary monetary policies, probably the effect of the interest rate decrease would be lower than in other circumstances.
In others, respondents pointed out that the highly volatile exchange rate had led them to postpone adjustments to final prices, and that the pass-through could begin to occur as the large inventories were used up.
Regarding the domestic scenario, it was noted that the most relevant surprise of recent times had been the dynamism of private consumption, which exceeded the already high estimates of September.
These changes were especially important given the risks characteristic of today’s world economy and the hypotheses that had been incorporated into the projections of the domestic scenario.
In addition, the June MP Report would contain an update of the structural parameters of trend growth and the neutral interest rate, which would allow for a reassessment of the activity gap and the degree of expansiveness of monetary policy.
Inactivity had risen substantially, which, together with the Employment Protection Law, had contained an even greater increase in the unemployment rate, although indicators of underutilization had worsened further.
The data showed that investment flows from non-residents were still on positive ground and recent bond issues abroad by both the government and companies had been successful, with no big increases in risk premiums.
However, they remained very sensitive to new information, in a context of greater uncertainty regarding future financial conditions.
At the same time, the outlook implicit in the prices of financial assets anticipated that the MPR would stand at 7.5% next December.
On this last point, abundant liquidity seemed to be playing an important role.
All the Board members agreed that this option was totally consistent with the baseline scenario in the June Monetary Policy Report and, in particular, with the monetary policy strategy outlined there.
They also agreed that the decision to hold the MPR at 1.75% dominated every other option.
Most recently, the latter had been overshadowed by the Coronavirus crisis.
If this was coupled with a still relatively appreciated real exchange rate, it became clear that the risks for inflation were still present.
In construction and other works, among other elements the upward correction of the CBC’s Project Survey reflected that a greater number of economic sectors had increased the number of initiatives for this and the next few years, adding to the high flows that continued to be projected for mining.
In any case, toward the end of the quarter some sectors had surprised positively, such as manufacturing and retail, pointing to some stabilization of the Chinese economy.
In this scenario, excessive tightening of local financial conditions could be counterproductive, and the Board would keep a watchful eye on economic developments.
Its evolution had received opposite influences: on the one hand, from lower activity in China and, on the other hand, from inventory levels, which remained tight.
The upturn was visible in the manufacturing and retail sectors, along with labor market information which, at the margin, was also more positive in some of them.
This scenario had been shaped amid low inventory levels, where replenishment was occurring gradually, and transportation costs ran high.
The main argument against this option was that raising the MPR at this Meeting would be unexpected and, consequently, confusing, opposing the desirable practices of a duly informed and anticipated policy.
Meanwhile, costs had risen for a fraction of interviewees, who attributed this to factors such as shortage of inputs and/or products for sale.
Bank credit remained tight, as could be seen in the performance of real loans in all portfolios.
The postponement of the interest rate cut in the US and the slower reductions central banks elsewhere had affected Chile's interest rate differential with other economies.
In that context, the central scenario of the June Report assumed that the first quarter’s drop in durable consumption represented an advance of the expected trajectory.
That only realized that it was on the right path and that information still had to be accumulated to assess whether the convergence of inflation to the 3% target had been consolidated.
Pending the March figure, which was to be known the day after the Meeting, the CPI’s annual variation had fallen to 11.9% in February, which was still well above the 3% target.
He recalled that in the past, shocks of this kind had generated a response of more—not less—expansionary monetary policy, despite the higher short-term inflation.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) of the fourth quarter again reported a decline in companies’ credit demand for investment and working capital purposes, while the supply was tighter, especially for SMEs.
As for the domestic financial market, it was pointed out that liquidity levels were still high, with interest rates aligned with the message of the MPR being kept at its technical minimum for an extended period and long-term rates that had fallen in response to the monetary policy announcements of the previous Meeting.
In addition, especially in the case of Chile, there was the progress of the vaccination process, which was expected to lead to a significant reduction in sanitary restrictions in the second half of the year.
It was said that, in fact, in recent days greater volatility had been observed and pressures had increased on those economies perceived as the weaker ones.
Primarily, its effects would be channeled through lower external demand and tighter financial conditions.
In this context, the Board had begun to reduce the monetary policy rate (MPR) at its July meeting, lowering it from 11.25% to 10.25%.
In the emerging world, China’s first-quarter GDP had remained as strong as the previous quarter and the mixed marginal numbers had continued to support the deceleration and rebalancing of activity foreseen for the next quarters.
In any case, all these variables remained well below pre-pandemic levels, while important risks remained concerning the performance of activity going forward, mainly considering the recent resurgence of Covid-19 in several countries, and restated confinements in some places.
At the local level, the outlook was somewhat more positive for investment, reflecting that, for now, the greater global uncertainty had not permeated the local economy so much.
The evolution of the local financial market had been marked by external and internal factors, with the latter predominating, possibly related to reduced local uncertainty.
All five Board members agreed that, given the evolution of the macroeconomic scenario and related risks, the MPR needed to move towards a more restrictive level, as reflected in the MPR corridor depicted in the December MP Report.
Local activity had performed below expectations in the June IPoM.
By then, the initial impact on private consumption of the third pension savings withdrawal, which was preliminarily estimated to be less than for the previous two, could also be assessed.
All the five Board members agreed that an increase of 25 basis points in the MPR was sufficiently robust to the different scenarios that had been analyzed for the economy and, therefore, made it the best option.
However, the negative shock caused by the pandemic was very significant, as reflected in the high number of persons and firms whose income source had been affected.
Its contents show that, in line with forecasts, domestic economic activity recovered its growth pace after taking a pause in the third quarter of 2018.
In the fixed-income segment, the 10-year nominal rate had risen by 30 to 40 basis points (bp) more than its developed-economy counterparts since the beginning of March.
In turn, the peso had appreciated more than other comparable currencies and had strengthened around 8% against the dollar.
At the same time, there were also very significant external risks.
Headline inflation had risen above forecasts in the last MP Report, standing at 5.3% annually at September.
Accordingly, the levels of retail activity and vehicle sales (ANAC) were high, while inventories, as reflected in the underlying trade index, had been significantly reduced.
In China, there were doubts concerning the magnitude that the slowdown of activity could achieve and the effectiveness of its stimulus policies, coupled with medium-term risks that might continue to incubate.
In any case, some related indicators had performed somewhat better than expected.
The March Report, where some more information would be available, would allow a better assessment of the implications of this surprise.
The latter had continued to put pressure on supply chains, which reinforced the view that their impact would last longer than previously expected.
In this scenario, the Fed had once again raised the benchmark rate at its September meeting with prospects that, without new developments, it would continue to advance in the monetary normalization.
This had been especially noticeable in countries displaying a more controlled epidemiological situation, either due to the effectiveness of their sanitary containment measures or to the progress of their vaccination programs, which had allowed them to proceed with their reopening plans.
Second, the necessary consistency between exchange rate intervention and monetary policy limited the room for rate reductions over the coming months, as speculation on the latter could generate the kind of volatility the intervention sought to avoid.
There was agreement that the two most important developments in the projection scenario suggested a path for the nominal MPR somewhat above that considered in March, as contained in the June IPoM.
Therefore, in the Board’s opinion, what had to be done was to analyze whether there were any clear signs of said process being consolidated.
The most recent activity and spending data had brought positive surprises, while measures to support its real-estate sector seemed to have reduced the likelihood of a severe contraction in the near future.
It was agreed that the evolution of the labor market required special attention.
The international outlook was still evolving favorably, with global growth projections consolidating steadily.
The change in perspectives on the private consumption side was stressed.
The signals obtained so far made the scenarios that marked the limits of the interest rate corridor of the June Report unlikely.
In particular, it was striking that external and domestic bond issues had eased off considerably since March, considering they had experienced high dynamism in the first few months of the year.
In the Eurozone, inflation had continued to decline, although service inflation remain high.
In his opinion, the degrees of uncertainty were important, and just as more negative scenarios could not be ruled out, neither could more positive scenarios be dismissed.
Salaried employment continued to slightly outpace self-employment.
It was pointed out that in recent weeks the external scenario seemed less adverse for the emerging world.
This latter view could be exacerbated by a decision to apply a 75bp reduction with a downward bias.
While respondents saw no major obstacles in refinancing or deferring existing loans, access to new loans was more difficult, particularly due to risk policies.
This was reasonably consistent with the difficulties in finding workers in certain sectors reported in the preliminary background information leading to the Business Perceptions Report.
In Latin America, despite rather improved confidence indicators in the margin, many economies had seen weak performance in the early part of the second quarter, as was evident in monthly activity figures.
There was consensus among the Board members that both options met the need to continue reducing the MPR, thus reflecting the economy’s progress in resolving the significant macroeconomic imbalances and the process of inflationary convergence.
Several Board Members considered that the option of raising the MPR by 125bp could be understood as being more consistent with risk assessment in terms of inflationary dynamics, while signaling more clearly the concern about the persistence of the deviation of two-year inflation expectations from 3%, the concern about a change in the dynamics of price adjustment by firms and the obvious need for the economy to adjust activity.
In this context, long-term interest rates in developed economies had fallen across the board, risk premiums remained contained and volatility indexes, after a temporary rise, were back to mid-June levels.
In the same context, the stock market returns had worsened and the peso, with ups and downs, had appreciated.
Financial conditions had improved in terms of rates.
In general terms, incoming news in recent weeks tended to confirm the view of the macroeconomic scenario adopted at the May Meeting, including the change in the monetary policy rate (MPR) trajectory anticipated at the moment.
One Board member thought it was appropriated to analyze the option of reducing the MPR by 150bp, but then added that it would be preferable to wait for the next MP Report to implement such a change in the monetary policy strategy.
For this Meeting they considered three options: (i) raise the MPR by 100 basis points (bp); (ii) raise the MPR by 125bp; and (iii) raise the MPR by 150bp.
It was discussed that, in this context, the economy was facing a particularly complex scenario of very significant risks.
And two, it could lead people to believe that the Bank was too lax regarding its commitment with the inflation target.
The decline in annual inflation was positive news.
Thus, part of this effect would be transmitted to the external sector via imports.
By sectors, trade continued to lead as the best performer.
The main arguments in favor and against of each of these options were the following: are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
In their opinion, one should not lose sight of the fact that inflation was still high and the reduction in the core was less marked, suggesting that inflationary pressures had not yet dissipated to a significant degree.
In short, this option was the most appropriate if the aim was to anticipate the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus and to gain room in the face of sensitive scenarios of higher inflation.
Bank credit continued to show poor dynamism.
It was agreed that the Bank had no limitations to act in the foreign exchange market, but that any action in this matter should be analyzed on its merits, referring to the functioning of such market and its potential repercussions on other segments of the financial market.
In the view of several Board members, the biggest difference stemmed from a tactical and communicational component: in particular, the need to inform the market of the change the Bank was observing in the macroeconomic scenario—which would be attained with the publication of the June Report—and to prepare it for the adjustments that would occur shortly.
The services CPIEFE was still low, while the goods CPIEFE had risen further.
All five Board Members agreed that the background information presented suggested that, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to 3% over the policy horizon, it would be necessary to have a higher MPR trajectory than the one estimated in the June Report.
Accordingly, the median of the July Economic Expectations Survey foresaw GDP growth in 2021 at 8.0% (7.0% in June).
In any case, the risks for inflation were perceived as unbiased, as the costs of inflation deviating above or below its convergence trajectory were assumed to be symmetrical.
These included opening a funding facility for the banks conditional on their increase in loans (FCIC), valid for six months, to grant credits charged to it over a term of up to four years with an initial loan amount equivalent to 3% of their commercial and consumer portfolios as reported by the Financial Market Commission (CMF) for 29 February 2020 (benchmark portfolio).
The discussion turned to the uncertainty surrounding the evaluation of structural parameters that sustained monetary policy (i.e.
Both of them satisfied the need to continue to make substantial cuts to the MPR, better reflecting the economy's progress in resolving the significant macroeconomic imbalances and the inflationary convergence process.
Governments, meanwhile, continued to implement substantial spending packages, often focusing on protecting the workers and sectors most affected by the current contingency.
In terms of activity, the conjunctural data and economic outlook of the Eurozone were still moderating and posting lower figures than the market expected, raising doubts going forward.
Since the previous Meeting, the price of most commodities had decreased, especially copper with a near 15% drop.
It was added that this evidence or feeling of capacity gaps in the labor market could be related, on the demand side, with a labor hoarding behavior on the part of companies, while, on the supply side, to the evolution of the labor supply and the participation of different components had been more dynamic than estimated, because, for example, of the strong contribution of immigrant workers.
Real wages continued to falter, in a context of still low demand for workers: the Internet Job postings index was under its historical average and companies hiring expectations (IMCE) remained low, amid persistent pessimism among consumers (IPEC) and entrepreneurs (IMCE).
Increases in demand were observed in all types of consumer goods, which in May was reflected in the strong monthly increase in the Retail Trade Activity Index and the Supermarket Sales Index (controlling for seasonality and at constant prices).
Thus, all these measures were around the upper limit of the MPR corridor in the December MP Report.
Regarding trade, a large number of respondents reported inventory shortages, increased demand and price hikes.
The creation of private salaried employment continued to be quite weak, while the public component showed some moderation at the margin.
Business (IMCE) and consumer (IPEC) confidence remained in pessimistic ground.
Regarding the local economy, the state of capacity gaps was discussed, in particular the different signals that could be seen by observing the evolution of activity, the different components of demand and the evolution of cost and price pressures.
The real exchange rate (RER), using the 1986=100 base measurement, was estimated to have approached 89 in April and in the first days of May, a level similar to those of the previous Meeting.
The Board ruled that the plausible options were an MPR cut of 25, 50, or 75 basis points.
In this sense, some services stood out, which could have been affected by the extension of quarantines, lagged openings and/or because part of them continued to be imputed.
The unemployment rate and the annual expansion of nominal and real wages continued to be around 7%, 4% and 1%, respectively.
Furthermore, the 50bp-cut option had the great advantage that it was widely expected, so it would cause no significant changes in market prices.
There were also lower prospects for world growth and tightened financial conditions.
In this context, the Board members coincided that the options of raising the MPR by 100 or 125 bp seemed to be the most appropriate.
One such challenge would be the capacity to implement a massive and efficient vaccination process, while following all sanitary measures, until the risks of contagion and its most severe impacts were well under control.
Regarding investment, the rebound in capital goods imports continued to give signs of recovery.
On the contrary, the goods component of the CPIEFE had been above expectations, although largely motivated by the tourist package item.
Some Board members said that the possible negative effect on demand would dominate in the evolution of inflation, while in the opinion of other Board members the effects on the productive capacity and the potential impact on demand of some proposals should not be ruled out, therefore the impact on inflation in the medium term was still uncertain.
In addition, the prospects for greater dynamism of investment and a strong expansion of private consumption suggested that this process would continue in the coming months.
While the peso depreciation put upward pressure on inflation in the short term, this was contained by the sharp fall in oil prices, while in the medium term, inflationary pressures were clearly determined by the weakening of the economy and increasing capacity gaps.
About the options of lowering the MPR by 25 or 50bp, all the Board members agreed that both were consistent with the baseline scenario and posed less communication problems because they left the door open to new adjustments given the expansionary bias considered in either of the two.
The National Statistics Institute (INE), meanwhile, reported that the percentage of imputed prices during the pandemic had continued to decline.
This continued to respond to the abundant household liquidity and advances in the reopening of the economy.
The GFCF growth forecast for the period 2024-2026 was somewhat lower than the one considered in June, reflecting the weak investment in the non-mining sectors.
All this occurred within the context of still pessimistic household and business confidence.
All five Board Members agreed that the background information accumulated since the last Meeting indicated that the MP should be further reduced.
One was the magnitude of the contribution of fiscal expansion to the cycle, as there could be tensions between short-term needs and medium- term sustainability of the fiscal accounts.
The large-scale investment project surveys stood out, showing a significant increase in the amounts foreseen for the upcoming years.
There were also differences across multiple sources of information.
Board member Pablo García voted for cutting 25 basis points off the MPR, to 2.25%, as he believed that what should prevail in monetary policy decisions in general were the macroeconomic fundamentals, which, in his opinion, suggested that the previous cut had not been enough because activity and demand indicators showed less-than-expected growth for the next few quarters; inflation was still low and had surprised with lower numbers in a large group of services; plus the external scenario was gradually weakening.
All the Board members noted that in favor of this option was the fact that it limited the risks about the convergence of inflation described in the last Monetary Policy Report, which were still fully present.
The financial markets had been strained by sharp price movements, which in some cases had gone beyond what one would expect given the country risk.
December’s inflation had been at -0.1%, affected mainly by a fall in the prices of its most volatile items.
Overall, growth prospects had not changed significantly for 2024-2025.
All in all, expectations about the economic situation of households one year ahead are still positive.
In particular, due to the upward revision of potential and trend growth, which occurred along with a fall in the neutral rate, in a context of low inflation and economic slowdown.
In any case, these figures were still considerably lower than historical ones and were below the previous year.
In previous meetings, this option had been justified mainly under a risk management argument to lower inflation that could affect its convergence to the goal in the policy horizon.
Containing inflationary pressures would require withdrawing the domestic demand stimulus measures deployed during the crisis.
For example, if the international scenario deteriorated further, as had happened in the past, an additional monetary push could be required, due to its medium-term disinflationary impact.
In addition, market expectations showed downward adjustments in the short term, while remaining in the two-year 3% target.
This, because although there was reason enough to think that the growth projection would be revised going forward, this derived in part from specific factors and it was still unclear how capable the economy was to resume a growth pace that would allow it to close the gap.
In addition, the data was difficult to interpret, particularly because of doubts about how much of it was due to the measures taken in association with the pandemic; how much was a reflection of something more persistent resulting from the scars of the crisis; and how much was simply statistical noise with no macroeconomic content.
The unemployment rate showed no major changes, while the annual change in real wages remained negative.
In the money market, the banks’ abundant liquidity in dollars kept the local cost of dollar financing contained.
Although some of this was due to some sector-specific factors, also noteworthy was the deceleration of consumption and a deterioration of its fundamentals, including the lower dynamism of private salaried employment, and that consumer expectations had fallen since early in the year.
It was said that it was important to try to figure out which factors were affecting the evolution of wages, because its effects on inflation looked different under the assumption that the biggest impact would be on costs or the wage mass.
The doubts regarding the projected evolution of the output gap and its implications for inflation and monetary policy were discussed.
All the Board members agreed that beyond the decision of this Meeting, the recovery of the economy and the achievement of the inflation target required monetary policy to remain expansionary during the coming quarters, lending counter-cyclical support to the economy.
The latter was partly linked to higher interest rates in the segment, a phenomenon that had also been mentioned in the IPN.
Goods production had maintained the high growth of previous months.
Actually, this caution was evident in the postponement of the normalization process, in light of new elements in the evolution of inflation and the interpretation of its fundamentals.
In any case, global inflation was still high, as the persistence of the core data continued to indicate, and inflationary pressures remained quite significant.
It was affecting consumer and business confidence, financial asset prices and the value of the dollar, signaling a perception that negative effects would last longer.
In the local financial system, the high volatility of the trajectory of the Chilean peso stood out, ranging between CLP 655 and 700 per dollar, to settle at CLP 670 at the time of the meeting, fairly unchanged from the previous instance.
It was said that the announcements on fiscal policy and its implications on the structural balance that the Administration had to make within the first 90 days of its mandate were key to analyze the matter.
Since the last Meeting, annual inflation had risen to 3.1% and its core component (i.e.
Broadly, these showed that the evolution of the macroeconomy had reduced the risks facing the convergence of inflation to 3% in the policy horizon.
Inflation expectations showed no big change.
Their behavior would be decisive for investment to be reactivated beyond large-scale public and private projects.
As for portfolio risk, between April and May the Financial Market Commission data showed no significant change in bank arrears of 90 days or more.
The unemployment rate had reached 8.9% in the moving quarter ending in October, outpacing its historical average.
To this end, while maintaining the residual financial conditions of the FCIC 2, it would be necessary to adjust the access conditions, incorporating the new definitions of Fogape, focusing on gross flows —as the aim was not necessarily to increase the companies’ leverage— and extend collaterals.
In this Board member’s view, this could be justified if it was kept in mind that, including the peso appreciation, the trends suggested that inflation was set to decline going forward, although it was recognized that there was not enough information.
Among the multilateral measures, the MER-5 showed a slightly lower rise than the exchange rate, while the MER and MER-X showed more limited movements.
Part of the difference was explained by the decline in service-related activities and another part by the impact of some on-off supply elements, related to the availability of fishery resources in the industry, the effect of a climatic shock and maintenance downtime in mining operations.
It was noted that this made it especially necessary to update those estimates over the course of this year.
The presence of immigrants had also helped to contain wage pressures according to some respondents.
There was agreement that the challenges for monetary policy were also considerable in this context.
It was noted that the surprise in services CPIEFE inflation suggested a rather widespread tendency in its components more related to wages, pointing to a potentially greater impact of immigration on its evolution.
These results were explained by a specific set of elements, including the depreciation of the peso, external price increases and some local inflation-based repricing.
At its December Meeting, the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed) had raised range of the fed funds rate by 50 basis points (bp), to 4.25%-4.5%, in the context of a still tight labor market, which continued to pose an important upward risk for inflation.
As for local financial conditions, there was agreement that they were still tight.
Regarding qualitative information, credit conditions had tightened, as reflected in the Bank Credit Survey of the fourth quarter of 2019, which reported that credit supply was perceived as more restricted in all portfolios, particularly in the consumer and large company segments, together with weaker demand, mainly for consumer credit.
This was true both for what was happening with the sharp depreciation of the peso and the evolution of the external scenario.
It was noted that something similar happened with inflation, which had been particularly volatile in recent months, making it difficult to read.
Private consumption posted a quarter-on-quarter decline, after its significant expansion in the first quarter of the year.
At the same time, consumer confidence (IPEC) at June was still in optimistic territory.
Some members added that doubts about the evolution of wages were also an antecedent that enhanced the validity of this option.
Monetary policy had played a crucial role in this, allowing a reduction of MPR based on progress in the convergence of inflation.
In this context, two-year inflation expectations had remained at 3% for several quarters.
The Board had made a series of decisions to mitigate the effects of this new scenario, including a cut of 75 basis points off the MPR at a special meeting held on 16 March and the implementation of a package of extraordinary measures aimed at ensuring adequate access to credit and the normal functioning of financial markets.
It was noted that the scenario was still favorable in terms of global growth and financial conditions, however significant changes had been observed in commodity prices and exchange rates.
Accordingly, and with a less favorable external scenario after the excessive growth of 2021, the economy would expand at a rate below its potential in 2022 and 2023, with contractions in private consumption and investment.
While Chile’s economic indicators were yet to reflect the effects of these disruptions, the progression of the virus in other countries pointed at significant impacts on the affected firms’ sales and cash flows.
The Bank Lending Survey of the second quarter reflected that supply conditions remained fairly stable, while demand was perceived to be weaker in large companies and with moderate rebounds in the segments of construction companies and housing credit.
In cumulative terms, both measures were in line with forecasts.
It was noted too that, despite the temporary nature of some elements, data from the beginning of the year made it possible to project somewhat stronger growth in activity in 2024, as reflected in the growth range of the central IPoM scenario.
Regarding external developments, in the immediate future, an inflationary impact was to be expected due to the price rise of some commodities and the higher exchange rate.
In China, the recovery of activity had continued to lose traction, amid fundamentals that pointed to less dynamism going forward.
The European Central Bank had also continued to raise its benchmark rates and communicated that its future decisions would continue to be reviewed on a meeting by meeting basis.
All five Board members agreed that the option of cutting 75bp off the MPR was fully consistent with the central scenario of the September MP Report and the general monetary policy stance that had been delivered at the previous Meeting.
Real consumer and commercial loans again showed annual contraction rates, which in April were at –2.1% and –5.3%, respectively.
It could also be argued that the option to keep the MPR unchanged would allow collecting additional high-frequency information prior to taking this first step.
All five Board members agreed that, from the analysis of the background information submitted in the preparation of the March MP Report, it could be concluded that there was still no evidence of consolidation of said inflationary convergence.
The aim was to limit the negative impact on the situation of firms, households and financial institutions and to underpin the recovery in the second half of the year.
In general, all this showed that the impacts of the various shocks that had affected the Chilean economy were going to linger on for quite some time.
Also, that other sources of information, delivered with lags, had still not shown such behavior, so it was necessary to wait for more data to become available.
Vice-Governor García voted for raising it by 125bp.
On the other hand, headline inflation had fallen again, driven by its more volatile components.
The median of the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) remained around 3.5% for the third month in a row, while 90% of the respondents expected inflation to be higher than 3%.
Moreover, their short- and medium-term implications were also diverse and much of the analysis was aimed at evaluating these different trade-offs.
Also, the cost outlook that was reflected in the IMCE business confidence showed increases in recent months.
The close of the 2022 National Accounts, which would be released in March, would give valuable information to assess the state of the adjustment the economy required to bring down inflation.
In December 2022, headline and core annual inflation had been at 12.8% and 10.7%, respectively, both figures down from the previous month.
It was worth noting that, as expected, part of the higher growth early in the year had come from supply factors that had been reversing.
Mining had also underperformed in annual comparison, although production levels remained high.
These pressures had also increased by the rise in international inflation and the idiosyncratic depreciation of the peso.
In this context, the evolution of macroeconomic conditions made it necessary to reduce the monetary stimulus, a process that the Board estimated it would continue to undertake gradually and cautiously, while the uncertainties coming from the external scenario were still high.
Monetary incentives from central banks remained high, while many policymakers had reaffirmed their commitment to keep them in place, scale them up and/or adopt new measures if necessary.
They also agreed to adapt the FCIC, by opening a third phase covering an amount of US$10 billion in effect for six months.
The risk premiums had receded, while the dollar had tended to weaken against other currencies.
All the Board members agreed that the background information known since the October meeting was, for the most part, consistent with the decision announced at the time.
The implications of the outcome of the constitutional plebiscite were discussed, noting that, although this was an important milestone in the process, the road to a new institutional framework was long and would not be free of challenges.
The projections in the central scenario of the September MP Report contained few changes with respect to June’s.
the Financial Brokers Survey and the EES) anticipated that the benchmark rate would remain at 1.75%, at least until the first half for 2021.
In this context, the main central banks had attenuated the restrictive character of their monetary policy communication.
In this new stage, he continued, it was reasonable to recalibrate the parameters and modalities in order to increase the complementarity of this new FCIC with the existing guarantees in COVID loans, as well as to consider the role of non-bank credit intermediaries that depend themselves on bank financing.
Given the difficulties in making projections, many had decided to postpone their investments.
The full Board agreed that the turning points of monetary policy would be based primarily on an assessment of the state of the economy and not on specific dates.
Although the CDS and EMBI had declined since the last Meeting and long rates stood at low levels, it was undeniable that, as of the second quarter of this year, the dollar and longer-term interest rates were on an upward trend.
World growth projections showed minor changes, although it was still necessary to bear in mind that several economies were performing somewhat better than expected.
In fact, 10-year US Treasury rates had risen by nearly 70 basis points (bp) since the last meeting, to decade-long highs.
In the weeks following the December Report, progress had been made on the legislative agenda, both on political and economic issues, and even on issues related to the protection of public order.
For this reason, it was necessary for the Bank to remain very vigilant of the evolution of the process and its effects on the markets.
Measured by the new benchmark CPI calculated by the INE, inflation was significantly below the forecast.
Moreover, the prevailing vision was that not all the layoffs due to the pandemic would be reversed.
In the developed world, the poor performance of the US in the first quarter (-4.8% q/q annualized) stood out, as it had been far below the markets' expectations.
Business expectations (IMCE) continued to reflect the prospect of cost increases going forward.
However, it was stressed that there were doubts about what were the implications of this greater activity in terms of inflationary pressures.
The Board agreed that monetary policy should complete the withdrawal of the full monetary impulse adopted during the crisis and open the way to a contractionary stance, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target over the two-year policy horizon.
They also agreed that there was conclusive evidence that the economy was requiring a stronger monetary stimulus that had to be implemented using unconventional measures.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the first quarter reported a more dynamic supply for smaller companies, which was partly related to a lower perception of risk in this segment, aided by the continuity of credit support measures.
Lending interest rates continued to decline, except for a minor rise in consumer loans due mainly to composition effect.
The fundamentals of consumption, in general, showed a similar behavior to that of previous months.
Regarding domestic credit, market interest rates were still low and real credit growth remained limited, with a rise in the commercial segment in recent months, due to greater loans in installments.
This process, however, had been accompanied by significant and prolonged episodes of violence, which had triggered major disruptions in the productive system, severely reducing activity and weakening employment.
At the same time, the CPI accumulated a somewhat smaller-than-expected increase, mainly in the non-volatile goods component.
The Board recalled that the process of monetary normalization had already begun almost a year ago, so that a good part of the adjustment deemed necessary to resolve macroeconomic imbalances had already been made.
However, if the tightness of external financial conditions persists, the medium-term effects on activity and inflation would be negative.
Domestic spending behavior was consistent with that of activity.
All this pointed to a scenario in which inflationary pressures were evidently higher than previously estimated.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for raising the monetary policy interest rate by 75 basis points, to 1.5%.
It was said that the most striking change was the risk of a disorderly recovery from the Covid-19 crisis in different dimensions.
Consumer loans had continued to reduce their annual contraction (–14.6% real annual contraction in June), in response to abundant household liquidity, and flows in the mortgage portfolio were stable in the margin.
Some data suggested that the greater dynamism of these items seemed to be mainly concentrated in mining.
Background information for this Meeting was contained in the March Monetary Policy Report, to be released the following day.
There were a number of factors at work here.
They also agreed that a clearer assessment of these issues should be made as the bill advanced in its legislative process, which together with the fine-tuning of the diagnosis on the economy’s evolution would be priority tasks until the September Monetary Policy Report.
In Chile, although infections had declined and mobility had increased since mid-year, improvements in activity had been slower than expected in September.
One Board member pointed out that it was important to keep in mind the existence of a trade-off between the effectiveness of the decision and the communication noise that a surprise would cause, which had already been present when it was decided to lower the MPR at the June Meeting.
Finally, the risks associated with the rise in long-term interest rates in Chile and elsewhere were discussed.
In Japan, the manufacturing and services outlook had also moderated, although it remained above the pivot of expansion.
In the US, incoming data remained dynamic, with a still tight labor market that was sustaining consumption in the short term.
All the Board members agreed that the options proposed reflected the need to speed up the pace at which the monetary restriction would be reduced.
This was consistent with the fading out of some supply factors that had temporarily affected the performance of some sectors in the first half (e.g.
Beyond some limited variations in the margin, the expectations of persons (IPEC) and firms (IMCE) lingered in pessimistic territory.
Moreover, the revisions to the National Accounts showed that the composition of domestic demand was more inflationary than expected, with consumption much higher and investment stagnant for several quarters.
While it seemed impossible to foresee that there would be no associated problems, this did not mean that facilities could not be devised to generate such funding and mitigate the impact on the private sector.
Several Board members pointed out that, while the decision of a 75bp hike might surprise the market, it was totally consistent with a scenario where inflation and projected growth were also higher than what the average analyst assumed.
Furthermore, on the day of the Meeting, the country had learned of Chile’s sovereign risk rating downgrade.
This was related, in their opinion, to fear of contagion, increased income support measures including pension savings withdrawals.
All five Board members agreed that the information accumulated since the publication of the last Report had increased the risks about the timely convergence of inflation to the target within the policy horizon, particularly due to the lower services inflation figures, whose persistence was high compared with other CPI components and the risks surrounding the future evolution of activity and demand, in a context of a highly uncertain external scenario.
Thus, while the data on the number of dependent contributors of the pension fund system (AFPs) suggested that formal salaried employment was already nearing its pre-pandemic level, INE data pointed to a milder rebound.
Although it had returned to one digit after several quarters, it remained quite high.
The activity gap, far from closing, as would be expected in an ongoing adjustment process, was wider than had been expected in late 2022 and early 2023.
Although this responded to a greater labor supply, it also reflected less dynamic hiring.
In the labor market, job creation remained sluggish, with demand for workers still weak, consistent with the evolution of the economic cycle.
Inflation levels remained well above target and the central scenario projections of this Report exceeded those of the previous one.
In any case, preliminary information from the IPN revealed a drop in the number of transactions carried out in October, especially mortgages, with a tightening of lending standards, greater restrictions in terms and in the required down payment, among others.
This recovery had been made possible by the adaptive capacity of businesses and individuals and the great progress made in the vaccination campaign, which had contributed to a significant process of opening up.
In any case, the market had already priced in several additional MPR cuts than expected in the December MP Report, which had shifted the rate curve in the appropriate direction given the changed scenario.
It was noted that the evolution of the labor market confirmed the signs of an adjustment consistent with the economy’s performance and the usual lags between the two.
In China, third-quarter GDP growth (6% annually) had disappointed as once again it reached its lowest figure of several decades.
Moreover, despite a certain upturn in labor supply as seen in lower inactivity and more job postings on the Internet, there was still a big mismatch between the supply of and demand for jobs, especially for lower skilled persons.
kind of decision considering the developments in the macroeconomic scenario.
The March survey of the Capital Goods Corporation reported a cut in the investment forecast for this year, mainly due to the postponement of projects (energy and public works), where everything in the 2018-2021 period adjusted upwards.
In particular, in May the Imacec was back at its prepandemic level, up 18.1% annually.
They also agreed that the wisest decision was to bring the policy rate to its technical minimum of 0.5%.
Most importantly, this had allowed to quantify the effect of the strong immigration flow of recent years on trend and potential growth, increasing both.
Thus, any shock entailing a greater delay in the convergence of inflation would make it difficult to meet the target within the policy horizon and would require sharper cuts to the MPR in the future.
On the contrary, there was still a way to go before the macroeconomy would signal that the process of inflation convergence to the target had been consolidated.
Meanwhile, Universidad de Chile fourth-quarter 2019 saw the unemployment rate for Greater Santiago rising up to 8.8% and slightly negative annual employment growth, influenced mainly by the annual contraction of salaried employment, in a context where administrative data, such as December’s contract termination notices, showed an incipient deterioration.
All this meant that it had become less necessary to hold on to the monetary impulse established when the economic cycle was at its lowest, so now the appropriate thing to do was to continue withdrawing it in order for inflation to converge to the policy target within its medium-term horizon.
Prematurely starting the process of lowering the MPR might have adverse effects on inflationary persistence and, therefore, on economic activity, as sensitivity scenarios could materialize that would force a pause or even a reversal of the process.
At the time —it was recalled— there was debate on whether there was a very strong trade-off between the greater monetary impulse that was necessary in the new macroeconomic scenario and the problems that could endanger the stability of the financial markets.
The price of a barrel of oil had risen by nearly 10% since the last meeting, favored by a greater global appetite for risk, the depreciation of the dollar and the continuous recovery of its demand.
Going forward, the evolution of inflation remained exposed to opposing forces, whose relative impact was still uncertain.
That situation —where the U.S. economy was not performing as well as expected and the Fed was aggressively cutting interest rates— would be a relatively disinflationary medium-term scenario for Chile.
This had triggered episodes of risk aversion with the consequent reshuffling of investment portfolios.
Given the medium-term implications of this scenario, the Board opined that the monetary stimulus should begin to be reduced in the coming months and that by 2020 it would stand around its neutral level, which was estimated between 4% and 4.5%.
Exports had shown greater resilience than expected, particularly in mining shipments and some industrial lines.
Compared with September, beyond some ups and downs, the exchange rate had decreased and the stock market indices had risen.
In this context, stock market indexes rose slightly further in most countries.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon voted for reducing the MPR by 50 basis points, to 2%.
Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted for raising the monetary policy interest rate by 150bp, to 5.5%.
It was mentioned that beyond the reasons behind the behavior of inflation expectations, the fact that they remained above 3% in the two-year horizon was a matter of concern.
Consumer confidence and business and investor expectations had continued to worsen, amid Russia’s protracted invasion of Ukraine.
The main argument in favor was that holding the MPR and communicating that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would begin in the coming months avoided upsetting the market, which could convey a sense of haste or delay in the normalization process that was not consistent with the analysis presented in the Report.
On the one hand, there was the favorable evolution of some items linked to business services and wholesale trade and, on the other, a slower rate of construction expansion.
The fall in overall inflation had been driven by volatile prices, and in the core part, by the appreciation of the peso and the adjustment of goods consumption.
In this context, the financial markets reflected this heightened optimism, driving up stock markets, capital inflows to emerging economies and commodity prices.
It was further noted that inflation accumulated in November and December had exceeded somewhat the Monetary Policy Report’s forecasts for both volatile and core inflation.
One participant noted the risks posed by the oil price rise to an economy such as Chile, which is a net importer.
In the Board’s view, reducing uncertainty was imperative in order to spur the economic recovery, reduce the probability of a recession and prevent unemployment from reaching high levels difficult to reverse.
Some Board members noted that, in terms of their macroeconomic effects, both options were practically identical so, in essence, the decision was tactical.
Interest rates remained low for all credit users.
The real exchange rate (RER) base 1986 = 100, had stood at 90.4 in June and, with the information at hand, estimates placed it near 91.6 in July.
Add to this the evolution of inflation expectations and preliminary background from the IPN that signaled the relevance of cost increases and indications of higher pass-through to prices.
The data known since the publication of the December Report pointed to somewhat higher than expected inflationary pressures.
In this context, consumer (IPEC) and business (IMCE) expectations were still on the pessimistic side, but with some improvement.
On the other hand, although the evolution of the external scenario caused some concern, it was important to draw a line between the baseline scenario and its implications for monetary policy decisions and the risk factors.
The entire Board agreed on the need to safeguard the proper functioning of the monetary policy pass-through channels, so the MPR reduction should be accompanied by non-traditional measures to support liquidity and boost credit.
However, the withdrawal of pension savings and fiscal measures had caused effects across all regions and in several sectors and in the repayment of financial obligations.
Market expectations about how far up the MPR would go in the current cycle of hikes had risen again.
On the one hand, the baseline scenario assumed that economic growth would resume its stronger dynamism in 2020.
Household spending on non-durable goods and services had declined, breaking the upward trend of previous quarters.
Nominal exports of goods also continued to be affected, mainly industrial shipments.
This Report noted that the Chilean economy had been advancing steadily in its recovery process after the massive shock caused by the pandemic.
In addition, it coincided with what the markets expected, avoiding surprises that could affect the correct transmission of the boards assessment of macroeconomic conditions and the expected path of inflation.
In addition, he agreed on the difficulties in forecasting or estimating the size of the additional monetary stimulus that would be required without a more detailed analysis of the mediumterm impacts of the latest news.
The perception of the labor market pointed to a stagnation of employment and wage pressures that remained contained.
For this reason, the Board would take every action necessary to meet this objective.
The evolution of several of its fundamentals —such as the lower cost of credit and the increase in the real wage bill— suggested that its recent moderation would not last long.
The macroeconomic scenario had continued to reflect the evolution of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Early-year data showed some increase in annual inflation.
In the corporate bond market, in both the financial sector and the rest of the companies, there were fewer transactions and lower amounts traded, with spreads fairly constant.
In particular, considering that the stimulus measures weighing on the economy were already very significant, that their impact was being greater than anticipated and that such measures had also increased in magnitude.
Despite having grown month on month, services continued to be severely affected by the sanitary constraints.
The Board recalled that in the latest Meeting they had delivered an unequivocal message regarding the future evolution of the monetary policy rate.
In the external scenario, the advances in trade negotiations between China and the United States, particularly after signing the first phase of the agreement, and the positive surprise in incoming activity and demand figures from the main economies —especially the greater stability of manufacturing-related indicators— had a positive impact on financial markets and commodity prices.
The background information presented to the Board and the analysis thereof are contained in June’s Monetary Policy Report.
Furthermore, they agreed that a signal had to be given that the MPR would be kept stable over the coming months, awaiting for more information about the unfolding to the macroeconomic scenario.
It was suggested that another reason that could explain this short-term volatility was the fact that the Central Bank of Chile was one of the first to begin reducing its reference rate, with prospects that the reduction would continue in the future.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon and Céspedes voted in favor of raising the MPR by 100bp to 10.75%.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%.
In the opinion of one Board member, it was possible, for example, to think of a path of MPR increases slower than indicated by the working assumption of the Monetary Policy Report, as considered by market expectations.
All five Board members agreed that, given the macroeconomic context caused by the pandemic, there was no other option than reinforcing the message that monetary policy would remain highly expansionary for a prolonged period of time.
The widened gaps that were derived from the updating of the parameters and the weakness of first-quarter activity and demand were consistent with the low inflationary pressures observed.
One Board member noted that one way of assessing the relevance of reducing the MPR at this Meeting was to review whether or not the process of consolidation was taking place and/or whether the magnitude of the costs being caused by the process of lowering inflation exceeded expectations.
Therefore, they agreed that the monetary policy’s orientation should continue to point at a normalization of the policy rate towards its neutral level, as had been expressed in the December Report.
In that sense, there were elements that interfered in that understanding.
Regarding the labor market, again those surveyed did not intend to make changes in their staff in the near future, with wage pressures that were still generally contained, backed by increased migratory inflows for certain types of jobs according to the respondents' visions.
At the same time, there was downward pressure on inflation in the short term, a sharp deterioration in business and consumer expectations, and a significant expansion in commercial credit since the announcement of the stimulus measures.
This figure had been somewhat lower than the March estimate, while the weakening of the lines most closely linked to services, stood out, which was linked to the demand that was being affected by Covid-19 containment measures.
The labor market continued to lag behind output development.
This responded largely to trade tensions and the appreciation of the dollar, in a context in which China’s activity figures had been weaker at the margin.
The evolution of core inflation was still a matter of concern.
That is, the MPR would be kept at 11.25% until the state of the economy informed that the convergence of inflation to 3% was consolidated.
The UK was stagnant in productive investment, amid generalized falls in different confidence indicators.
On the one hand, the 75bp option could give a feeling of continuity of the Report’s central scenario which was not consistent with the observed changes and which, in a context where inflation expectations had risen, could be counterproductive.
As for investment, various indicators—including wholesale trade, home sales, construction expectations (IMCE)—had improved in the margin, despite being still low, in general.
Interest rates on UF-indexed mortgage loans had dropped from November, to 4.4%, in a context where the Bank Lending Survey for the fourth quarter reflected still stringent supply conditions and further falling demand.
On the monetary side, this included further interest rate cuts in some countries or the extension of unconventional plans, with actions concerning the pandemic being led by the Fed and the European Central Bank.
Commercial banks had applied to nearly 95% of the funds available under phase 1 of the Facility Conditional on Increased Lending (FCIC), and many had used up their full assigned amount.
This, it was concluded, was fully consistent with the idea that, even in a context of gradual normalization, monetary policy would continue to accompany the recovery of the economy, anticipating that the MPR would be below its neutral value throughout the complete policy horizon of two years.
Household expectations had also improved, although their performance and that of other indicators more closely related to private consumption augured a slow rebound in this expenditure component.
All measurements coincided in that the first cut would take place between the July and September meetings, although they differed as to its magnitude.
In the financial markets, the exchange rate had fallen in recent weeks, but its expected trajectory was not perceived to be very different from the one foreseen in the Report.
On the demand side, consumption-related indicators had continued to adjust downwards, with a weak performance of imports of these goods and of retail sales, according to Imacec and digital invoicing data, among other factors.
On the one hand, it raised questions about the size of the activity gap, in a context in which the evolution of activity and demand had not changed much over the last few quarters and the differences with respect to projections had been smaller.
This mechanism would allow, in principle, to reduce certain risk premiums in the capital market, facilitate portfolio rebalancing towards riskier assets, and directly provide liquidity to non-banking institutions, which nevertheless are important mobilizers of private savings.
Regarding two-year inflation expectations, both the Economic Expectations Survey (EEE) and the Financial Operators’ Survey (EOF) were at around 3%.
The Board agreed that the main reason for not changing the MPR at this Meeting was the consistency between the Bank’s actions and their communication, especially in that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be done gradually and with caution.
There was consensus on the importance of specifying that this weakening was not an “externality” of the process of raising rates, but rather a fundamental element to achieve the convergence of inflation to the 3% target.
The US showed narrowing gaps, with investment and consumption fundamentals that remained solid, especially because of a seemingly tighter labor market.
The movements after the December FOMC, associated with the markets’ perception that the U.S. Federal Reserve had to some extent relaxed its monetary policy, had tended to be reversed during the past few weeks.
With respect to the December Report, inflation had been somewhat below projections, mainly because of specific factors, such as lower inflation of some typically highly volatile services.
In line with expectations, annual inflation had peaked in August, when the annual variation of the CPI had reached 14.1%.
In the money markets, financing costs remain contained in both pesos and dollars, despite a reduction in dollar liquidity.
In that context, an additional degree of prudence could help reduce the possibility of facing short-term financial stress.
In addition, these projections were shared by the vast majority of market agents, as was visible, for example, in the Economic Expectations Survey (EES).
At two years, the EES continued to place the MPR at 3.5%.
Wages had risen in real terms at a pace that was consistent with a tighter labor market.
Interest rates on commercial and mortgage loans had increased compared with data available at the previous Meeting.
possible new outbreaks or progress in vaccination—, the fear of new violence episodes as manifested in some surveys, together with financial difficulties in some companies.
With such information factored in, the next movements could be either up or down depending on the true state of the economy and the inflationary outlook.
Bank lending remained subdued in the various segments, with financing conditions perceived to be tighter and demand for new loans lower, according to the second-quarter Bank Lending Survey.
Regarding the 125-bp and 175-bp options, there was agreement among the Board members that both had disadvantages, particularly the former.
Headline inflation had risen to 3.8% annually as of June, which was mainly due to the evolution of fuel prices in recent months, because of both their increase and the low comparison base left by the same period of 2020.
The surveys to purchasing managers (PMI) pointed to significant disparity in manufacturing and services that anticipated a favorable performance in the US and some moderation in the Eurozone, but with activity growth still above potential.
Last but not least, the prices of copper and other commodities had far exceeded projections.
Since the last Meeting, annual inflation had risen to 3% and the core measure (CPIEFE) had remained at around 2.5%.
In particular, it could depend not only on the dynamics of some relevant prices, but also on the evolution of actual activity and potential growth.
There was growing concern about the economic effects of the trade war between the US and its trading partners.
For this reason, they said, it was not strange that the focus was placed rather at the most appropriate time to start the process of withdrawal of the monetary stimulus and the differences were concentrated in periods very close to each other.
The measures aimed at favoring market liquidity had also been effective, contributing to reducing money market spreads in both pesos and dollars.
A second example was taken from mid-2021, at the start of an MPR hike cycle, when there was also considerable debate regarding its pertinence and the pace of the hikes.
However, it was also apparent that there were areas of the economy that had not yet been reached by credit or economic stimuli that matched the scale of their needs.
As for two-year inflation expectations, in both the Economic Expectations Survey (EES) and the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) they remained at 3%.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Soto voted for lowering the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 5.75%.
The copper price had risen about 5% since then, driven by Chinese imports that showed more dynamism in September while inventories continued to show some depletion in the margin.
One participant added that he believed that the main risk continued to be that of a lack of coordination between monetary and fiscal policy in the United States that could be resolved in a disorderly manner, culminating in an overheated economy with excessive credit expansion.
The Bank of England had added 50 bps to its benchmark rate, amid high pressures from wages.
Particularly, it was noted that understanding what this accumulation of lower PI records meant for the future inflation trajectory and for monetary policy decisions was a must.
This decline owed much to the effect of the slowdown in demand, which outweighed the impact of the continued tightness of the market.
On the external front, the progress in vaccinations in the world’s main economies stood out, as it had allowed to gradually overcome the recession.
Investment, on the other hand, had been surprisingly strong, although growth was concentrated mainly in some particular sectors, such as renewable energies.
About the evolution of activity, there was consensus among the participants that its recent evolution reduced the risks of insufficient traction to ensure the convergence of inflation to 3% within the policy horizon.
Among the multilateral measures, the MER posted a depreciation in the period.
In this Report, the Board had updated the structural parameter estimates that were used to assess the state of the economy, their prospects and implications for monetary policy.
On the credit side, lending conditions were still seen as favorable.
It was mentioned that in the local financial markets’ risks seemed to be receding somewhat from their peak.
In particular, he noted that the Bank had adopted extraordinary measures of liquidity provision and had begun a foreign exchange intervention that limited —especially the latter— the countercyclical action that in principle could be expected from monetary policy.
This was partly explained by the difficulties in OPEC+ to reach an agreement on the increase in production quotas.
In this context, MPR expectations in the surveys (EES and FTS) showed increases of 25 to 50 pb one year ahead, while the prices of financial assets pointed to a rise of around 100 pb.
There was consensus among the Board that the key and essential commitment was to fight for inflation to return to 3% in two years, which was the way to avoid excessive and unnecessary costs for the population.
Although the Board considered it important to communicate the launching of the process of withdrawing the monetary stimulus, it also deemed it advisable to emphasize that monetary policy would remain expansionary for a long period of time.
In addition, it provided room for a timely reaction in case some of the risk scenarios came true.
By components, the CPIEFE for services had risen to 3.4% annually, while for goods it had remained unchanged.
All this was consistent with the inflationary pressures affecting each one.
Therefore, lowering the MPR by 50 bp only reinforced the previous message, which the market had made its own after the publication of the Report.
Still, this diagnosis called for some caution, particularly because of the possibility that demand-side factors could have a greater impact on the recent evolution of this price.
For the 2019-2020 period they had some changes, but all consistent with the projections in the current baseline scenario.
The details of the central scenario, sensitivities, risks and future evolution of the MPR were included in the September Report, which served as the basis for the discussion at this Meeting.
This had led the market to anticipate a less contractionary monetary policy path.
All the Board members agreed that the main risk of this option was to take the market by surprise again, since the last two decisions had already done so.
It was reiterated that this not mean that the exchange rate did not have an important role in the inflation targeting framework, since it was a relevant price in the economy, whose movements could have significant effects and which also provided valuable information on how things were going in the macroeconomic and financial scenario.
The sanitary situation had complicated particularly in the United States, where the new quarantines imposed threatened to halt the recovery of mobility and the performance of its economy.
It was said that, actually, the inflation expectations reflected in longer-term market prices had changed very little in response to the peso’s most recent appreciation.
Meanwhile, household demand remained weak —for the consumer and mortgage segments—, related to the users’ worsened income and/or employment conditions.
In any case, many respondents drew attention to the increases in the prices of fuel and electricity.
It was said that one hypothesis that seemed consistent with the observed changes was that immigration was having a somewhat greater-than-anticipated impact on the capacity gaps, reducing inflationary pressures.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted for keeping the MPR at 1.75%.
In general, all sectors were performing in line with expectations, reflecting the heterogeneity that had been the trend in recent months.
This would allow the Fed to go ahead with its gradual process of lowering its benchmark rate, with one or two cuts of 25bp during this year.
Accordingly, they considered the most appropriate options to be (i) hold the MPR, or (ii) lower it by 25bp to 5.5%.
It was noted that the evolution of inflation was consistent with the gradual closing of gaps in the economy and that going forward the gradual withdrawal of monetary stimulus needed restructuring in proper balance with the closing of these capacities.
On the other hand, there was progress in the successive openings in several economies, with numbers that confirmed this gradual recovery in line with projections or even with some positive surprises.
The 10-year nominal interest rate had exceeded 6.5%, a rate unseen in more than a decade.
One Board member pointed out that analyzing the option of making a small reduction to the MPR at this Meeting could be valid.
On the other hand, housing loans continued to show a downward trend.
Thus, the market internalized that the Fed could go faster than previously expected, which pushed the long-term rates up.
In his view, the need to lower the MPR so fast was tempered by the fact that inflation had begun to rise towards the target and the current-account balance measured at trend prices was high.
Also noteworthy were the improved capacity of companies to adapt to the sanitary restrictions, a positive flow of credit oriented to the worst affected companies, a substantial volume of support to households suffering income losses, and substantial progress in the Covid-19 vaccination program.
On public investment, the views were not optimistic.
Given the current monetary policy constraints, this Board member found it doubtful that such a move would be seen as a relaxation of monetary policy.
Thus, since the December Meeting, the peso had appreciated and had become notably less volatile, reflecting the effects of the exchange rate intervention carried out by the Bank.
Activity’s performance was being driven by investment.
In this scenario, several central banks had adopted a less expansionary stance.
As for inflation expectations, it was noted that they had risen for every source and every term, including the 24-month policy horizon.
In particular, to make it consistent with the idea that the MPR was approaching a terminal level, it would need to be accompanied by a clearly neutral bias, which was thought not to be feasible as yet.
The last few weeks had been characterized by the markets’ assessment of the American economy’s growth and the actions of the Federal Reserve (Fed).
About domestic credit, the Bank Credit Survey of the first quarter 2018 had reported a strengthened demand in various segments—especially for consumer loans and commercial credit to big and real-estate companies—, together with marginal improvements in the supply of consumer and commercial loans for large companies.
The fact that the increasing participation of non-residents in the ownership of local bonds during the past year could end up having effects on the evolution of interest rates if the fiscal situation changed was also discussed.
All five Board members agreed that the option of holding the MPR at 1.75% dominated over any other.
The consumer and business confidence indicators endorsed this scenario, standing in highly favorable territory.
Nonetheless, it was noted that the application of new quarantines, lags in the recovery of the labor market and political tensions had significantly deteriorated consumer and, though somewhat less, business expectations.
Business and consumer expectations had continued to recover, although still on pessimistic territory.
The Chilean economy would be affected by lower external demand and tighter global financial conditions.
In several regions, the substantial supply of labor was worth noting, supported by the presence of foreign labor.
Inflation and its short-term outlook had continued to rise and was projected to approach 10% by mid2022.
Finally, political/legislative uncertainty had intensified, as had concerns about the possible resurgence of violence, especially affecting investment decisions.
Although establishing such a conclusion required reviewing multiple dimensions, some of them could be mentioned.
Therefore, intensive work needed to be undertaken to identify non-traditional measures to enhance the monetary impulse and support for financial stability.
There were risk scenarios in which the international situation could deteriorate abruptly and sharply.
This meant leaving no doubt about the need for a normalization of monetary policy, but, in turn, ensuring that this normalization would be done gradually and with caution.
Regarding the former, it was clear that important progress was being made in this process.
As of December, in real terms, the annual growth of consumer loans remained negative (-6.7%) despite continuing to rise, for mortgage loans — — it had not changed much (5.9%) and for commercial loans it had resumed positive values (2%).
The uncertainty surrounding the Brexit had intensified, with little time left for the parties to reach an agreement before the deadline of the actual departure.
The five Board Members agreed that the economic scenario posed significant risks.
Another member added that, if greater weight was given to risk management and the asymmetry of its costs, the 150bp option was the best, as it signaled more decisively the idea of going faster in raising the MPR and positioning it near the upper edge of the corridor.
In Latin America, the decline in volatile components stood out, while core inflation was taking longer to decrease, given the slower progress of services inflation relative to goods inflation.
Two years ahead, they were still around 3%.
It was noted that the volatility of the domestic macroeconomic scenario had decreased significantly since the December Meeting, thanks to several factors combined, in particular the decline of the most violent episodes—and a lower level of disruptions in productive activities—and the extraordinary measures taken by the Bank.
All these factors combined had led to a global appreciation of the dollar and a negative correction in stock markets.
Meanwhile, in Brazil and Colombia the outlook was somewhat more encouraging, both with ongoing reforms that could result in greater dynamism going forward.
If the increase in direct fiscal transfers was added to this, a scenario was configured in which the expansion of consumption was considerably greater than had been foreseen in the June MP Report.
Anyway, he added, the closing of gaps outlined in the last Report remained perfectly possible, because the conditions leading to it had not changed.
On the other hand, activity figures confirmed that the recovery had been faster than expected, even in some services that strongly depended on human interaction.
In the central scenario, this adjustment of fiscal and monetary policies would contribute to a gradual closing of the activity gap, helping to prevent the recent inflation dynamics from having a persistent impact on the price formation process.
Preliminary information in August’s Business Perceptions Report showed that the respondents continued to expect their businesses to improve growth in the second half of this year and over 2020, although their prospects had moderated, because of lower-than-expected results in the first half, and some sources of uncertainty externally and internally.
This latter factor was attributed to the weak performance of the last few years, which had decelerated wage growth and often led to freeze compensations during some quarters.
As for the 100bp option, although it could be justified as a sign of greater concern about the risk scenarios being faced, its counterpart was that it provided less flexibility for the future.
Some Board members said that the message of closing down under uncertain conditions seemed too risky in a scenario as complex as the current one, with a lot of unfolding events.
This was reflected in the upward revision to the growth projection for 2021, which, despite its magnitude, was not enough to absorb the full expansion of domestic demand and yielded the way for the current account to move from a surplus of 1.5% of GDP in 2020 to a deficit of slightly more than 2% of GDP in 2021.
Although the price of an oil barrel remained high, it had been corrected downwards to just over US$100 at the time of the meeting (-15% since the last meeting, for the WTI-Brent average).
As had been the trend previously, this was based especially on the behavior of the automotive segment, whose sales growth was still among its highest in recent years.
Regarding the option to maintain the policy rate unchanged it was mentioned that it could send the wrong signal about the risks that the Board was analyzing.
In this Board member’s view, this was consistent with the scenario in the Report and with suitable degrees of flexibility to deal with risks in either direction.
First, it agreed to open phase 2 of the FCIC for an amount of US$16 billion for a period of eight months.
Thus, the annual CPI variation —spliced benchmark series— was 3.5% for both headline and core inflation—the latter being the CPI without volatiles.
The impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad would remain limited, matching the forecast in the June Monetary Policy Report.
The outlook for global growth had deteriorated, amid still unfavorable conditions, especially for emerging economies.
Particularly important was high corporate and government indebtedness and, probably, increased risk-taking in some sectors in search of higher returns after years of low rates.
Still, more respondents reported some improvement in their activities in December compared to the previous two months.
On the other hand, lower growth in China could hurt Chile’s terms of trade and exports significantly.
In any case, commercial loans continued to grow above numbers of the beginning of the year, thanks to the strong impulse provided by the measures in place.
The Business Perceptions Report continued to show positive expectations for this year according to the bulk of opinions, especially towards the second half, beyond the disparity of businesses’ actual results.
Qualitative sources, such as the BLS and the Business Perceptions Report, reported still high interest rates despite a recent decrease in some portfolios-, higher collateral requirements and contained demand.
Some Board members considered that the 75bp option was plausible, because it was within the upper range of market expectations and was evaluated in a context in which monetary policy had already made a very significant adjustment, while activity and demand were showing the expected weakness, as evidenced by the evolution of consumption, investment, and real wages.
Regarding local conditions, there was general agreement that there were no substantial differences with respect to forecasts in the September MP Report.
In Latin America, with some exceptions, several countries showed increased inflation, although no big changes in monetary policy in the margin.
are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
All five Board members agreed that the scenario where the country was operating was one of seldom seen, extraordinarily high, uncertainty that was sweeping through the real economy and the financial system.
China had closed 2023 with negative inflation and weak demand, especially for consumer spending.
Thus, although with limited movements overall, in the last month several economies had exhibited improvements in their stock markets, spreads and currencies, while a large part of long-term interest rates had declined.
About local activity, in line with the December Monetary Policy Report, partial fourth-quarter figures showed that the economy had regained dynamism, having left behind the specific factors that had slowed it down during the third quarter.
There was consensus in the Board that the options of reducing the MP by 75 or 100bp seemed the most appropriate.
One Board member noted that, beginning with this Report, the MPR corridor had been added to the monetary policy communication tools.
Its immediate impact was severe, it was lasting more than previouly expected and its longterm repercussions were still uncertain.
The contribution of services stood out, with annual growth of 20%, driven by personal services in particular, reflecting the consolidation of eased sanitary restrictions and the boost of the remaining resources from household support measures.
In Latin America, inflation seemed to have reached its peak in most countries, and some central banks had continued to raise their benchmark rates.
The rapid evolution of the macroeconomic scenario, inflation expectations and sensitivity scenarios associated with higher price pressures, set the stage for the Central Bank to act promptly to ensure the convergence of inflation.
Governor Costa and Board members Naudon and Céspedes voted for holding the MPR at 11.25%.
Plus the more favorable response of the world markets to the first phase of the US-China trade agreement, coupled with early signs of stabilization or even improvement in developed economies.
Qualitatively, business expectations (IMCE)—excluding mining—had become more pessimistic.
With the MPR at its technical minimum and the commitment to keep it there for an extended period, the additional efforts should focus on a broader and more systematic use of non-conventional policies.
According to one Board member, on this occasion the option had more weight and validity because the news of lower short-term inflation came despite the fact that the economy had been growing more strongly for some quarters.
This, together with inflation expectations aligned with the 3% target, reduced the risks of greater inflationary persistence in the medium term as a result of the cost shock, which pulled down the balance of inflationary risks present at the previous meeting.
Commodity prices had shown mixed movements.
In the emerging economies, China’s GDP had closed 2019 with a 6.1% expansion, in line with market expectations, while short-term activity data showed an acceleration in December from the previous month, including figures from the external sector.
In the U.S., the most recent data had been surprising again, with record-high figures that this high inflation was a persistent phenomenon across the board.
One Board member estimated that in certain aspects the option of a 25bp reduction dominated over the 50bp option.
There was agreement among the participants that the incoming figures since the publication of the September Monetary Policy Report were consistent with the baseline scenario in it and with the monetary policy orientation communicated at the time.
On the other hand, according to administrative data, formal salaried employment had made a full comeback, with an increase in vacancies and, according to the CNSI for the first quarter, the wage bill had recovered.
Moreover, this type of exchange rate movement showed above-average passthrough and persistence on inflation, given the idiosyncratic nature of the shock.
In the Eurozone, different expectations measures backed the region’s weak outlook, especially those more closely linked to the tradable sector, coinciding with the worsening of exports from these economies.
Governor Marcel and Board members García, Naudon and Costa voted in favor of holding the MPR at 0.5%.
Externally, the main development since the last Report had been the escalating conflict between the United States and its main trading partners, which had resulted in increased risk aversion, affecting the valuation of assets, currencies and commodities, as well as Chile’s terms of trade, in a context of marked deterioration of global trade figures.
However, the high level of inflation and the greater persistence associated with its main determinants called for a more contractionary monetary policy to ensure such convergence.
The answer was not obvious, because the scale of the shock was causing many scars, particularly to individuals and businesses, whether due to lost jobs and income, solvency problems, or more permanent adjustments that should be made to the operation of some sectors.
High inflation was having a significant impact on the incomes and expectations of economic agents.
Therefore, if this risk had intensified somewhat in the recent past, the probability of a scenario where monetary policy was a little more expansionary than previously thought might have increased.
Preliminary qualitative data derived from the February’s Business Perceptions Report showed some relapse in the latest performance of many businesses, after a significant rebound between the end of the third quarter and early fourth quarter of 2020.
In a context where global inflation was still bounded, global monetary policy continued to be expansionary, with policy rates being held flat or further reduced in most countries.
Primarily, it showed that growth in activity had increased in recent months, particularly in the non-mining sectors.
At the same time, they agreed that the upward bias that accompanied this decision reaffirmed that this process would continue in the months ahead.
For this reason, the operation of the Covid lines would compensate with guarantees part of the risk, helping the credit to flow to the smaller firms.
However, the latest indicators showed a rebound in confidence and outlook, anticipating a faster recovery in the second half of the year, supported by progress in the vaccination processes, the high savings accumulated by households, and the fiscal stimulus plans.
Expectations for the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) contained in both the EES and the FBS continued to foresee it unchanged at is technical lower bound of 0.50% for a protracted period of time, while those implicit in the prices of financial assets anticipated a transitory cut to 0.25%.
In fact, in the weeks leading up to this Meeting it had rather experienced a depreciation.
A second dimension was a scenario in which different economies would accumulate inflation levels not seen in many decades.
This evolution owed mainly to the higher copper price, among other reasons.
Meanwhile, one year ahead the median had risen to 2.7% per year and that of the Financial Traders Survey (FTS) to 2.5%, while two years ahead it remained around 3%.
All the participants in the Meeting agreed that the economy, both externally and internally, had behaved within the framework depicted in the baseline scenario of the last Monetary Policy Report, although risks remained and had even varied on some fronts.
Administrative data showed a significant increase in termination notices and unemployment insurance claims, which was being partially cushioned by the measures announced by the Government.
The information submitted to the Board and the analysis thereof are contained in the March Monetary Policy Report.
It is estimated that it will converge to the 3% target in the early months of 2026, and remain nearby until the end of the projection horizon.
Finally, the US inflationary cycle would feature a gradual convergence to its 2% target, suggesting that the America economy, which had been unexpectedly dynamic lately, was losing speed.
In the Eurozone, manufacturing production and several measures of expectations were showing better performance in the margin.
Feedback from the IPN confirmed this picture.
The main central banks had continued to raise their benchmark rates, despite a mixed outlook for monetary policy.
In this regard, it would be particularly relevant to review the impact that the Covid-related credit lines with State guarantees would have, which at the time of the Meeting -—-early May— had just begun operations, so information was yet to come to light.
Several reasons were brought up to explain why this could be happening, including a different assessment of the neutral MPR and the expected monetary policy trajectory of the U.S. Federal Reserve.
In terms of risk indicators, the banking system’s delinquency rate remained contained overall.
The Board agreed that the risks to the evolution of inflation were still significant and their possible materialization was particularly relevant in a context in which both the annual change in the CPI and its outlook were already high.
It was pointed out that the important thing was not the origin of the disruptions in the financial markets, but to analyze the way in which it could affect financing conditions in Chile.
There was debate around the evolution of inflation in the next few quarters, particularly because of uncertainty regarding which effect would dominate, either the impact of the idiosyncratic depreciation of the peso or the widening of the activity gap.
Furthermore, the tightening of financial conditions, the persistence of the negative supply shock and the worsening economic outlook continued to anticipate an erosion of investment dynamism.
Activity had grown well above estimates.
In his view, the risk of having an inflation rate below the target could become significant in the coming quarters.
All five Board members agreed that the evolution of the macroeconomic scenario and its outlook made it clear that, in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target, it was necessary to lower the MPR.
All the participants noted that the recent and expected economic performance and its effects on the closing of the activity gap reduced the risks for inflation.
Real wage growth remained at around 2.5% per year.
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) had stabilized after the sharp drop of the second half of last year.
Regarding the external scenario, it was agreed that it offered no major novelties in its evolution.
Private consumption would regain momentum, although its level at the end of the projection horizon would be lower than in the previous estimate.
CPI data for May and June had been largely in line with forecasts in the June Monetary Policy Report.
This had been compounded by the start of monetary normalization by the authorities in Norway, New Zealand, and various emerging economies.
On the one hand, expectations were very negative, as was the evolution of some investment components and, on the other, credit creation figures remained fairly reasonable, while investment components more closely linked to mining maintained an interesting rate of expansion.
CPI without volatiles) had continued to hover at around 3%.
On the one hand, the effects of the social crisis that had burst out in October were still unfolding, and although the Imacec in December and January had been above expectations, other real and financial variables showed a deterioration in recent months.
In Latin America, low inflation in most countries and price pressures that led to additional moderation provided some leeway for additional monetary easing.
Also, the possible changes associated to the new CPI basket had to be considered.
These divergences had been permeating global financial markets, with opposing movements in interest rates and the depreciation of an important group of currencies, the Chilean peso included.
It was added that, because most of the MPR adjustments had been made in the first part of the year, it was possible to monitor the evolution of the scenario.
In addition, the Fed’s rate hike had been quite aggressive, and doubts as to how this process would continue introduced an additional degree of sensitivity with respect to the Bank’s own decisions and their effects on market financial variables.
On the other hand, the Bank Lending Survey (ECB) for the first quarter showed tighter credit supply conditions for firms and individuals and a perceived weaker credit demand, except for the large company segment.
In particular, that it could generate an even greater tightening in local financial conditions —and there were no forecasts to quantify this effect— or it could be associated with a response to inflationary surprises that had no relation with core inflation.
The opinions gathered in the framework of the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) confirmed a rebound of the economy, whose performance in many cases surpassed that of the previous year.
The U.S. Federal Reserve had begun to signal the need to accelerate this process, given the greater persistence of inflation, while the Bank of England had surprised with a rate hike.
They all agreed that the option to boost the monetary stimulus was no longer relevant, since the downside risks to the convergence of inflation —which had been a topic of concern in recent quarters— had lost strength.
The importance of not losing sight of the fact that this reduction in activity, that should translate into a negative activity gap, was an unavoidable condition for the convergence of inflation to the target was emphasized.
A somewhat lower-than-expected Imacec in July had been offset with a better-than-expected performance in August.
The labor market had shown some recovery, with a rise in employment compared to mid-year.
In turn, the European Central Bank had raised its monetary policy rate by 50bp at its last meeting, and had intensified the restrictive tone of its statement, adding a significant increase in its inflation forecasts.
In fact, it was recalled that, in the central scenario of the June Report, it was anticipated that the MPR would remain below its neutral level throughout the entire policy horizon.
Although the decline in inflation was a global phenomenon, its outlook differed from one country to another.
Private expectations for this year’s GDP growth had improved further thanks to better effective data for activity and demand, significant progress in the national vaccination campaign and in the re-opening of the economy, among other factors.
In addition, all this was taking place in a local context where there was quite significant financial tension, amid an environment of uncertainty and volatility.
Activity was proceeding as expected, which was consistent with an inflationary convergence process in line with estimates in the central scenario of the Report.
This region was facing the most complex situation, with long-standing doubts regarding the handling of the sanitary emergency and deep damage especially on employment, which pointed to a sluggish recovery.
Undoubtedly the shock would have contractionary effects and reduce inflationary pressures in the policy horizon.
All the Board members stressed the need to extend the Bank’s powers and instruments to take action when confronting riskier scenarios, considering the high degree of uncertainty that still hovers over the spread of the pandemic, the performance of the domestic economy, and the dynamics of the financial markets.
Meanwhile, the longer-term rates had risen less than their external counterparts, in a context in which the local risk indicators remained contained.
Although still in pessimistic territory, the expectations of businesses and households had picked up somewhat.
Trade tensions between the US and China had moderated somewhat, but with a limited impact on the markets.
In the area of fiscal policy, it was mentioned that the proposed budget of the public sector for 2019, currently being discussed by the Congress, was consistent with the fiscal consolidation plan announced at the beginning of this Administration.
This discrepancy was in line with domestic uncertainty levels that remained high by historical standards.
Exports remained weak, partly because of the poor performance of some trading partners and the impact of the trade war.
In this scenario, all the Board members considered 50bp and 75bp cuts to be plausible options.
While various sources of information suggested that businesses had sufficient margins to accommodate a rise in imported costs, especially in a context of what they described as lower demand, goods inflation was showing rapid declines in several economies, reflecting the aforementioned global prices factor.
Many of them responded that 2018 had closed with better results than in previous years, although less than they initially expected.
Germany, in particular, had disappointed again according to different data, with its evolution lagging somewhat with respect to other countries in the zone.
Still, given its coherence with the March central scenario, the option of lowering the MPR by 50bp clearly dominated when the two alternatives were contrasted.
The Bank Credit Survey of the third quarter reported tighter conditions for all types of loans, as higher risks were perceived in all segments.
This would likely have an impact on China’s growth outlook, although for now its potential effects were contained, and the copper price was still high.
This could be done in two ways.
This raised a note of caution, because while some countries had significantly reduced the number of cases, others were struggling with a significant increase.
Also present; Beltrán de Ramón, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, Legal Counsel and Attestor; Elías Albagli, Monetary Policy Division Director; Ricardo Consiglio, Financial Markets Division Director; Rosario Celedón, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Michel Moure, Institutional Affairs Division Director; Diego Ballivián, Corporate Risk Division Director; Markus Kirchner, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Lucas Bertinatto, acting International Analysis Manager; Sofía Bauducco, Economic Research Manager; Felipe Musa, Market Operations Manager; Juan Carlos Piantini, Business Strategy Administration Manager; Miguel Fuentes, Financial Stability Manager; Francisco Ruiz, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Juan Pablo Rioseco, acting Communications Manager; Andrés Sansone, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Erika Arraño, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General.
In core inflation, the fall had been more limited (to 10.3% annualized in April), which coincided with still high pressures on the services side.
However, the deflationary effects of potential appreciations of their currencies would still be present and strong.
All the Board members agreed that, as the downward risks in the local economy and particularly in inflation had intensified, the valid options for this Meeting should be to either hold the MPR at 2.5% with an expansionary bias, or reduce it by 25 bp, also with an expansionary bias.
On the domestic front, it was noted that one element that had weighed significantly in recent analyses was the evaluation that the labor market behaved according to the rest of the economy, having succeeded in absorbing a significant increase in the labor supply causing no big rise in the unemployment rate and only a moderate slowdown in wage growth.
Regarding corporate demand, the unrelenting deterioration of investment-related requirements was compounded with a fall in working capital requirements.
The labor market behaved consistently with the trajectory of the cycle, the unemployment rate stood at 8.7% in the moving quarter ending in March, while the labor force was expanding steadily.
In this regard, it was recalled that the Bank had already adopted a major package of measures at the end of last year when the social crisis had significantly affected the domestic markets.
For this year, activity was expected to grow between -0.5% and 0.25%.
Among other factors, this was explained by the reduction in employment and the increase in the labor force.
Although part of this increase is explained by the more volatile CPI items and the depreciation of the peso, inflation of those components of the basket that are most sensitive to the activity gap (i.e.
It was mentioned that there could be risk factors associated with the expected trajectories of monetary policy in Chile and the U.S. and the reduced presence of some important players in the forex market.
On one hand, the new information caused no significant change in the external impulse projected in the Report’s baseline scenario.
This contrasted with the situation in the rest of the world, where an important group of economies remained weak in both their actual and expected performance, including China.
The rise in Covid-19 infections had been significant in many countries, pushing some of them to new records.
There was agreement that the option of raising the MPR by 50bp did not seem consistent with the current macro framework.
In other words, adjusting again the rate based on partial and qualitative background could increase, rather than reduce, uncertainty in the economy if it was not clear how much the macro projections had changed and how deep and persistent the additional monetary stimulus was intended to be.
It was also noted that the external risks had implications for inflation and monetary policy in Chile that could differ in both the short and the long term.
All the Board members agreed that the macroeconomic scenario could require further monetary stimulus.
Several Board members agreed that the 50bp hike option had the advantage of being the one expected by the market consensus and, therefore, would not come as a surprise.
As global inflation was still increasing central banks had either continued to raise their benchmark rates or signaled a faster hike if the rising inflation proved more persistent.
Meanwhile, the possible negative readings that a MPR cut at this Meeting could open also had to be considered, especially if it was interpreted as a worsening in the Bank’s vision of growth.
It was also noted that global interest rates at different maturities had declined and the peso had appreciated over the course of the past month, due to both changes in the rate differential and a decrease in foreign exchange premiums.
There was important news in the global scenario.
They all agreed that it was imperative to address these questions in order to possibly make adjustments to these measures.
In the Board’s opinion, flatlining the MPR not only was consistent with inflation’s convergence in the policy horizon, but it also contributed to reducing uncertainty within the economy during a troubled period.
Moreover, new data on the consumption trajectory revealed a slower than expected speed of adjustment.
All in all, it was emphasized that this issue should remain under close scrutiny.
Nonetheless, US figures differed from those of other developed countries, in line with discrepancies in terms of activity, with increases in both headline and core measures.
The same behavior was observed in the case of firms (IMCE) across the different economic sectors.
Until then, the economy had behaved in line with projections in the September Report, with annual GDP growth at 3.3% in the third quarter and an annual CPIEFE variation of around 2%.
On the other hand, the inherent pressures of the idiosyncratic depreciation that the peso had accumulated since October 2019 were still present.
These developments occurred in the midst of still high cost pressures, as confirmed by preliminary data for the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) of February 2022, where the persistence of procurement and product availability problems were widely mentioned by the companies consulted and continued to put pressure on margins, while still facing high demand.
The oil price had climbed to around US$85 per barrel (+19% since the last meeting, for the WTI-Brent average).
Also, construction had recovered recently.
In this context, a precautionary attitude would be advisable.
The main constraints to their decisions had to do with the uncertainty of the sanitary situation, the evolution of demand and the political environment.
The business cost outlook (IMCE) remained near record highs.
In pesos, this cost had risen, influenced by adjustments in monetary policy expectations.
This was associated with, among other factors, the dynamic performance of the U.S. economy.
On the other hand, the global Covid-19-related sanitary crisis that had broken out in recent weeks was becoming the main factor reshaping both the global and local scenarios.
However, it was pointed out that this recovery was still very heterogeneous, which was especially evident in the labor market and left no doubt that there were still loopholes to be closed in the economy.
The importance of keeping this in mind was also stressed, as resolving the imbalances was a necessary condition for the economy to grow in a healthy manner while creating jobs and boosting real wages.
This positioned our economy near the positive sensitivity considered in the scenarios of that MP Report.
In any case, it was also pointed out that, particularly in the United States, the macro policy mix seemed to be incubating inflationary risks that were not negligible.
On the one hand, the markets had undoubtedly taken the recent political scenario in stride.
The pandemic continued to be a source of concern, but with somewhat reduced intensity.
That could also be the case with investment, because the background provided by the Capital Goods Corporation Survey tended to reinforce the perception of more dynamic investment.
Regarding fourth-quarter activity, in most regions performance was poor, especially in activities related to tourism, hotels and retail, where establishments in central areas had been the most affected, as they were more exposed to outbreaks of violence.
It was mentioned that, while the stronger peso was a significant development, an important factor to assess its macroeconomic implications —and its persistence— was to understand the reasons behind it.
One Board member agreed that it was difficult to accurately measure the magnitude of the additional impulse, but said that there were several metrics that could shed some light, such as the Covid loans’ outstanding balance that was still available and needed, the sensitivity of the total commercial credit stock to the flow linked to the FCIC, or the exercises regarding the financing needs of the corporate sector.
The Central Bank of Japan, in its latest statement, had ceased to mention that inflation would reach the target in 2019.
Demand had also underperformed in the second quarter, held back by private consumption.
But if consumption remained dynamic, beyond the adjustment in the automobile market, which was something anticipated and desirable, it was possible for inflation to resume its convergence trajectory as the effects of the greater monetary stimulus adopted in the previous Meeting, so a new MPR reduction would be unnecessary.
As for global financial markets, compared with the previous Meeting, long-term interest rates had seen some decline in both developed and emerging economies.
On the expenditure side, retail sales and imports of consumer goods, among other indicators, continued to show a less marked deterioration in household consumption, validating the hypothesis that the first quarter contraction, particularly in durables, was rather a preview of the expected adjustment.
The survey also reported a rebound in firms’ requests for funds, especially for working capital, as was also confirmed by May’s IPN.
In investment, survey information (CBC), capital goods imports and expectations continued to suggest that, beyond the positive surprise of the third quarter, investment would be adjusting downwards.
The evolution of consumption continued to be affected by these dynamics, in particular the sale of non-essential goods.
Meanwhile, concerns about Europe had resurfaced, both because of Brexit-related difficulties and because of greater political uncertainty in the region.
This considered that, on average, the economy would grow above potential during the period 2018-2020.
Governor Costa, Vice-Governor Novy and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Soto voted in favor of lowering the monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, to 6%.
All five Board members agreed that the recent evolution of the economy pointed in the required direction.
In fact, an evaluation of the state of the gaps showed them to be bigger in the sectors linked to goods consumption.
Although this latter risk was nothing new, it presented different dimensions that were not necessarily independent of each other.
At the same time, the option to raise it had to be included if an important increase was anticipated in either, the CPI or the CPIEFE, even if it responded to movements in the most volatile components of the basket.
Also, in the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) of February, most of the respondents saw a tightening of financial conditions, mainly due to some increase in interest rates in certain segments—although they noted that they were still low by the usual standards— and greater difficulties in credit granting requirements.
Food prices had shown mixed movements.
This would improve the current account of the balance of payments.
At the global level, the correct calibration of monetary and fiscal stimuli in terms of their size, scope and permanence emerged as key, so as to strengthen the recovery without generating macro-financial imbalances.
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial and Board members García, Costa and Naudon, to raise the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, to 2.75%.
Another factor had to do with geopolitical conditions.
In particular, the behavior of salaried employment, the persistent pessimism of expectations and the meager credit growth, most notably of consumer loans, stood out.
Several also pointed to a reduction in labor income resulting from shorter working hours, no overtime, reduced sales commissions, elimination of benefits and wage adjustments, among others.
It was added that the Fed had increased its hawkish tone.
Several Board members recalled that the Report’s central scenario assumed that economic activity would be below potential GDP for several quarters.
Thereafter, the stock would be gradually reduced as the assets in the portfolio matured.
About possible explanations for this behavior, it was mentioned that it was not unusual to see this kind of movements during episodes where the MPR began to be changed after a period of stability.
It was added that core inflation for goods could be responding to a delay in the pass-through of the exchange rate rise of the second half of the year to prices, in which case a reversal should be expected in the short term, provided that the exchange rate stayed longer at its current levels.
All this occurred in a context in which cost pressures continued to be present, linked to the difficulties in the supply of goods, soaring transportation costs and/or the high prices of inputs and commodities.
Since the last Meeting, the IPSA had fallen by nearly 5%, the sovereign risk premium (CDS) had increased and the nominal 10-year interest rates (BTP-10) showed no major variation.
He added that this had been known to happen in the past and its consequences were not positive for either the developed or the emerging economies.
Two years ahead, for the second month in a row the median of the Economic Expectations Survey (EES) was above 3% annually, with 70% of the respondents pointing to a value above 3%.
In addition, annual employment growth continued to be almost entirely accounted for by informal wage earners.
Meanwhile, a more in-depth review of the impact of immigration on the labor market showed that, in principle, in the last two to three years many more jobs had been created than was indicated by the surveys, whose designs did not allow to properly capture demographic changes of such magnitude.
Furthermore, there was agreement that the magnitude of the first move did not impose any conditions on those of the subsequent moves, which could be smaller.
In turn, activity had reduced its annual expansion rate in the first quarter, falling below expectations.
The various measures of expectations available (i.e., taken from surveys and financial asset prices) placed it at 11.25% at the October meeting, and then peaked between 11.25% and 11.5% at December.
This, coupled with the evolution of its other determinants, was behind the significant depreciation of the peso, showing greater than usual sensitivity.
As for inflation expectations two years ahead, both our Economic Expectations Survey (EEE) and Financial Traders Survey (EOF) stood at 3%.
In this regard, one participant mentioned that it was important to note that, despite the good twelvemonth figures and the difficulty to interpret seasonally adjusted figures, activity remained weak, which was consistent with the meager creation of private salaried employment, low cost-side inflationary pressures and general information that had been collected for the Business Perceptions Report.
Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Vial, and Board members García, Naudon, and Costa voted in favor of raising the MPR by 125 basis points, to 4%.
It was added that it was important to bear in mind that the advantage of the inflation targeting scheme was that by establishing a two-year horizon, it avoided reacting to shocks that had transitory effect on inflation dynamics and did not jeopardize the achievement of the target.
It could not be ruled out that these phenomena were affecting the price of some Chilean financial assets.
However, in the current circumstances, marked by inflation well above the 3% target, with upside surprises for several months and where everything indicated that inflation had become more persistent, it was very difficult for the Bank not to respond strongly to this news.
By contrast, housing construction and the salmon industry posted good results.
On the demand side, data on retail sales, imports of construction materials and capital goods, among others, again showed weak consumption and investment.
Actually, our country had rapidly moved to phase 4 of the outbreak, which entailed a number of restrictions that would have immediate effects on the economy’s performance.
Most of the firms surveyed in the IPN indicated that the performance of their businesses had remained stable or had declined slightly in recent times, in the context of still strong demand and where some businesses had ended 2021 at new highs.
Meanwhile, some short-term indicators continued to perform below expectations in the Eurozone—although levels were consistent with a recovery of the economy’s growth pace—, while in Japan they pointed to weaker activity.
On the consumer side, the sale of durable goods, again led by automobile sales, kept performing more favorably than non-durables, whose imports were dynamic nonetheless.
In particular, there was an agreement that the weaker demand and supply of commercial credit that had been observed in recent months reflected the fact that the simple availability of new credit for working capital would no longer be enough to meet the needs of companies.
Expenditure fundamentals remained strong with high levels of confidence and a robust labor market.
This figure was in line with forecasts in the June Report, with persistently weak areas more closely related to services, in a context of low inflationary pressures due to the abrupt widening of the activity gap.
At the same time, longterm interest rates were high and were becoming more sensitive to changes in expectations regarding the Federal Reserve’s next decisions.
Governor Costa, Vice-Governor García and Board members Naudon, Céspedes and Novy voted for lowering the monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, to 9%.
This, coupled with the announcement of the employment subsidy program, somehow mitigated the risk of a further worsening of the labor market.
Attention was drawn to how it would affect credit volume, especially in economies like the United States, where smaller banks are a significant source of financing.
This was accompanied by a series of fiscal measures and the implementation of a third withdrawal of pension savings.
Regarding the magnitude of the new monetary stimulus, all the Board members agreed that some figure of up to 10% of GDP seemed consistent with what the economy needed to navigate this complex period, to allow inflation to converge to the target and to ensure financial stability.
If this increase in credit were to occur, it would limit the destruction of jobs, resulting in a smoother reactivation of the economy that would allow inflationary convergence and would prevent some adverse effects on the financial system that could aggravate the costs of the pandemic.
This increase was largely explained by a decompression of term premia, associated partly with a market reassessment of the U.S. fiscal outlook.
Meanwhile, the reaction of inflation expectations and interest rates showed that the markets had grasped the specific origin of the inflationary shock and its transitory nature.
The year’s GDP growth exceeded forecasts, ending 2021 with activity significantly outpacing pre-crisis levels and its estimated potential.
Headline inflation had reached 13.7% annually in September, slightly less than in August, while core inflation —the CPI minus volatiles— had risen to 11.1% annually.
On one hand, broadly speaking, the macroeconomic scenario was aligning itself with the assumptions in the December Report.
However, they agreed that it was very complex to explain this are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa.
Summing up, all the Board members agreed that either option would be a surprise and there was no clear-cut reason indicating the convenience of making a gradual adjustment instead of doing it in one take, while including more information in the statement and in the understanding that the Report’s release would mitigate any possible misinterpretation.
Although this seemed to be largely explained by the high basis of comparison, another possibility was that, once the most difficult stage of the sanitary emergency was over and a sales had recovered, many companies had begun to reduce their future financial burden, either through amortizations or rescheduling.
All the Board members voted for adopting a set of extraordinary measures.
With this information, the markets’ growth expectations, as measured by the Economic Expectations Survey, were consolidated at 4% for 2018, while for this year and the next they were at 3.6% and 3.5%, respectively, almost unchanged since the close of the December Report.
Likewise, the commercial portfolio maintained negative annual growth rates (–4.5% real annual growth in June), relating to the high comparison base left by the Fogape-Covid lines granted during 2020.
Until the time of the Meeting, the effects on local financial markets had been limited.
In that context, real consumer and commercial loans posted changes of –1.3% and –3.7% in April, respectively.
Instead, what was needed was to assess whether these shocks affected the persistence of inflationary dynamics over the policy horizon.
In the main economies, the tightening of lending conditions, together with monetary tightening, were expected to negatively affect activity in the near future.
The Internet Job Postings Index and IMCE hiring expectations continued to reflect higher labor demand, although with some pullback in the latter in April.
The entire Board agreed that the evaluation of the macroeconomic scenario raised no doubts about the need to lower the MPR by 50 bp altogether.
Against this backdrop, the region’s confidence indicators had seen some marginal improvement.
Lending interest rates had risen further in most portfolios.
In particular, although inflation had closed 2018 somewhat below projections, it was adjusting in the foreseen direction.
The information gathered up to the time of the Meeting in the context of the Business Perceptions Report (IPN) also indicated that activity had increased, which also resulted in a more positive outlook for 2021.
On this, it was noted that, beyond the reservations that part of the market or analysts might have about the decision to normalize the MPR, the available data, plus the analysis and the published statement, led to the conclusion that starting normalizing the monetary policy was absolutely consistent with the current macroeconomic scenario and inflation perspectives.
In the labor market, stability continued to prevail, although there were new layoffs reported in some companies and reduced availability of lower-skilled labor.
Meanwhile, the annual change in the stock of consumer loans continued to shrink in March, while mortgage loans continued to grow at around 8%.
However, high-frequency indicators reveal important differences between sectors, as most sectors exhibited poor results in contrast with the dynamism of investment in the mining industry.
However, the latest information known since then had prompted a change in this assessment.