The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 90th meeting) on September 25, 2020 in Beijing. The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. They agreed that since the beginning of this year, great achievements have been made in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development, and the economy has been recovering steadily. The sound monetary policy has been forward-looking, targeted and timely, enabling vigorous support for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy. With financial risks effectively managed, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy have been gradually improved. The transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans has been completed successfully. The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been continuously paying dividends, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly. Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with greater flexibility and played a role as stabilizer for the macroeconomy. It was pointed out at the meeting that as the overseas pandemic situations and the world economy remain severe and complex, efforts should be made to enhance the research and analysis of the international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, concentrate on doing our own affairs well, improve cross-cyclical policy designs and adjustments, and support high-quality economic development. The PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, appropriate and well-targeted manner, and use a mix of monetary policy tools and innovate new ones to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level. The structural monetary policy tools will be effectively leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct reach” of policies. The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement the two monetary policy tools which enable direct support for the real economy, ensure deferred repayments of inclusive loans are applicable to all eligible micro and small businesses (MSBs) and substantively raise the portion of unsecured inclusive MSB loans. The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large banks to focus more attention on financial inclusiveness and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main businesses and responsibilities, thus advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness. The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform for lowering lending rates, adopt a mix of policies to significantly drive down overall financing costs, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, shore up weak links and foster strengths, and ensure that new financing primarily flows to the manufacturing sector and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with their contribution to socio-economic development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual circulations with the domestic circulation as the mainstay and international and domestic circulations facilitating each other. Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at a high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy. It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and better coordinate routine pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development. Adhering to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and the strategic orientation of structural adjustments, the PBC will keep firmly in mind the strategic basis of expanding domestic demand, take solid steps to ensure stability on the six fronts (employment, financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and fully implement the task of maintaining security in the six areas (the employment of residents, the basic livelihood of the people, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normal functioning of primary-level governments). The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, lending rates will be further guided downwards, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse major financial risks, hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur, and strike a long-term balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks.