On March 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 88th meeting) in Beijing. The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Chinese economy is overall controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged. The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments. Great support has been provided for pandemic prevention and control, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy. The macro leverage ratio has remained basically stable. With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved. The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced initial results, and real lending rates have seen a marked decline. The RMB exchange rate has remained stable overall and become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks. At present, the work of pandemic prevention and control in China continues to improve, and the restoration of the order of production and life is picking up pace. However, the downward pressure on the economy is mounting, and the spread of COVID-19 outside China has not only exerted adverse impact on the world economy, but also posed new challenges to China’s pandemic control and economic growth. It was noted at the meeting that efforts will be made to follow up the world’s economic and financial developments, enhance the research and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, and concentrate on doing our own affairs well. The PBC will innovate and improve macro regulation, make the sound monetary policy more flexible and appropriate, and attach more emphasis on supporting the recovery of the real economy. A mix of policy tools will be used to keep liquidity reasonable and  adequate and maintain the overall stability of prices. The PBC will also give effective play to the role of structural monetary policy tools in accurate liquidity provision, make good use of the RMB300 billion special central bank lending, the RMB500 billion quotas of central bank lending and central bank discount and the RMB350 billion special credit quotas of policy banks. Financial institutions will be encouraged to increase credit support for enterprises providing supplies for epidemic containment, resumption of work and production, poverty alleviation, spring farming and tillage preparation, poultry and livestock breeding and foreign trade. The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to encourage large banks to promote financial inclusiveness and small and medium-sized banks to focus on their mandatory responsibilities and businesses, so as to advance a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness. Meanwhile, the PBC will also work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission, continue unleashing the potential of reforms in bringing down real lending rates, and guide financial institutions to increase support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises. In this way, private enterprises will get financial support proportionate to their contribution to the economic and social development. Moreover, measures will be taken to promote the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, in a bid to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development. Work will also be done to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, and consolidate the capabilities of economic and financial regulation and risk prevention in an open market. It was stressed by the attendees that, the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and coordinate the efforts to support pandemic control and economic and social development. The countercyclical adjustments of macro policies should be intensified so as to invigorate micro entities and make all-round progress in stabilizing employment, the financial sector, domestic and foreign investment, foreign trade and expectations. The mechanism for the coordination and transmission of fiscal, monetary and employment policies should be improved to counter the impact of the outbreak on economic growth. The PBC will further deepen market-based reform of interest rates, advance the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans to loan prime rate (LPR) in an orderly manner, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks and strike a balance between stabilizing growth, preventing risks and curbing inflation. Emphasis will be placed on defusing risks amid reform and development, so as to hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.