Pressures on other regional currencies along with the end-of-the-quarter demand for dollars by corporates also contributed to the weaker peso in September.
This was marginally lower than last year's 22.0 percent growth.
This could trigger a second round effect on the prices of other commodities estimated to be about twice that of the direct impact, which would raise the average annual inflation for 2002 by about 0.48 percentage point.
- Meanwhile, oil demand forecasts for 2010 and 2011 by global energy authorities were broadly unchanged from the previous assessments, with growth expected to come from countries outside of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
over the long term and the possibility that global commodity prices could be reaching a trough.
On the other hand, the uptick in MOOE in Q3 2023 can be attributed mainly to disbursements for the banner programs of the Department of Social Welfare and Development and the Department of Agriculture, as well as the Department of Health’s payment of Public Health Emergency Benefits and Allowances and implementation of Medical Assistance for Indigent Patients program.
Preliminary data show that domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 9.8 percent year-on-year to about ₱15.3 trillion in January 2022 following a 7.3-percent (revised) expansion in December 2021.
- The Monetary Board noted the slower expansion of real GDP for Q1 2019 at 5.6 percent from national budget.
- On a year-to-date basis, the peso depreciated against the US dollar by 1.8 percent on 17 October 2023 from the end-December 2022 closing rate.
This brings the year-to-date net adjustment in the prices of gasoline products to P8.00 for unleaded gasoline, - P1.69 for diesel, - P3.49 for kerosene, and P2.26 for LPG.
- The US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) kept its federal funds target rate at 5.25 percent for the sixth consecutive time in January, noting indications of firmer economic growth and some improvements in the housing market.
Meanwhile, the potential for slower global economic growth due to protectionist policies in advanced economies and geopolitical tensions, along with the proposed tariffication of quantitative restrictions (QR) on rice imports, continued to be the main downside risks to inflation.
For the period 1-28 May 2002, the Phisix averaged 1345.65 index points, down by 42.82 index points or 3.1 percent lower than April’s average of 1388.47 index points.
The October unemployment rate, however, was lower than the 11.7 percent posted in the preceding quarter.
Meanwhile, corn production for Q2 2009 is forecast at 1.3 MMT, 1.0 percent lower than the Q2 2008 output, due to heavy rains and the early harvest in Q1.
The FOMC also signaled two possible further rate increases in 2017.
Based on the latest data from the BSP, banks’ placements under the RRP window rose significantly by almost four times billion from zero during the same period.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - Electricity rates of Manila Electric Co. (Meralco) increased in November due to an increase in its power supply cost.
Loan quality improved following steady growth in lending.
At the same time, inflation for services also accelerated due to increases in the domestic prices of petroleum products, largely influenced by rising imported crude oil prices, and the recent hikes in transport fares.
- In November, the peso appreciated against the US dollar amid the recent US Federal Reserve rate cut; the release of Philippine inflation data for October which eased to a three-year low; the acceleration in the country’s economic growth in Q3 2019; and the rise in gross international reserves (GIR) in October 2019.
Growth in the second quarter was supported by sustained growth in household consumption and capital formation, particularly durable equipment and construction.
In the Philippines, the continued sound macroeconomic fundamentals as evidenced by the IMF’s raising its growth forecast for the Philippines, alongside with the markets’ pricing-in of an expected credit rating upgrade by Moody’s, further eased widening pressures in the country debt spreads.
The minimum fare for jeepneys nationwide increased by P0.50 and the fare for regular and airconditioned buses in Metro Manila by P1.00 and P1.50, respectively.
Moreover, economic activity has been subject to downside risks, as fiscal fragilities have weighed heavily on the economic outlook.
Net domestic assets (NDA), meanwhile, decreased anew by 9.3 percent in April following a decline of 3.5 percent in March.
vis-à-vis the US dollar as of 18 December 2007 from its 29 December the South Korean won and the Indonesian rupiah depreciated by 1.0 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively.
- The Philippine equity market raised P16.9 billion in fresh capital for the period January to February 2011, lower by 15 percent compared to the previous year’s level.
f) The buoyancy of demand conditions adds latitude to the conduct of monetary policy and suggests room for a measured policy response.
- The Philippine Stock Exchange index (PSEi) rallied, closing at 8,521.81 index points as of to help finance public infrastructure programs; (ii) positive investor sentiment over domestic Q3 2017 earnings and end of the drawn-out conflict in Marawi City; and - Meanwhile, the peso depreciated on a year-to-date basis in October 2017 up to the first week of November 2017 amid strong corporate demand and expectations of the US Fed turning more hawkish.
This represented collections increased by 11.1 percent while expenditure was higher by 14.5 percent.
- Most central banks, including the US Federal Reserve, maintained their monetary policy settings.
The within-target inflation outlook is also in line with the latest BSP and private sector surveys, which indicate declining and well-contained inflation expectations.
- The risks to the inflation outlook appear to be broadly balanced for 2021 to amid supply chain bottlenecks could pose upside risks to inflation in the near term.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.5 percent for the overnight RRP b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs and RPs; c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios; and d) Set the pricing of the Special Deposit Account (SDA) at 3.00 percent regardless of tenor, effective immediately, consistent with the BSP’s continuing efforts to fine‐tune the operation of its monetary policy tools.
J:\_aaMB Policy and Minutes\Highlights\2006 MB Minutes\MB minutes 09-03-2006 meeting.doc the dynamics and sources of price pressures in order to help guide
The BSP, therefore, should stand ready to take action in order to guide inflation expectations and signal the BSP’s commitment to fight inflation.
Reflecting the strong performance of the manufacturing sector, capacity utilization has remained consistently above 80 percent.
Results of the May 2013 BSP survey showed lower mean inflation forecasts for 20132015.
Food inflation slowed down on adequate domestic supply of key food items, particularly rice, corn, and vegetables.
improvement but remained uneven across indicators.
The BSP relief measures are still in place to support credit growth in the country and, at the same time, provide continued access to financial services to households and vulnerable sectors.
- Given these considerations, the Monetary Board believes that prevailing monetary policy settings are appropriately calibrated to the outlook for inflation and domestic economic activity.
The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.75 percent for the overnight RP prices and continue representation and coordination with concerned government agencies for this purpose; and the BSP’s policy pronouncements on the stance of monetary policy.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The generation charge of Meralco registered a slight uptick in October as prices from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) increased brought about by the reduction in available generation capacity and the output of coal‐fired plants, which have undergone repairs and maintenance.
Although various parts of the Philippines are expected to have below normal rainfall in the last quarter of regions), much of the available evidence confirmed that the El Niño weather phenomenon would be much weaker than the 1997-1998 El Niño episode.
Similarly, yields for the 182-day T-bill rate and the 364-day T-bill rate increased to 6.6 percent and 7.609 percent, respectively, from 6.277 percent and 7.201 percent.
the special deposit account - Relative to their 11 July levels, secondary market yields of Government Securities (GS) in end-July and on 14 August showed mixed trends.
For example, approved building construction permits, an indicator of construction activity, increased by 25.1 percent in the second quarter compared to a year earlier.
The members gave particular attention to the developments in Asian equity markets, where risk-averse investors have generally fled.
- In deciding to raise the policy rate anew, the Monetary Board has noted that price pressures continue to broaden.
The upward revisions for 2023 and 2024 were driven mainly by the higherthan-expected inflation outturn in January 2023, following the sharp uptick in the prices of housing rentals, electricity, and water rates as well as key food items.
Meanwhile, inflation expectations remain firmly anchored close to the midpoint of the Government’s 3 percent ± 1 percentage point target over the policy horizon.
inflation in developed as well as emerging market economies in recent months.
- Domestic supply conditions continue to face challenges emanating from animal diseases, high production costs due to global supply disruptions, and additional uncertainties brought about by the Ukraine-Russia crisis.
The JP Morgan Global All-Industry Output Index accelerated in February as growth in new orders rose to a three-month high amid improved conditions in several markets and stable new export orders.
G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions - Domestic liquidity or M3 reached P4.2 trillion in April 2011, higher by 7.3 percent relative to the level a year earlier.
- Global oil supply-demand outlook is mixed for 2023 and 2024.
- Prospects for global economic activity have broadly improved.
Developments in the utilities sector - Power rates could be adjusted upwards after the Energy Regulatory Commission allowed MERALCO to automatically reflect adjustments in its generation rates despite reduced National Power Corporation charges last March 2007.
MB Meeting MB Meeting - The risks to future inflation are seen to remain evenly balanced for 2019 while downside risks to the outlook will dominate in 2020.
A further cut in the BSP’s policy rates could be interpreted by the market as growth spurring.
Majority of the members of the Monetary Board also noted that the current interest rate differentials remained comfortable, suggesting a case for further monetary easing without raising concerns on a possible adverse impact in the foreign exchange market.
Economic recovery has been delayed given that the outlook for economic activity has remained broadly unchanged.
The higher inflation in January is also due to better enforcement of tax laws on tobacco as well as temporary increases in prices of selected food items, such as fish and vegetables.
- Early indications point to near-record world production of cereals for - Bank lending rates declined by 224.0 basis points during the period posted for the period 8-12 December 2008, bringing the pass-through rate to 110 percent.
- At the same time, catch-up fiscal spending is expected to help sustain the growth momentum in the remainder of 2019.
Net foreign assets of depository corporations continued to drive M3 growth, although at a slower pace of 32.2 percent year-on-year from 39.7 percent in August.
The risks over the pace of global economic recovery remained predominantly on the downside.
In March, domestic liquidity growth decelerated to 4.2 percent (from 7.1 percent in February) while bank lending expanded at a slower rate of 9.9 percent (from 13.7 percent).
Despite these initial signs of improvement, however, financial conditions in the US economy have remained tight.
[4] - Despite the favorable outlook for agricultural production, food prices remain at risk from the El Niño dry spell, which is expected to continue until the second quarter of 2007. unemployed, which included all persons who were 15 years old and over as of their last birthday and were reasons.
However, the generation charge was raised in December as Meralco passed on its recovery of purchased power costs resulting in a P0.06/kwh increase in its generation charge.
The statement from the US Fed Chairman, who pledged to maintain her predecessor’s policies by scaling back stimulus in measured steps, calmed the market and tempered the rise in yields of emerging market bonds.
Expected inflation for 2010 increased to 4.8 percent from 4.6 percent in the previous month.
This differential was below the average of 368 basis points for a sample of countries, which have shown a general decline in lending rates as well as in benchmark rates during the review period.
- Average headline inflation is expected to settle within the 4.5 + 1.0 percent target range for 2010.
Similarly, the BOT maintained the economic growth in Thailand given the external uncertainties with respect to the recovery of industrial economies, higher oil prices and increased volatility in the financial markets.
Using an I-O analysis, a 10 percent increase in power rates could raise average annual inflation by about 0.48 percentage points.
of future price movements pointed to a generally manageable inflation over the policy horizon with some upside risks.
Bank lending—net of banks’ RRP placements with the BSP—increased by 15.7 percent year-on-year in March.
They argued that monetary policy stance should continue to recognize the liquidity needs of economic growth against a backdrop of essentially benign inflation.
The Monetary Board considered the recent macroeconomic and financial developments discussed below in assessing the monetary policy stance: - Inflation increased slightly in February 2023, implying the strong persistence of inflation.
- The decision of the Monetary Board is based on its assessment that inflation is likely to decelerate in the remaining months of 2021 with fullyear inflation slightly exceeding the upper end of the target band.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 12 January 2006.
More positive economic data in previous months have led to markets pricing in a higher likelihood of an increase in the US policy rate before the end of the year.
Sales rose by 9.7 percent in 2007, reversing the 7.3 percent decline recorded in 2006. uptrend since early 2007 as it increased slightly in October to 80.5 percent from a revised rate of 80.4 percent in September, based on the NSO’s Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries in October.
Inflation is also projected to remain within target in 2014 and 2015, as inflation expectations remain firmly anchored.
than-expected rebound in world economic activity; and delayed implementation of exit strategies especially in advanced economies.
The decision of the US Fed to keep the federal funds target rate unchanged following its two-day meeting on 25-26 June 2002 highlighted the Fed’s assessment which maintains that “the degree of strengthening of the US economy remains uncertain”.
This brought the January-April 2004 annual growth of imports to 6.9 percent.
However, there is evidence of a gradual moderation in the global growth momentum as GDP growth in the US slowed significantly due to the cooling housing market and high oil prices.
The steady downtrend in the benchmark RP rates was accompanied by relatively steady foreign interest rates, which in turn translated into narrower interest rate differentials in May.
Stock Market - In September, the market generally succumbed to grave external pressures following the collapse of the Lehman Brothers, the sale of Merrill Lynch & Co. to Bank of America, and the US Fed’s takeover of the American International Group, Inc. (AIG).
Debt spreads started to ease by mid-July after Greece and its creditors agreed on a bailout package and after the Chinese government intervened to arrest the stock market rout.
Consequently, the cost of power from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market declined.
The overall rate decreased as Meralco implemented a staggered collection of generation costs from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market and Power Supply Agreements.
However, the increase represented a slowdown from the 5.1 percent annual rise in June.
Net of RRP placements with the BSP, lending also increased by 22.6 percent year-on-year in February, slightly slower compared to the 24.5 percent expansion in the previous month.
However, oil prices retreated in March on reports of record-high US crude oil inventories, adding to concerns of excess global supply.
The acceleration in inflation was due mainly to increases in the prices of selected food items and in the prices of gasoline and other oil products.
Credit extended to the private sector slowed down to 7.2 percent year-on-year from 8.1 percent in the previous month.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - Electricity rates increased in April due to higher generation costs.
- On the output side, latest domestic demand indicators point to diminishing pent-up demand in the near term.
Results of the BSP’s survey of private sector economists for May 2014 yielded slightly higher but still within-target mean inflation forecasts of steady at 3.8 percent.
month for both food and non-food items, particularly fuel, light and water (FLW).
NG spending also expanded by 4.5 percent y-oy in January-October 2023.
[14] It could be recalled that, pursuant to the pertinent provisions the Electric Power Industry Reform Act of 2001, NPC filed on 26 December 2001 its petition for the unbundling of power rates.
- In deciding to maintain policy rates, the MB noted that the future inflation path is likely to stay within the target ranges of 4±1 percent for 2014 and 3±1 percent for 2015.
Headline inflation decelerated further to 6.03 percent year-on-year in November 2018 from 6.68 percent in October and 6.70 percent in September.
Moreover, uncertainties sparked by the political impasse in the Senate and the still fragile recovery of the global economy dampened market sentiments and investor confidence.
- Core inflation slowed down further to 7.6 percent in May from 7.8 percent in April, bringing the year-to-date average core inflation to 7.9 percent.
Likewise, tracking the movement of international oil prices, prices of most domestic petroleum products were adjusted downward thus far in June.
- The Monetary Board’s decision was based on its assessment that the latest baseline inflation forecasts are within target for 2021 to 2023, although supply-side interventions by the government continue to play a crucial role in keeping inflation within the target range.
They noted that there could potentially be some cause for concern if prolonged political uncertainty contributes to significant nominal depreciation over an extended period of time.
Meanwhile, economic recovery in the euro area showed a gradual firming up but continued to be modest.
- Meanwhile, manufacturing conditions in the ASEAN region stabilized.
lending, however, remained sluggish.
Monetary Board members noted that the requirements of financing the budget deficit may compel the NG to increase its domestic borrowings.
unchanged at 78.8 percent in July from its month ago level of 78.5 percent.
circumstances, monetary authorities may opt to respond in order to guide inflation expectations down.
The downward revision in the risk-adjusted forecast for 2024 is attributed primarily to the decline in the estimated risks along with the decrease in the baseline forecast for the year.
Inflation expectations - Inflation expectations based on the BSP and private sector forecast surveys continued to be steady but remained within the 3-5 percent target range over the policy horizon.
Meanwhile, the volume of production index (VOPI) continued to decline by 1.3 percent year-on-year in April.
Meanwhile, the growth in value of production index (VAPI) strengthened to 17.4 percent (revised) during the month from 10.0 percent (revised) in February.
- Meanwhile, the arguments to reduce interest rates revolved around the benign inflation outlook and the continued downside risks to demand from external headwinds.
However, the return of liquidity at the end of the holiday season and NG disbursements resulted in oversubscription in the 7-day TDF, bringing down the WAIR to oversubscriptions.
Meanwhile, the official core inflation was steady in March, while the alternative measures of core inflation estimated by the BSP were slightly higher.
The NFA Council set to review the country’s import requirement this Q1 2014.
Strong demand for shorter-dated term deposits also drove down the WAIR for the 7-day TDF, while the 28-day TDF remained undersubscribed.
Thereafter, inflation will stabilize and return to the midpoint of the target by Q2 2024.
This was aimed at tempering the extreme volatility of the domestic currency during the period.
However, given evidence of weakness in domestic demand conditions and benign inflationary setting, some members of the Monetary Board also noted that current monetary policy stance might risk being too tight.
Given the background of extreme uncertainty surrounding the downturn, lowering policy rates could help support growth by encouraging spending, investment, and production.
Oil prices were boosted in June by the weakening of the dollar following the announcement of Moody’s Investors Service that it may place the US government’s rating under review if there is no progress on increasing its debt limit.
[3] the 6.4 year-on-year growth recorded in June.
The December imports brought the full year growth to 5.7 percent, slightly below the 7.2 percent recorded a year ago.
As a result, demand-side factors driving global commodity prices have abated.
The slide in the prices of oils/fats reflected ample supply combined with weak world import demand.
inflationary expectations on one hand and the evolving domestic demand conditions, on the other hand, the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, approved to restore the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and SDA windows.
All these factors underlie the BSP’s expectations that average inflation in 2003 would be broadly in line with the government’s full-year target of 4.5–5.5 percent.
- On water rates, the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage SystemRegulatory Office (MWSS-RO) approved a lower discount under the foreign currency differential adjustments (FCDA) for Q3 2008.
the second quarter of 2008 decreased to -43.8 percent, down by 11.7 index points quarter-on-quarter and by 17.8 index points year-on-year.
E. Supply-side indicators Developments in Agriculture - After growing robustly in the first half of 2011, the production outlook on agriculture could be lower in the second half due to the series of typhoons that hit the country.
values in the Makati Central Business District and Ortigas Center sustained their uptrend in Q4 2006 and are expected to rise further in the next twelve months.
However, the favorable outlook for agricultural production, particularly, for the crops subsector, should help ensure stable food prices and provide some cushion against cost-side inflationary pressures.
By contrast, food inflation eased but remained elevated given the double-digit inflation for rice.
- In the transport sector, a provisional reduction in the minimum fare for jeepneys and buses nationwide was implemented on November 7 and Developments in the Utilities Sector - The Energy Regulatory Commission deferred the implementation of its earlier decision allowing Meralco to increase its distribution charge by November 2008 under the performance-based rate (PBR) application.
Policy uncertainty such as the state of regulatory and fiscal policies in the US, spillovers from tighter global financial conditions, and geopolitical risks as the primary downside risks to global growth over the medium term.
- The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Food Price Index was lower in January as prices of almost all commodities, particularly cereals and oil fell year-on-year amid ample supplies.
The average inflation for the first four months of the year was 3.7 percent, lower than the Government-announced target of months to 4.1 percent.
- Nonetheless, there continue to be a number of risks to the inflation outlook.
- In emerging Asia, prospects remain mixed.
The Advisory Committee [1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 7.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; The recommendation to keep monetary policy settings unchanged was based on the following assessments: Depending on the movements in oil and non-oil commodity prices, inflation could settle above the 2008 inflation target range but will be within the 3.5 percent ± 1.0 percentage point target range for 2009. side, and the use of monetary instruments against such influences may have less effect compared with direct supplyside intervention measures.
[15] Manila Electric Company”, 15 November 2002, at http://www.supremecourt.gov.ph and “Meralco customers billed at rates approved by law”, undated, at http://www.meralco.com.ph submit their offers to sell electricity to distribution utilities at their desired price.
Likewise, alternative measures of core inflation were generally increasing – the trimmed mean, net of volatile items, and principal component analysis accelerated while the weighted median was steady during the month.
Results of the Consensus Economics survey for March 2017 showed higher mean inflation forecasts for 2017 at 3.2 percent (from 3.1 percent in the previous month) while mean inflation forecast for 2018 was steady at 3.3 percent.
Business confidence for the current quarter weakened in Q3 2023 but was more upbeat for the next quarter and the next 12 months.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The overall electricity rate decreased in January 2018 due mainly to lower generation charge.
Relative to the 18 Ap ril 2005 auction, T-bill yields for the 91-day, 182-day and 364-day T-bills eased by 10.6 basis points, 12.3 basis points and 11.4 basis points, respectively.
Meanwhile, inflation expectations for 2023 have remained steady, while those for 2024 and 2025 have declined slightly.
Positive investor sentiment has also continued to strengthen the peso exchange rate, thus providing continued stability to domestic prices of imports.
Output, new orders, and inventories declined amidsurging COVID-19 cases in the region which forced governments to reimpose virus-related restrictions.
This, however, may be tempered by the broadly steady peso and higher utilization of hydroelectric power plants with the increased rainfall brought about by the La Niña.
Meanwhile, capital-raising activity in the PSE was lower in January PSE reached P5.7 billion for the past two months of 2008, P5.1 billion lower than the level in the same period in 2007.
The gap between farmgate and retail prices also exposes challenges in the agricultural value chain as well as indicate noncompetitive practices.
Meanwhile, the 91 day T-bill rate increased by 8.4 basis points.
They emphasized, however, that keeping the policy rates on hold does not represent inaction by monetary authorities to the downside risks to inflation.
Claims on the private sector accelerated during the month, consistent with the sustained increase of bank lending in July.
Average headline inflation for the first quarter of 2006 was 7.3 percent.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on monetary policy issues is scheduled on 28 January 2010.
Similarly, the average capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing sector was broadly steady at 84.4 percent in September from 84.3 percent in August, based on the Philippine Statistics Authority’s Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI).
Developments in Agriculture - Domestic rice prices decreased due to the continued arrival of rice imports of both the government and the private sector, and increased supply during the recent harvest season.
Oil Price Developments - Global crude oil prices averaged higher in January 2018, at around USS$65 per barrel following the extension of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries’-led production cut agreement, geopolitical tensions, and unplanned supply outages.
- The overall balance of risks surrounding the inflation outlook is seen to be tilted to the upside, with pending petitions for adjustments in electricity rates along with the proposed adjustment in the excise tax rates of petroleum products and the potential second-round effect on transport fares.
The official core inflation measure published by the National Statistics Office (NSO) increased to 5.9 percent in April from 4.8 percent in March.
Meanwhile, capacity utilization in manufacturing also continued to be fairly low at 76.0 percent for October 2002.
The positive performance of the PSEi can be attributed to improved investor sentiment owing largely to the faster than-expected Q3 2022 GDP growth and sustained reports of positive corporate earnings.
This would also affect over time the supply factors that could impinge on price stability.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Reduce the BSP’s policy interest rates by 25 basis points to 3.75 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 5.75 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; b) Reduce accordingly the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
- Fiscal consolidation continued as the National Government (NG) recorded a deficit of ₱204.1 billion for January – April 2023, 34.6 percent lower than the amount recorded in the same period in 2022.
- Inflation expectations—based on forecast surveys of private sector economists by the BSP and by Consensus Economics—continued to be in line with the BSP’s within-target inflation outlook.
softening of the yields was due mainly to the improved fiscal performance in April 2003 as well as the presence of ample liquidity in Treasury, the average yield on the benchmark 91-day T-bill fell to 6.302 percent, 54 basis points lower than the 6.842 percent yield recorded in the previous auction.
By frontloading the rate cuts, the BSP acted preemptively to address potential risks to growth and financial stability, gaining sufficient policy space for maneuver should potential inflation risks materialize.
- Overall, the continued implementation of quarantine restrictions, tepid demand recovery of foreign markets, and slower-than-expected global vaccine distribution are expected to weigh on the domestic economy’s recovery.
Prospects for the domestic economy continue to remain favorable supported by the positive outlook of businesses and consumers.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The generation charge of Meralco registered an uptick in November due to the higher cost of electricity from power producers (e.g., National Power Corporation and Wholesale Electricity Spot Market).
Meanwhile, the seasonally-adjusted month-on-month headline and core inflation were unchanged.
pressures on the peso have again raised concerns of a possible sustained episode of currency depreciation, with adverse implications for inflation and inflation expectations.
This was also higher than the 1.3 percent growth in the same period last year.
G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions - Domestic liquidity or M3 increased at a faster pace of 8.0 percent in May assets (NFA)—recorded at 15.3 percent in May—continued to fuel the expansion of domestic liquidity.
Domestic liquidity (M3) grew by expand due largely to sustained demand for credit.
- The favorable inflation outlook against a positive economic background suggests that current monetary policy settings remain - Various surveys continued to indicate well-contained inflation expectations over the policy horizon.
- The faster-than-expected GDP growth in Q2 2014 was driven by the services and industry sectors on the production side and by net exports and household consumption on the expenditure side.
natural disasters over the past year.
- World oil prices eased in early November as demand for expensive oil weakened and as cold weather conditions in the Northern Hemisphere turned out to be milder than expected.
Potential price pressures continue to come from a possible uptick in oil and food prices and pending petitions for increases in electricity rates.
[7] For the period June-December 2002, the price of Brent crude oil in the futures market showed gradual softening and settled at an average of $26.21 per barrel.
Inflation expectations for 2024 and 2025 also increased to 3.7 percent (from 3.5 percent) and 3.5 percent (from 3.4 percent), respectively.
- Inflation concerns, risk aversion, and economic uncertainty in the US continued to dictate financial market sentiments.
The policy rate hikes are seen to temper demand in 2024 as real interest rate shifts to positive territory.
- The Monetary Board believed that a tighter monetary policy stance will help steer inflation toward a target-consistent path over the medium term by reducing further risks to the inflation outlook, including those emanating from exchange rate volatility given the continued uncertainty in the external environment amid geopolitical tensions and the normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies.
On a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis, inflation in September increased to 1.2 percent from 1.1 percent in the previous month.
Nevertheless, asset price movements continue to warrant careful attention.
sustained improvements in consumer spending, business investment, and employment conditions.
Average rice prices increased anew with the end of the harvest season as local traders bid up prices to ensure adequacy of their stocks amid the potential impact of El Niño until the next harvest season as well as the recent uptick in international prices.
The sustained expansion in domestic liquidity continued to be driven by the increase in the net foreign asset (NFA) position of depository corporations (DCS), following the steady rise in overseas Filipinos’ (OF) remittances, export earnings, as well as foreign direct and portfolio investment inflows.
Meanwhile, pump prices of petroleum products in the domestic market eased in January, following the decline in world oil prices in the previous month.
11203, or the "Act Liberalizing the Importation, Exportation, and Trading of Rice, Lifting for the Purpose the Quantitative Import Restriction on Rice, and for Other Purposes" on 14 February 2019 is expected to further promote lower domestic rice prices.
Advisory Committee, the members of the Monetary Board noted that inflation is likely to trend upward over the policy horizon.
- Recent surveys showed inflation expectations remained generally well-anchored: forecast for August and the BSP’s survey of private sector economists for July showed lower average inflation forecasts for Expectations Survey indicated a sharp decrease in the number of respondents expecting inflation to increase in the current quarter.
The upward pressures on the power rates could be mitigated should the Supreme Court uphold its 15 November 2002 decision on Meralco’s overcharging case.
Meanwhile, for the period 1-16 July, the average price of Dubai crude oil declined after the reopening of two terminals in Libya, easing supply concerns in the Middle East.
Further, the steady stream of foreign portfolio and direct investments to the country, reflecting favorable investor sentiment, as well as export earnings provided support to the peso.
The release of the Q2 national income accounts (NIA) data in August should provide additional evidence on the strength of domestic demand.
Net intercompany borrowings by local subsidiaries with parent companies were likewise higher during the first six months of 2010 compared to the same period in 2009.
- Equally important, the Monetary Board also noted that despite some moderation in economic activity in recent months, overall domestic demand conditions have generally held firm, supported by improved employment outturns and by ample liquidity and credit.
- The latest baseline inflation forecasts are 4.3 percent for 2021, 3.3 percent for 2022, and 3.2 percent for 2023.
However, analysts generally view the domestic stock market’s overall positive tone as sustainable over the long term.
The NG recorded a P90.2-billion fiscal deficit for Q1 2019, which is forty-one percent lower than that recorded in - Global economic growth is seen to slow down in 2019 but is expected to pick up in 2020.
On 16 September 2022, the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) decided to collectively raise transport fares across several public transport vehicles.
- Latest data from the National Food Authority (NFA) as of 11 April indicate that the country's total rice inventory stood at 1.8 million metric tons (MT), slightly lower than the previous month's level of 1.9 million MT but higher than the previous year's level of 1.5 million MT.
The business cycle analysis by the BSP indicated that the economy has been growing below its long-term growth trend.
All commodity groups registered slower price increases except for clothing, for which inflation remained steady at 3.1 percent for the past three months.
[3] This was a slight deceleration from the 13.4 percent growth registered in June.
Based on estimates of the real effective exchange rate (REER) in May 2002, the country’s external competitiveness has weakened relative to major trading partners.
Supply-chain disruptions could also contribute to inflationary pressures, and thus warrant closer monitoring to enable timely intervention in order to arrest potential second-round effects.
- The MB considered the risks surrounding the inflation outlook to remain tilted to the downside.
The withdrawal of NG deposits with the BSP could imply an infusion of additional liquidity into an already-liquid financial system, which could lead to demand-related inflationary pressures.
- Amid broad-based inflation pressures, persistent upside risks to inflation, and elevated inflation expectations, the Monetary Board deemed it necessary to take aggressive monetary action to bring headline inflation back to within target as soon as possible.
monetary policy stance” considered by the Monetary Board on 11 February 2003 _Bank_ _lending_ _activities_ _continued_ _to_ _improve._ _These_ _developments provide evidence that the expansionary impact of_ _the BSP’s past monetary easing is gradually working its way into_ _the real sector.
- Food and energy items continued to account for more than half of the October inflation rate: food accounted for 2.7 percentage points; fuel, light and water (FLW), 1.2 percentage points; and transport and communication (which includes gasoline and diesel), 1.2 percentage points.
ASEAN manufacturing conditions stabilized in November, with the PMI improving to 50.0 from
On the domestic front, prices of petroleum products increased compared to their end-2018 levels.
Mobility trends for places of work was below the baseline, suggesting that work-from-home arrangements are still in place in February 2021.
For within the BSP’s target.
- The National Government (NG) recorded a ₱879.2 billion fiscal deficit for the first nine months of 2020.
The increased liquidity in the financial system is reflected in continued oversubscriptions in the T-bill and T-bond auctions by the BTr in January inflation expectations.
pending petition with the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) for a percent increase over the current overall average rate of P5.9893 per kwh.
commodities remain, as considerable demand from emerging economies is expected to continue, while supply responses to rising relative prices have been slow to adjust.
The rates of expansion picked up in China, Russia, and Australia, but slowed in the US, Japan, the UK, and India.
- In the global market, the February 2010 Crop Prospects and Food Situation Outlook of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) indicated further improvement in the global cereal supply situation.
Real lending rates remained negative even with the continued decline in inflation.
- Efforts to raise infrastructure spending provided a boost to domestic activity.
improvements but remained uneven across indicators.
The long-standing structural weaknesses in the banking system have constrained the recovery of the Japanese economy.
- The IMF has raised its global GDP growth forecast for 2017 by 0.1 percentage point to World Economic Outlook (WEO) report.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy The Monetary Board considered the developments listed below in deciding appropriate the monetary policy stance: - Headline inflation was steady at 4.5 percent year-on-year in April compared to the previous month.
Shorter-dated instruments, however, declined more significantly than longer-term instruments, reflecting the rush of investors toward safe-haven, short-term assets in response to the heightened level of uncertainty in financial markets.
The price of Brent crude oil for July 2010 deliveries declined to US$74.43 per barrel on its month-ago level of US$86.63 per barrel.
This in turn, would compensate for the broadly flat consumption from OECD countries, where demand remained soft due to inflationary pressures.
Growing expectations of recovery have also been particularly apparent in financial markets across the globe.
Likewise, the volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing increased by 2.0 percent May.
To soften the impact of the rate increase on consumers, the MWSS and MWC have agreed to implement the tariff adjustment on a staggered basis.
In particular, core inflation, which eliminates the volatility caused by food and energy prices, has remained relatively subdued since July.
An increase in domestic oil prices due to an uptick in world oil prices could raise average annual CPI inflation directly by about 0.15 percentage point.
D. Demand conditions - Over the near term, economic recovery appears likely to continue to gain traction.
appreciation against the US dollar due mainly to the sustained inflows of remittances from overseas Filipino workers, participation of foreign investors in the initial public offerings of two companies, stronger regional currencies, exporter dollar sales and the favorable reaction to the passage of modifications to the value added tax.
However, for the period 1-28 January, oil prices were lower as US crude oil production rose to its highest level in more than two decades.
Given the relatively small share of water to the CPI basket of 0.7 percent, the proposed increase in water rates was estimated to result in an increase in the CPI inflation by 0.1 percentage point in 2003.
However, with the onset of the lean season, rice prices averaged higher in AOMM, bringing average rice prices higher on a national level.
Moreover, adequate and timely importation would further support the relative stability in food prices.
Further downside risks are expected to stem from additional price increases in oil and other commodities.
In particular, the members of the Monetary Board indicated their willingness in the future to resort to monetary tightening measures should conditions in the foreign exchange market continue to point to a severe depreciation of the peso which could threaten the inflation target over the policy horizon.
[2] At the same time, the Committee also submitted its monetary policy recommendations to the Monetary Board.
On the downside, the main risks to the outlook include the resurgence of COVID-19 cases; tighter financial conditions; likelihood of substantial and persistent damage to supply potential or extended scarring, especially in emerging market and developing economies and geopolitical, trade, and technology risks.
However, the market subsequently retreated as investors cashed in on gains on the possibility of an earlier-thanexpected interest rate hike by the US Federal Reserve following positive jobs data in February.
- Meanwhile, the US Fed left its policy rate unchanged on 16 March.
Inflation for food slowed down in November, driven by slower price increases of major food items such as, meat, fish, and vegetables.
For some firms, however, growth in net income was capped by higher costs of financing, raw materials, distribution and utilities.
The decline in prices may be attributed to concerns about oil demand as the impact of tight financial conditions and weak global manufacturing activity more than offset the voluntary oil output cuts agreed by OPEC+ for Q1 2024.
On a yearto-date basis, commercial vehicle sales slowed down to 17.5 percent from 21.7 percent in the comparable period last year.
- In deciding on the stance of monetary policy, the MB also noted that the risks to the inflation outlook continue to tilt slightly toward the upside in 2020 and toward the downside in 2021.
The MB also agreed that communications with the public concerning the monetary policy stance should emphasize that the BSP remains vigilant against emerging upside risks to the inflation outlook and that appropriate policy adjustments will be carried out to ensure that future inflation and inflation expectations remain consistent with the medium-term target and supportive of sustainable economic growth.
Interest rate developments - During the 13 August 2007 auction, T-bill rates increased across all tenors, as T-bill offerings faced competition from other investment facilities available in the market (e.g.
Similarly, power rates of the Power Supply Agreements and Independent Power Producers transmission charge and other bill components declined.
Some of the employment losses since the start of the pandemic In 2020 have also been gradually recovered with the employment level in October 2021 rising above the pre-pandemic level.
However, a number of risks remain, notably a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the US economy, a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances, and a potential increase in market volatility.
Meanwhile, the combined truck and bus sales continued to decline by 11.3 percent year-on-year in August, lower than the 55.7 percent decline reported in the previous month.
- Outstanding loans of commercial banks (KBs) increased modestly by 1.3 percent in April relative to the same month in 2005.
The yields on GS in the secondary market fell across tenors given ample market liquidity, a benign inflation environment and positive sentiment following the results of the recent T-bill auction and the government’s swap of shorter-dated peso bonds with bonds due in 10 and 25 years.
During the first two weeks of September, trading was mixed as the index seesawed between such negative news as the rise in job cuts in the US private sector in August, the fall in the Shanghai Composite Index due to the perception that China will not meet growth expectations, and the lack of fresh news to stir local equities versus the positive developments in the local front, including the continued easing of inflation and the upward revision in the country’s GDP growth targets.
Based on the latest data from the BSP, banks’ placements under the RRP window rose by P68.2 billion to reach P96.4 billion as of 19 July 2002 from P28.2 billion as of end-December 2001 while placements under the SDA window amounted to P5.6 billion from zero availments during the same period.
PMI readings for manufacturing, retail/wholesale and services sectors have also remained in expansion territory.
This should bring the weighted average all-in water tariff of MWSI to P29.79 per cubic meter of water from the current rate of P24.44 per cubic meter.
The increase in the NDA, in turn, was due to the sustained increase in bank lending.
For 2011, the mean inflation forecast was also slightly lower at 4.6 percent from 4.7 percent.
- Domestic labor market conditions continued to show overall improvement.
In the domestic market, price changes of most domestic petroleum products showed mixed trends compared to end-2020 levels.
Nonetheless, the impact of the pandemic warrants careful monitoring as this would continue to weigh on the performance of the banking system.
Lower charges for household electricity rates due to weaker demand and the return to normal operations of some of the country’s natural gas‐fired plants pushed down non‐food inflation.
Meanwhile, the margin between the Philippine lending rate and the benchmark 91-day T-bill rate continued to decline from its peak level of about 5.7 percentage points in October 2000.
The MB considered the following developments: - Year-on-year headline inflation in July was unchanged at 3.9 percent from the previous month’s inflation rate as lower non-food inflation was offset by marginally higher food inflation.
This was a further downturn from the 8.9 percent expansion in the same month last year.
On the production side, the faster growth of the industry sector (particularly manufacturing) and the recovery in agriculture mainly contributed to the overall expansion in output.
Foreign participation in the stock market strengthened as its share to total transactions increased slightly to 43 percent in March 2002 from 42 percent in January and February 2002.
This brought year-to-date growth to 5.6 percent, albeit still below the government’s growth target of 7-8 percent.
Increased corporate demand for dollars combined with market fears over the heightened US-Iraq tensions and renewed threats to domestic and as of 1 October 2002 while household stock is as of 1 September 2002. international security following the recent bombings in Mindanao and Bali, Indonesia and recently, in Metro Manila exerted pressures on the exchange rate.
This differential was about the same as the average differential in 2001 of about 5.7 percent and is higher than the differential that prevailed for the most part of 2000, which averaged at about 4.7 percent.
The increase in April inflation was due mainly to higher prices of selected food items, gasoline and other oil products, selected construction materials and the adjustment in transport fares.
In particular, those consuming less than 50 kwh per month or the so-called “lifeline consumers” will not be affected by the planned increase.
Meanwhile, market interest rates (deposit and lending rates) increased following the 150-bps cumulative hike in the BSP’s key policy rate.
On 25 May, the index reached 2,334.6 index points, the highest level posted since 7 October 2008.
- The balance of risks to the inflation outlook is tilted to the upside due to potential inflationary pressures from supply-side factors.
- Core inflation—which excludes certain volatile food and energy items to better capture underlying price pressures—rose to 3.0 percent from 2.6 percent.
during its meeting held on 3 October 2002.
- Indicators suggest continued economic growth in H2 2012.
quarter of 2004 reached P61.8 billion, lower than the deficit level for the same period last year of P63.1 billion.
Similarly, food inflation dropped due to adequate domestic supply of such food commodities as vegetables, sugar, and oil.
They underscored the need to continuously assess the evolving balance of risks and respond in a measured fashion to the inflation outlook in order to maintain an environment of price stability and provide support to the economy’s growth objective.
On a month-on-month seasonally-adjusted basis, commercial bank lending increased by directed to key production sectors of the economy.
reduction in capacity fees as a result of the annual reconciliation of outage allowances as approved by the Energy Regulatory Commission.
These drivers of growth offset the negative contribution from exports.
Meanwhile, charges from the PSA increased due to higher prices of international coal and lower plant dispatch of some PSAs in October from the $2.04-billion gap a year earlier.
Year-on-year headline inflation rose to 3.3 percent in November 2003 from 3.1 percent in the previous month.
However, the robustness of exports growth registered in the first quarter could diminish in the second quarter as the yen strengthened further against the dollar and as uncertainty over the strength of overseas markets continued.
- The fiscal deficit in January-June 2011 was P17.2 billion, 91.2 percent lower than the P196.7 billion deficit incurred during the same period last year.
Output expansion was maintained in the US, euro zone, and emerging markets in Q1 2011.
The steady decline in the RP 91-day T-bill rates resulted into a narrowing of the RP-US interest rate differential in December.
- Following a relative period of calm in October, bond spreads widened in November on concerns over the possible tapering of the US Fed’s QE program.
The relative stability in overall consumer prices was due mainly to steady food prices and lower inflation for some services items in the CPI which cushioned the impact of higher prices of fuel and oil-related products, clothing materials as well as the increased costs for housing repairs.
On a geographical basis, inflation also rose in both the National Capital Region (NCR) and areas outside NCR.
The full-year growth in energy sales was marginal at 1.1 percent in percent in December 2006 based on the NSO’s Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI).
The highlights of the discussions during the 9 February 2017 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 23 February 2017.
This simulation was based on the assumption that the average price of Dubai crude would reach US$27.50 in 2002.
H. Fiscal developments - The January-May 2011 fiscal deficit was P9.5 billion, 94.1 percent lower than the P162.1 billion deficit incurred during the same period last year.
Inflation on educational services went up due to the approved tuition fee increases for the new academic year.
However, overall growth remains largely unbalanced, with the euro area and Japan experiencing more modest upturns.
Nonetheless, the increasing level of the country’s gross international reserves likewise provided broad stability to the peso.
The Monetary Board decided to: a) Keep the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate unchanged at 2.00 percent; and b) Maintain the accommodative levels of overnight deposit and overnight lending rates at 1.50 percent and 2.50 percent, respectively.
The transient nature of the supply shocks as well as the overall conditions for aggregate demand and credit activity argue against monetary tightening at this time.
The members of the Monetary Board noted that the Philippine economy posted a better-than-expected real GDP growth for 2002, driven mainly by the upturn in consumption spending and the recovery in exports.
Tracking the movements of international oil prices, the domestic prices of petroleum products, except LPG, were raised on 27 April.
- On 15 January 2019, the Senate transmitted the rice tariffication bill to the Office of the President for signature.
- Prospects across the globe continue to be uneven.
target range for the federal funds rate at 5.25 - 5.50 percent to keep financial conditions sufficiently tight and bring inflation back toward the Fed’s 2 percent objective.
Nevertheless, current high fiscal deficits, record-low interest rates, large-scale monetary easing, and other government interventions are not sustainable: an expansion of private demand is necessary to drive the global recovery beyond the impact of the various stimuli.
- Prevailing credit and liquidity conditions continue to support the appropriateness of present policy settings.
For the period January-June 2002, the DA has forecasted palay and corn production at 5.72 million metric tons and 2.05 million metric tons, respectively, up by 2.7 percent and 4.7 percent from the previous year’s level.
- Financial market volatility eased over the past month on expectations that the US Federal Reserve (US Fed) would delay further interest rate hikes.
Other indicators such as year-on-year core inflation and seasonally-adjusted month-on-month (m-o-m) headline inflation also reflected an uptrend.
However, the Philippines continued to register one of the lowest real lending rates in the Asian region.
On a year-to-date basis, the peso depreciated against the US dollar by 0.3 percent on 2 February 2011 as it closed at P43.97/US$1, moving in tandem with the Thailand baht, Indian rupee, Japanese yen, and the Indonesian rupiah.
- Oil companies again raised the price of gasoline by P1.00 per liter on during the month.
Meanwhile, oil prices remain vulnerable due to production cutbacks and supply disruptions.
The increased foreign assets of the monetary system were due largely to inflows from the foreign exchange remittances by overseas Filipino workers (OFWs).
The expansion in domestic liquidity continued to be driven by the growth in both net foreign assets decelerated to 14.0 percent from 23.2 percent in the previous month as the expansion in the NFA of the BSP moderated due to the slowdown in the growth of its foreign assets and the continued decline in its foreign liabilities.
Most of the mobility indicators temporarily breached the baseline during the holiday period before reverting to below baseline figures in January 2021, albeit continuing to improve which suggests a rise in economic activity for the Philippines.
The recovery of the local bourse would depend on the sustainability of the growth in the domestic economy and positive developments in the US and other major 23.
October, bringing the growth of year-to-date sales to 7.3 percent, an acceleration from the 5.3 percent growth registered in the same period last year and the 5.7 percent growth in September.
- The peso remained strong in April due to improving investors’ confidence in the country’s economic fundamentals, particularly the prospects for fiscal sustainability.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The overall electricity rate slightly increased by around P0.0229 per kilowatt hour (kWh) to P11.9397 per kWh in March 2024 (from P11.9168 per kWh in February 2024) due to higher transmission charges.
The highlights of the discussions on the 6 February meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular The MB considered the following developments in deciding its policy stance: - Year-on-year headline inflation was slightly higher in January due largely to higher prices of food and selected non-food items.
Across the seven monitored countries, Singapore, Thailand, and Indonesia showed improvements in manufacturing operations during the month, while Myanmar and Malaysia continued to contract.
The next meeting - On balance, the Monetary Board was of the view that prevailing monetary policy settings remain appropriate given the manageable inflation environment and uncertain growth outlook.
This was due to the combined impact of lingering political concerns and lower demand for government securities following the successful issuance of retail treasury bonds on - The peso was weaker against the US dollar in early September due to market jitters relating to the uncertainty on the domestic political front.
While the Philippine economy continues to expand, sustained domestic spending is expected to compensate for weaker external demand.
- Strong domestic demand is also reflected in the latest survey results of the Q3 2012 Senior Loan Officers’ Survey (SLOS) which point to an increase in overall demand for loans.
Moderate improvements in demand indicators and
- Although the secondary market yields and term spreads declined across all tenors on 6 September 2011 relative to end-July 2011, the bigger decline in the yields for shorter tenors led to a relatively steeper yield curve.
Oil Price Developments - International oil prices are expected to moderate going forward due to excess supply and concerns over world oil demand.
Foreign Exchange - In February 2010, the peso averaged slightly weaker at P46.29/US$1 from P46.01/US$1 in January 2010 as concerns over the January inflation data dragged down the peso in the first week of February.
Global inflation continues to be influenced by developments in energy prices.
- The risks to future inflation are deemed to be on the upside.
barrel during the period 1-17 November 2003 from US$27.27per barrel average price in October.
Meanwhile, global economic prospects are likely to stay uneven, thus mitigating upward pressures from commodity prices going forward.
G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions - Domestic liquidity grew at a slower pace of 7.7 percent year-on-year in October from 10.5 percent in September.
Slower economic activity in the US as well as globally could also moderate price pressures coming from imported oil and food.
- Outstanding loans of commercial banks, thrift banks, and rural banks year-on-year in December 2007, from the year-ago and month-ago growth of 6.3 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively.
The higher cost of electricity from the independent power producers (IPPs) was driven by the higher cost of fuel.
- The overall balance of risks to the inflation outlook remain tilted to the downside for 2020 to disruptive COVID-19 pandemic due to social distancing measures and recurring waves of infection is the primary downside risk to inflation.
In its monetary policy statement on 4 May 2004, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) noted that removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.”2 This hinted that the US Federal Reserve is not likely to raise the federal funds target immediately.
At the same time, the Monetary Board agreed it would continue to support non-monetary measures to address high oil prices by concerned government agencies.
- Equally important, the possibility of a sustained deviation of the forecast from the target over the policy horizon poses a considerable risk to inflation expectations, in that the public may begin to expect inflation to remain persistently well above announced government targets.
Meanwhile, higher prices of sugar indicated short-term export tightness in Brazil, the world’s largest sugar exporter, but prospects of sufficient supply in the current 2012/13 marketing season limited the gain.
The Monetary Board also highlighted the need to ensure that the macroeconomic environment remains conducive to credit demand and investment activity.
The prospect of sustained high international oil prices, along with associated adjustments in power and possibly transport costs, implies a continuing environment of supply-side pressures.
- Corporate issuers continue to tap the equity and bond markets.
The national rice inventory as of 11 September 2002 was estimated at 1.3 million metric tons (MT), sufficient to last for 52 days.
Mindanao inflation decelerated to 2.6 percent in July 2016 from 2.7 percent in the previous month.
measures can be undertaken to help temper a further depreciation of the peso.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Increase the interest rate on the special deposit account (SDA) facility by 25 basis points from 2.0 percent to 2.25 percent; b) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.5 percent for the overnight RRP c) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs and RPs; and d) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
Price pressures are expected to further dissipate in the near term following the implementation of reduced tariffs on rice, along with other non-monetary interventions that could ensure sufficient domestic food supply.
The Monetary Board decided to: a) maintain the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate at 3.0 percent; and b) maintain the current overnight deposit and overnight lending rates.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is scheduled on The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Price pressures eased further in August 2019 as food inflation decelerated due to lower prices of rice, corn, sugar, electricity, and petroleum.
Loans for production activities—which comprise 84.9 percent of banks’ total loan portfolio—expanded at a faster pace of 12.7 percent in August from 12.0 percent previously.
The expansion in liquidity continued to be fueled by the rise in net foreign assets (NFA) at 21.7 percent in July from 17.6 in June.
This brought the year-to-date net decrease in the price of diesel to P0.68/liter.
- Rice prices were unchanged in Metro Manila (MM), but rose in areas outside MM (AOMM).
The peso settled at an average of P52.76/US$1 during the month, a 3.4 percent nominal appreciation from its average level in March.
Additional petitions for adjustments in electricity rates, and rising inflation sentiments could also lead to higher inflation.
- Agricultural output increased by 3.9 percent in 2006, up from 2.3 percent a year earlier.
These reflect the impact of the Russia-Ukraine conflict on commodities and financial markets.
Additionally, higher oil prices were partly supported by expectations of interest rate cuts by the US Federal Reserve in 2024; US plans to increase its crude stockpiles; and favorable indicators of economic activity in China.
On a month-on-month basis, commercial banks’ seasonally-adjusted lending in June grew by 4.5 percent for loans inclusive of RRP placements, but fell by 0.3 percent net of RRP placements.
This was a slowdown from the quarter- and year-ago growth of 4.8 percent and 17.1 percent, respectively.
The European Central Bank (ECB) Governing Council decided to leave its key interest rates unchanged during its 12 April 2007 policy meeting following the 25.0 basis-points increase in its 8 March 2007 meeting.
This could help ensure adequate food supply at relatively stable 6.
- On 19 July 2011, the Auction Committee awarded in full the original issuance of 4-year T-bonds at 4.875 percent, which is 35.5 basis points lower than the highest bid rate during the last auction for a similar tenor.
- Changing expectations about the policy settings of the major central banks, outlook on the Chinese economy and more external headwinds continued to influence market sentiment over the past month.
Domestic pump prices of petroleum products saw mixed trends: gasoline and LPG prices fell while diesel and kerosene rose in March.
This represented 41.5 percent of the P279.1 billion programmed deficit for Q1-Q4 2012.
Transmission charge and other bill components also increased.
Meanwhile, year-todate energy sales increased by 4.6 percent from 1.7 percent in the comparable period last year.
- Domestic output growth, however, could be hampered by tenuous global economic conditions.
Likewise, the total equity raised in the Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE) during the same period amounted to P203.5 billion, higher by - Government spending continued to gain some momentum in the latter part of 2012.
However, domestic demand momentum remains relatively strong.
c. Should current monetary policy settings be maintained to allow previous policy rate reductions to work their way further through the system while guarding firmly against sources of potential pressures to the inflation outlook?
At the same time, the members of the Monetary Board shared the view that the prospects for sustained recovery in domestic economic activity were being clouded by uncertainties in global economic conditions along with signs of weakness in overall domestic demand, such as the contraction in manufacturing activity and car sales.
Meanwhile, the potential escalation of trade tensions between the US and China on global trade and investments could result in further downward adjustments to world growth projections.
In the fourth quarter of 2008, gross capital formation contracted, and if sustained, economic growth over the medium term could further slow down.
neutral weather conditions in the second half are expected to support food production, which should help temper food prices.
By contrast, the mean inflation forecast for Consensus Economics inflation forecast survey for the country showed lower mean inflation forecasts for 2015 at 1.4 percent (from 1.6 percent in November) and at - Meanwhile, results of the Business Expectations Survey (BES) for Q4 2015 indicated that more respondents expected inflation to increase for the current and next quarters compared to those who said otherwise.
- Likewise, the growth of outstanding loans of commercial banks, net of banks’ reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, grew at a slower pace of 14.7 percent in May from the previous month’s expansion of 19.2 percent.
Similarly, results of the March 2015 Consensus Economics inflation forecast survey for the country showed a lower mean inflation forecast for 2015 at 2.7 percent (from 2.8 percent) and steady inflation forecast for 2016 at 3.5 percent.
that, in real terms, both the current world and local prices were still below their peak levels in 1991.
- The Monetary Board considered the latest outlook on inflation which continued to suggest that current monetary policy settings remain appropriate.
Banks, however, continue to be circumspect in their lending activities as the volume of outstanding loans of commercial banks dropped by 3.2 percent in January marked the sixth month of successive decline in bank lending since August 2001 due to constraints posed by persistently high non-performing loans (NPLs) and the presence of spare capacity in manufacturing, which has dampened demand for new loans.
The growth of AHFF was driven up by higher poultry, livestock, corn, and coconut production but was tempered by contractions in the production of sugarcane, rice and mango.
- The highlights of the discussions of the 18 November 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 16 December 2004. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department.
It was also lower than the Q1-Q3 program at P914.2 billion.
However, monetary authorities continue to face inflation risks from the volatility in oil prices.
- Meanwhile, the most recent available indicators continue to depict solid growth in the economy.
E. Supply-side indicators Developments in Agriculture - Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing (AHFF) expanded in Q1 2012, albeit at a slower pace.
The Philippine Stock Exchange index (PSEi) dropped on mounting evidence of a slowdown in global growth, the impact of the US credit rating downgrade on global markets and the US economy, ongoing eurozone debt troubles, and the pick-up in China’s inflation.
The increase in NPC’s power rates was partly offset by the reduction in wholesale electricity and spot market charges and independent power producers’ rates.
With growth expected to improve over the policy horizon and inflows from abroad anticipated to strengthen, the Board maintained its resolve to remain vigilant against inflation pressures, ready to undertake timely and preemptive monetary policy actions to safeguard price stability.
The average inflation rate for JanuaryAugust 2007 was maintained at 2.6 percent.
Rice imports were sourced from Vietnam, Myanmar, Thailand, China, India, Pakistan, and much smaller shares of rice imports from Cambodia, Taiwan, Italy, and Spain.
On the production side, all three major sectors grew in the first quarter, led by the industry sector.
following the reassurance from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) that it is prepared to increase production to meet higher demand for oil.
This has resulted in an uptick in the RP 91-day T-bill rates.
- Negative risks to the global economic outlook have increased recently, mainly because of the tensions caused by the US subprime mortgage problem on global capital markets.
- The Monetary Board noted that there was still room for an additional outlook: inflation will fall within the target ranges for both 2009 and information available at the time of the policy meeting.
The Monetary Board decided to: a) maintain the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate at 4.50 percent; and b) maintain the current overnight deposit and overnight lending rates at 4.00 percent and - The Monetary Board (MB) deemed the prevailing monetary policy settings to be appropriate, with latest baseline inflation forecasts settling within the target range of 3.0 percent ± The MB also noted that while real sector activity moderated in the first quarter of the year, overall domestic economic activity is likely to remain firm, supported by a projected recovery in household spending and the continued implementation of the government’s infrastructure spending program.
Loans for production activities—which comprised more than four‐fifths of banks’ aggregate loan portfolio— grew by 15.6 percent in January from 16.6 percent a month earlier.
These factors offset the impact of the higher GDP growth rate and NG deficit assumptions for 2012.
The program expects to produce an additional 339,598 metric tons of rice for 2002.
policy rates or in liquidity reserve requirement would infuse more liquidity in the system, which could fan inflation.
This developed as the US dollar has generally weakened against the peso and other regional currencies amid fears of a US recession, which were fueled by concerns on US banks’ and funds’ exposures to the subprime mortgage market as well as the weakness in the US housing prices and employment conditions.
On a year-to-date (YTD) basis, however, the official measure of core inflation, which excludes some food and energy items, remained higher than headline inflation for the sixth consecutive month in June but lower than the midpoint of the target of 4 percent.
Current forecasts suggest that inflation is likely to settle slightly above the midpoint of the point target range in 2015.
It depreciated by about 54 centavos to average P56.09/US$1 in February 2004 from its January 2004 average of P55.55/US$1 due to persistent concerns over the fiscal deficit and preelection uncertainties.
The economy grew by 6.9 percent in Q1 2016, faster than the quarter- and year-ago growth rates of 6.5 percent and 5.0 percent, respectively.
The AC is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four members, namely: the Deputy Governor of the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor of the Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor of the Treasury Department, and the Managing Director of the The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Year-on-year headline inflation decelerated further in April.
Developments in Agriculture - Agricultural output grew by 3.5 percent in the first semester of 2007 from 5.2 percent in the same period a year ago.
However, palay output is expected to decline in Q3 2014 compared to year-ago levels based on the Bureau of Agricultural Statistics’ (BAS) Palay and Corn Production Survey report due to the reduction in harvest areas and yields per hectare.
Analysts expect inflation to continue easing in the near-term due largely to base effects but viewed that upward risks to the inflation outlook could persist from supply disruptions arising from the potential adverse impact of El Niño.
- Credit activity has weakened further banks reported tighter lending standards due to a reduced tolerance for risk and a less favorable economic outlook.
In particular, growth in domestic liquidity, while showing some easing, remains high despite recent increases in the key policy rates and the reserve requirements.
Inflation is projected to accelerate above the high end of the target range from Q1 to Q3 2021 due to the transitory impact of supply-side price pressures.
- The Monetary Board’s decision was based on its assessment that inflation is likely to remain elevated in the coming months, reflecting the impact of supply-side constraints on domestic prices of key food commodities such as meat as well as the continuing uptick in international oil prices.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - Electricity rates of Manila Electric Co. (Meralco) inched up in February driven mainly by higher power supply prices from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market.
In nominal terms, the peso appreciated by 80 centavos or 1.5 percent against the US dollar in April 2002 relative to its average level in December 2001.
By contrast, the mean inflation forecasts for 2025 and 2026 both increased to 3.6 percent (from 3.5 percent and 3.4 percent, respectively).
The highlights of the discussions on the 24 March 2011 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 7 April 2011.
The increase in global oil prices were reflected in the domestic pump prices of petroleum products, which were the main drivers of non-food inflation.
Unemployment fell unexpectedly in February to 5.2 percent from 5.5 percent in the previous month.
[5] Moreover, as of 11 October 2002, the national rice inventory[6] of 1.3 million metric tons (MT) was sufficient to last for 51 days, much higher than the 15 days security benchmark for rice self-sufficiency.
Oil Price Developments - Oil prices surged in early March 2022 as geopolitical conflict in Eastern Europe intensified with imposition of Western sanctions on Russia.
- Analysts expect within-target inflation over the policy horizon, although upside risks continue to dominate their outlook owing to supply-side pressures and potential second-round effects.
The highlights of the discussions on the 26 August - At the same time, the MB took into account the higher-thanexpected real GDP growth of 7.9 percent for the second quarter of percent.
Inflation reached 2.1 percent in August from 1.9 percent in the previous month.
the steady growth in exports and business investments (private capital outlays).
In particular, analysts speculated that the hike in the Fed’s rates would not come until August 2002.
percent in February 2005.
Relative to previous surveys, the Asia contraction in gross capital formation and manufacturing output along with the modest expansion in credit activity, suggested that the current Pacific consensus forecast for September and the BSP’s survey of private sector economists for August showed lower and within-target average inflation forecasts for 2009.
Meanwhile, Treasury bill rates rose during the 25 April 2005 auction relative to the 14 March 2005 auction[2] but declined relative to the previous week’s auction on 18 April 2005. bids for the 364-day tenor.
Holding the key rates steady could delay the stimulatory impact toward a sustainable growth path.
This was faster than the 8.5-percent expansion recorded in February 2015.
In the domestic market, rice prices in Metro Manila were steady due partly to NFA intervention while rice prices in areas outside Metro Manila reflected mixed trends with the onset of the lean season.
Meanwhile, domestic pump prices of gasoline, kerosene and diesel were reduced to reflect earlier declines in world oil prices.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.5 percent for the overnight RRP b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDA; and c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
However, optimism over the delivery of vaccines has lifted market confidence, supporting improved prospects for global growth.
The highlights of the discussions during the 6 February 2020 monetary policy meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 27 February 2020.
The rice import program of the government, through the NFA, could serve as safeguard against the possible adverse impact of the recent typhoons and the El Niño weather phenomenon on palay production.
production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries international oil prices in July.
previous auction on 29 November 2005.
While the initial results have been encouraging, the recent policy moves need to be given more time to fully work their way through the financial system and achieve their objective of keeping domestic liquidity growth down to a more modest pace.
This was a slight improvement over the 1.9 percent increase in the previous month.
Outstanding loans of commercial banks including RRPs also continued to grow, albeit at a slower pace of 5.9 percent relative to the month-ago expansion of 6.9 percent.
- Adverse shifts in the public’s inflation expectations also remain a risk given the relatively high level of inflation relative to the government target.
- On balance, the Monetary Board deems it prudent to maintain the BSP’s accommodative policy stance given a manageable inflation environment and emerging uncertainty surrounding domestic and global growth prospects.
In China, recent indicators also suggest weak real sector momentum, especially in the manufacturing sector, although partly policy‐driven.
Likewise, the US, China, and Japan registered further gains in manufacturing in August; and India, Hong Kong, and Taiwan also posted expansions in factory production in the same period.
Meanwhile, the potential impact on domestic economic growth prospects of delays in the easing of containment measures as well as a weaker-than-expected global economic recovery owing to the spread of new COVID-19 variants are the main sources of downside risks.
- Weather forecast models (as of September 2017) predicted an increasing chance of a La Niña phenomenon in Q4 2017.
The Monetary Board identified the recent increase in transport fares, possible adjustments in utility charges, and in minimum wages in response to a sharp rise in fuel costs and the dollar cost of imports as likely sources of cost-push inflationary pressures.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.50 percent for the overnight RRP b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
Meanwhile, year-to-date sales rose by comparable period last year.
Oil Price Developments - Dubai crude oil prices were higher in January 2010 with increased demand in winter but averaged lower in February as the weak US economy dampened demand growth.
- Nevertheless, the Monetary Board recognized that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook remains tilted toward the upside, linked mainly to movements in oil prices.
Developments in Agriculture - Domestic rice prices have been broadly steady, while total rice stocks are projected to remain at a comfortable level during the first half of 2017.
In terms of sufficiency, the latest inventory level is sufficient to last for MT.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 10 April 2003.
Increases in headline and core consumer prices continued to be muted.
The MB reiterated that it will continue to monitor closely domestic the time of the policy meeting.
The average peso per US dollar weakened further to a low of P55.075/US$ on 12 March 2003 but it recovered slightly to settle at an average of P55.04/US$ on 18 March 2003.
However, the stock market index rose anew in the first two weeks of December on expectations that the US Fed will further reduce its target rate on 11 December 2007.
MB Meeting MB Meeting - The risks to the inflation outlook appear to be weighted toward the upside for 2020, but are tilted to the downside in 2021.