The sharp rise in the premium was due mainly to fiscal deficit concerns, particularly on news that the government would sell more yen-and euro-denominated bonds for 2003.
`o` Meanwhile, the slower global economic growth due to protectionist policies in advanced economies and geopolitical tensions along with the proposed reform in the rice industry involving the replacement of quantitative restrictions with tariffs and the deregulation of rice imports continue to be the main downside risks to inflation.
The initial P4.25 per cubic meter water rate increase will take effect in January 2003 while the remaining P2.78 per cubic meter could be implemented in 2005.
In other parts of Asia, manufacturing conditions continued to improve for the Philippines as well as Myanmar while the sector remained stagnant for Thailand and Vietnam but in contraction territory for Malaysia, Indonesia, and Singapore.
However, the T-bill rates for the 182-day and 364day tenors declined on ample liquidity and improving fiscal outlook.
Results of the January 2016 Consensus Economics inflation forecast survey likewise showed a lower mean inflation forecast for 2016 at 2.4 percent (from 2.5 percent).
Based on data on bid yields, the yield curve for government securities in the secondary market as of 14 October 2002 generally shifted upward—except for Treasury note.
C. Inflation outlook - Although the forecast inflation path for 2012-2013 is slightly higher compared to the forecast path in the previous round, the latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation could settle within the government-announced target range of 3-5 percent for 20122013.
However, subdued consumer confidence continued to weigh down on consumption growth.
In addition, the pace of global economic recovery led by the US has slowed down due to the sharp falls in the equities market and the spate of revelations of corporate reporting and governance irregularities, which have dented consumer and business sentiment.
declined by 0.9 percent, a reversal from the 22.1 percent rise in the - Food and energy items continued to account for more than half of the previous month based on the data of the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. percent year-on-year in September, as the increase in commercial energy consumption failed to offset the slowdown in the consumption of residential and industrial users.
E. Supply-side indicators Developments in Agriculture - The agricultural sector recovered in Q4 2010, but not enough to offset the contractions in the previous quarters.
- The recent turmoil in global financial markets caused by the US subprime mortgage problem has moderated global growth momentum in Q3 2007.
The main downside risks facing the international economy over the past two years—notably those pertaining to the geopolitical risks, corporate and financial governance issues and the SARS outbreak in Asia—have largely dissipated.
- Looking ahead, the Monetary Board emphasized that the BSP will continue to prioritize providing policy support for the economy while keeping an eye on the potential risks to future inflation.
For provincial buses, there will be an increase of P0.50 in the minimum fare for regular buses and an additional of P0.10 for every succeeding kilometer while air-conditioned buses were allowed to charge P0.25 more for every kilometer.
Meanwhile, the futures market remained in backwardation as of - Domestic pump prices of petroleum products remain significantly higher relative to end-2021 levels even with the recent rollback of kerosene and diesel prices.
Using these alternative scenarios, average inflation for 2012 and 2013 are expected to remain within target over the policy horizon.
accelerated by 3.9 percent year-on-year in December 2003, following an increase of 3.6 percent in November 2003.
Preliminary data show that outstanding loans of universal and commercial banks decreased by 2.0 percent year-on-year in June2021following a 4.0-percent contraction in May.Furthermore, latest results of the Senior Bank Loan Officers’ Survey (SLOS) continued to reflect a net tightening of overall credit standards for both loans to businesses and consumers in Q2 2021.
Results of the Q2 2010 Consumer Expectations Survey increases in the prices of goods and services over the next twelve months.
For the month of January 2003, the budget deficit of the National Government (NG) was recorded at P13.9 billion, lower than the P15.0 billion budget gap recorded in the same month a year ago.
The country’s top import, electronic products, surged declined slightly year-on-year to 8.2 percent in April 2006.
Year-todate energy sales were up by 4.6 percent in 2007 from the 1.1 percent growth in 2006. compared to the P8.5 billion average monthly sales posted in the comparable month of the previous year.
A prudent pause also allows monetary authorities to further assess how macroeconomic and financial conditions will evolve in view of tighter global financial conditions.
As a result, GDP growth accelerated to 1.8 percent in Q4 from 0.4 percent in the previous quarter.
- The PSEi breached the 6,800 level and reached an 11-month high in May on bullish trading.
Meanwhile, the weak global economy and the stable peso could provide a moderating effect on inflation.
countries and a rebound in import demand, particularly in Asia.
The latest risk-adjusted inflation forecast for 2024 eased to 3.9 percent from 4.2 percent in the previous meeting in December.
Corporate bond issuances also increased to P119 billion, higher by 20 percent compared to the level a year ago.
Moreover, the sustained inflows of foreign exchange from overseas Filipino remittances, BPO and tourism receipts, foreign portfolio and direct investments, as well as the ample level of the country’s gross international reserves provided stability to the peso.
This brings the year-to-date average inflation to 2.6 percent, which remains well within the government’s target range of 2-4 percent for 2019.
- The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Food Price Index was lower in May as prices of almost all commodities, particularly cereals, dairy, and meat products, fell year-on-year amid ample supplies.
Fiscal authorities attributed this largely to the frontloading of expenditures and payments for accrued accounts payable, along with a shortfall in revenue collections.
Inflation expectations - Inflation expectations based on the BSP and private sector forecast surveys remained within the 3-5 percent target range over the policy horizon.
- Consumer credit rose by 21.1 percent year-on-year in Q4 2006.
that the balance of risks on the global economic outlook remained on the downside even as the uncertainty surrounding the war has been removed.
the increases in the prices of fuel products, medicines, selected construction materials (which raised the inflation rate for housing and repairs) and personal services, as well as higher purchased power adjustment (PPA) and the currency rate adjustment (CERA) for electricity in the National Capital Region (NCR) contributed to the upward movement in consumer prices in December 2002.
Tighter global financial conditions due to persistent high inflation also contributed to the decline.
- With the run-up in equity prices, capital-raising activity at the PSE increased significantly for the period January to October 2010.
Oil Price Developments - International crude oil prices rallied in January 2021 amid ongoing COVID-19 vaccine rollout, which boosted market sentiment along with constrained production given OPEC+ agreement.
Preliminary data show that M3 grew by 6.4 percent y-o-y to about ₱16.3 trillion in December from the 5.5-percent (revised) growth in November.
Likewise, average cost of power sourced by Meralco from its Power Supply Agreements (PSAs) also increased but was offset by the reduction in power rates from the Independent Power Producers (IPPs).
Expectations of higher yields due to favorable weather conditions and continued Government support foster conditions for stable food prices going forward.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Year-on-year headline inflation rose further to 6.4 percent in August 2018 from 5.7 percent in July 2018 using the 2012-based consumer price index (CPI) series.
The expected increase in rice prices has been kept at bay, with some cities even registering declines in prices between the 1st and 2nd phase surveys in August, as domestic rice supply is augmented by private sector rice imports.
The US FOMC maintained its target for the federal funds rate at economic growth slowed significantly in the second quarter, partly reflecting the cooling housing market.
- In the latest World Economic Outlook as of July 2010, the IMF raised the 2010 growth forecast for world output, noting the modest but steady recovery in most advanced economies and the strong growth in many emerging and developing economies.
- The ongoing dry spell may be strengthening.
- Latest data for Q3 2007 showed that consumer confidence continued to improve.
There has also been relatively little indication thus far of second-round effects from ongoing supply shocks.
[5] However, the US unemployment rate remained high at 6.0 percent in April while the manufacturing sector remained weak as reflected in the decline of the Institute for Supply Management’s (ISM) manufacturing index to posted a nil quarter-on-quarter GDP growth in the first quarter.
Developments in Agriculture - Domestic retail rice prices remained stable, owing to ample supply of the grain, and moved closer to international prices as envisioned with the enactment of R.A. No.
On the other hand, the US Federal Reserve, Bank of England and Bank Negara Malaysia maintained their respective key policy interest rates as they continue to assess the impact of previous monetary policy adjustments.
- At the same time, the increase generation charge partly contributed to the rise in the overall electricity rate.
Furthermore, with the increasingly important role of emerging and developing economies in global commodity demand, the expected strong recovery of private demand in Asia could support global commodity prices going forward.
The depreciation of the peso was in line with the movements of the Korean won and Indian rupee, which depreciated by 6.6 percent and 8.5 percent, respectively, vis-à-vis the US dollar relative to their end-2007 closing levels.
On the demand side, economic activity was driven by resilient private domestic demand and an improved external trade position.
On a monthly basis, seasonallyadjusted M3 expanded by 0.8 percent in February from a 0.2 percent decline posted in the previous month.
In the near term, a positive bias is expected as investors position for the seasonal year-end window dressing.
[12] Similarly, the Department of Energy (DOE) noted that the implementation of the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) by September 2002 could also bring down the cost of electricity by another 40 centavos per kwh.
Meanwhile, early disbursement by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has raised government expenditures in the first two months by 12 percent year-onyear.
The highlights of the discussions during the 23 March 2017 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Inflation in February 2017 increased to 3.3 percent from 2.7 percent in January 2017, which is the highest outturn since November 2014.
However, corn production could decline by 4.9 percent year-on-year in the fourth quarter of 2002 to 4.3 million MT, as earlier floods affected the standing crops and delayed the planting especially in the corn-growing areas in the south.
These developments form the economic backdrop for the latest WEO projections by the IMF, which point to a modest recovery in 2017.
- Local equities continued to consolidate in October, as the benchmark index retreated due to lingering uncertainties over the US presidential elections and the increased likelihood of a US Fed rate hike in December (on the back of upbeat US retail sales data in September), combined with concerns over the fate of Deutsche Bank and on whether the ECB will taper its monetary stimulus.
However, a number of risks remain, notably the expected slower growth trajectory of the US economy, a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances, and a potential increase in financial market volatility.
Thus, the Board also decided, effective 15 March 2010, to: d) Reduce the peso rediscounting budget from P60 billion to P40 billion; e) Restore the loan value of all eligible rediscounting papers to 80 percent from 90 percent of the borrowing bank’s credit instrument; and f) Revert to the pre-crisis NPL ratio requirement of two percentage points above the latest available industry average.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The ERC provisionally approved a lower refund under the 12[th] GRAM and 11[th ]ICERA for the Luzon grid and the increase in NPC’s basic rates.
Contraction in the corn, sugarcane, and other crops subsectors pulled down agricultural growth in Q1 2009.
In this regard, the MB reiterates its support for urgent and carefully coordinated measures with other government agencies to alleviate the spillover effects of the pandemic on people and firms, with a view toward preventing any longlasting economic and social damage.
The IMF estimates global growth in 2007 to be at 4.9 percent, lower than the 5.0 percent growth in 2006, with mature economies (United States, Euro area, and Japan) leading the slowdown at 2.2 percent from 2.9 percent in the previous year.
As of 16 March, the EMBI+Philippine spread was wider than end-February’s level, although still trading narrower than the EMBI+ Global spread.
This meant that domestic demand would continue to be the main source of impetus for economic expansion in the near term and should thus be the focus of supportive macroeconomic policies.
growth in the first half of 2005.
Meanwhile, results of the Consensus Economics survey in November showed a slightly higher mean inflation forecast for 2013 of 2.9 percent (from 2.8 percent in October) and steady mean inflation forecast for 2014 of 3.6 percent.
Headline inflation increased in JuneJuly driven mainly by rising transport costs such as, higher domestic petroleum prices and tricycle fare hikes.
percent in August from 3.2 percent in the previous month, according to - Headline inflation continued to ease in September, consistent with the BSP’s expectation of a mild deceleration in inflation for the remainder of data from the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. percent year-on-year in August, as energy consumption in the commercial sector slowed down while that of the residential and industrial sectors declined.
Commercial bank lending grew by 3.8 percent in August, a slight improvement from the 3.7 percent annual rise in the previous month.
- At the same time, the risks to the inflation outlook lean strongly toward the upside for 2022 and 2023 but are seen to remain broadly balanced for 2024.
This was due largely to the faster expansion of the net other items account (which includes revaluation and capital and reserve accounts as well as the SDA placements of trust entities), which pulled down domestic liquidity.
remained on the recovery track as shown by the uptrend in business investment and steady improvements in corporate profitability.
Slower growth in government spending and investments in capital formation on the expenditure side as well as the weaker growth in manufacturing on the production side also contributed to the slowdown.
A simulation of the inflation impact of a possible sustained increase in Dubai crude oil from US$24.00 per barrel for the period January-March 2002 to an average of US$24.00-US$27.50 per barrel for the whole year would translate directly to an increase in the average inflation for 2002 of about 0.2-0.4 percentage points.
percent year-on-year to reach P1.49 trillion as of end-November increase in bank lending also represents an improvement from the February 2004 auction, reflecting the negative market sentiment over the credit rating downgrade by Moody’s Investors Service and uncertainties relating to the current political landscape.
- The diffusion index of price changes and the number of CPI items above threshold were also lower in February.
- Latest demand indicators affirm the earlier assessment that domestic demand conditions would remain relatively firm.
Total merchandise imports for 2004 posted a 7.5 percent increase from 2003. previous month.
The SPEED is aimed at raising the demand for electricity by providing price incentives to large users.
percent increase in the previous month and 3.6 percent expansion in November 2003.
However, immediately after the generally peaceful 10 May elections, the PSEi recovered.
[6] In practice, the NFA sells imported rice in the domestic market during lean months in order to shore up supply and temper possible pressures on rice prices.
Meanwhile, credits extended to the public sector declined further given the continued increase in NG deposits with the BSP and other banks during the month.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The overall electricity rate slightly decreased in February 2023 due mainly to lower generation charge.
This was faster than the 11.7-percent expansion recorded in March.
- Meanwhile, only Taiwan in Asia increased its policy rates, while Chile and Colombia in Latin America and several Eastern European countries tightened monetary policy settings as well.
- Meanwhile, debt spreads narrowed in April as the outcome of the FOMC meeting on Federal Reserve while ROP prices were also supported by general buying interest from both local and foreign players who remained bullish on their outlook for the Philippines.
- For the first two weeks of June, the peso appreciated against the US dollar following dovish remarks from the US Federal Reserve, as well as market optimism ahead of the trade negotiations between the United States and China on the sidelines of G20 Summit on 28 and - Domestic liquidity slightly increased while credit growth was broadly steady.
Oil Price Developments - Dubai crude oil prices decreased in July after rising in the first half of 2016 due mainly to global oversupply concerns largely as a result of increased US production.
[18] However, the use of a new test or base year in determining utility revenue requirements may change existing rate levels.
Meralco noted that its proposed new rates as contained in its petition for the unbundling of power rates could raise the cost of electric power consumption by an average of P1.12 per kwh.
Netting out interest payments, NG expenditures went up by 26 percent.
The increase in M3 growth was due to the expansion in net foreign assets.
To cushion the impact of these challenges on the country’s food security, the National Government has implemented crucial non-monetary measures to fill supply gaps and boost local production, such as rice imports to augment supply in the domestic market, the extension of lower tariff rates on pork imports, and the relaxation of quantitative import restrictions for sugar processors over the near-term, among others.
Data for August 2004 showed average capacity utilization at 79.2 percent (revised), a slight deceleration from the 79.7 percent in July.
With ample liquidity, some banks have continued to place their excess funds in government securities as well as in the RRPs and SDA facilities of the BSP.
Meanwhile, potential adjustments in electricity rates given pending petitions and the impact of stronger-thanexpected El Niño conditions are seen as the key upside risks to inflation.
Similarly, US manufacturing activity slowed down amid subdued demand.
This brought the year-to-date average inflation to inflation slowed down in August amid adequate domestic supply of key food items.
Even as overall activity continues to adjust to tighter financial conditions, alternative demand indicators continued to show that domestic growth prospects over the medium term remain largely intact.
- The latest risk-adjusted inflation forecast for 2024 has declined to 4.2 percent from 4.4 percent in the previous meeting in November.
expectations that headline inflation would remain broadly in line with the government’s target over the policy horizon.
Moreover, economic slack is likely to persist amid the significant uncertainty brought about by the detection of local transmission of the more contagious Delta variant of COVID-19.
Year-on-year growth in volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing was 2.8 percent in March from 1.6 percent in February.
The price of Brent crude oil for December 2009 deliveries rose to US$77.77 per barrel on to its month-ago level of US$72.00 per barrel.
Majority of statistical and model forecasts from international climate centers predict that La Niña will continue through early 2008.
growth in the previous month.
- The year-on-year growth in merchandise exports accelerated to 4.5 percent in July from 1.5 percent (revised) in June, due mainly to the higher growth in manufactures, particularly electronics which posted an upturn of 5.1 percent in July after declining by 1.7 percent in the previous month.
This brought the fiscal deficit of the NG in the first eight months to P25.5 billion, 25.4 percent lower than the P34.2 billion deficit incurred during the same period last year.
In addition, the NG was very liquid at this time (in view of the income tax period in March and April) thus, it projected no need for short-term funds.
- The latest baseline forecasts show lower and within-target inflation path for 2017-2018.
Netting out the interest payments in NG expenditures, the primary deficit amounted to ₱930.0 billion, thirty percent higher than the amount recorded in the previous year.
- The higher inflation in June was attributed largely to the increase in non-food inflation, particularly education, transport, and electricity, gas, and other fuels.
In the domestic market, pump prices have also been rising with some risks toward the upside with the impending closure of the Petron refinery.
- Recent surveys showed inflation expectations remained generally well-anchored: for April 2009 showed lower average inflation forecast for both showed lower inflation expectations for both 2009 and 2010. showed lower inflation expectations for the next 12 months: from Q2 2009, however, indicated that the proportion of respondents that anticipate inflation to move up in Q2 2009 increased, albeit marginally.
Meanwhile, July PMI survey data provided evidence that a recovery is underway in Japan’s manufacturing economy.
that have been made available since the last meeting on monetary policy presented by the Advisory Committee, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following policy measures: a.
Oil Price Developments - Global crude oil prices started rising past the US$60.00 per barrel level in January 2019 with the implementation of the production cut by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).
- Official core inflation, which excludes selected volatile food and energy items to measure underlying price pressures, increased to 3.2 percent year-on-year in November from 3.0 percent in the previous month.
Headline inflation picked up slightly in August 2002, rising to 2.9 percent year-on-year from 2.6 percent in the previous month.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - Electricity rates decreased in January 2016 due to lower generation costs.
percent (revised) in June 2004 following a 4.0 percent (revised) annual growth in the previous month.
The consolidation was expected considering the substantial appreciation that has been realized since the middle of November 2001.
Revenue collections accounted for expenditures were equivalent to 95.5 percent of the program for the same period.
However, total corporate bond issuances were lower in 2010 as companies returned to the equity market to raise capital.
This was, however, dampened in part, by persistent political uncertainty, stiff competition and the weakening of the peso.
Higher inflation in January was traced mainly to higher prices of food and energy items.
- While real sector activity is likely to moderate in Q2 2014, the Philippine economy is expected to continue to grow above its historical average rate.
- Growth in commercial bank lending rose to 11.1 percent year-on-year in October from 6.1 percent in September, driven mainly by loans to the financial institutions, real estate and business services (FIREBS) sector; the community, social and personal services sector; and the wholesale and retail trade sector.
For 2004, inflation is expected to track broadly the 4-5 percent target for the year.
In addition, Nikkei ASEAN Manufacturing PMI continued to expand in November at restrictions.
These measures could, therefore, mitigate cost-side pressures on inflation for the rest of the year.
Meanwhile, output indicators in the ASEAN region deteriorated.
Prices of domestic petroleum products followed suit.
Meanwhile, inflation expectations for 2023 are also lower, while those for 2024 and 2025 appear to have settled firmly within the target range.
Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 7.5 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.75 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; b.
open economies such as the Philippines typically face the difficult question of how best to respond to movements in the exchange rate, since they affect not only inflation through import prices but also inflationary expectations and output.
members of the Monetary Board considered the following monetary policy options: and stimulus to the real sector.
Domestic price conditions - Year-on-year headline inflation was higher in May at 4.5 percent from 4.3 percent (revised) in the previous month.
- The Board recognized that monetary policy is an important policy lever in supporting demand to minimize any further corrosive feedback stemming from weakening economic and financial conditions.
A commitment to long-term fiscal consolidation will help address concerns over fiscal sustainability.
- Substantial spare capacity remains in the labor market.
- The risks around the central projection for world economic activity remained skewed towards the downside, suggesting some downside risks as well to global commodity prices.
Other indicators also reflected an uptrend, including the following: the year-on-year core inflation, the three alternative measures of core inflation estimated by the BSP, and the number and weight of above-threshold items.
[11] Moreover, foreign participation in the local bourse dropped slightly to 51 percent in May 2002 from dominated foreign buying by P674.81 million.
This brought the January-October percent in September from 8.9 percent in August.
Likewise, merchandise imports declined more steeply by 37.4 percent year-onyear in April from a contraction of 36.2 percent in the previous month.
Investor optimism, combined with ample liquidity in the global market and investors’ search for yields have led to robust trading at the Philippine stock market.
WESM charges in turn were pushed upwards by tighter supply conditions in the Luzon power grid.
percent in April 2004 as in March, slightly higher than the 77.0 percent registered for the same month a year ago.
Compared to the survey two quarters ago, fewer banks have tightened lending standards over the past six months based on the Fed’s Senior Loan Officer Survey.
Inflation expectations also remain broadly aligned with the target over the policy horizon.
- Liquidity and credit growth remained manageable.
This was higher compared to the 4.4 percent growth registered in the same month a year ago but lower than the 7.7 percent expansion posted last month.
- However on 23 December 2013, the Supreme Court (SC) issued a Temporary Restraining Order suspending the implementation of the upward adjustment in power rates for 60 days.
Corporate bond issuances for the period January-May 2012 reached P165.0 billion, more than double the 2011 level of P74.6 billion.
Global PMI also showed modest improvements in September.
- By geographical location, inflation in the National Capital Region (NCR) and areas outside NCR declined further to 1.5 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively, in January from - Inflation expectations—as measured in forecast surveys for January—were lower compared to the previous month and aligned to the inflation target.
Moreover, unemployment rose to 10.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2002 as against 9.8 percent in the same period a year ago.
- The MB also noted that core inflation remains firm.
Given the concerns over inflationary risks posed by the upswing in world oil prices and possible power rate adjustments, a likely increase in election-related spending and indications that demand pressures would pick up as the global economic recovery strengthens, some Monetary Board members emphasized the need to monitor and assess more carefully the evolving environment, with particular focus on the impact of the current Middle East conflict on the oil market.
The remaining two-thirds will be indirect, reflecting a retrenchment in consumer and business behavior and a tightening in financial markets.
The expansion in net foreign assets (NFA) continued to drive the growth of liquidity, even as it was lower at 17.6 percent from 19.8 percent in May.
Reserve money (RM) declined to reach P277.8 billion as of 6 February developed as banks’ liquidity flowed back to the BSP—as placements under the reverse repurchase (RRP) and special deposit accounts (SDA) facilities— instead of being channeled to the private sector in the form of loans.
volume of production index (VOPI) rose by 4.4 percent year-on-year in June after falling by a revised 1.5 percent in the previous month.
The highlights of the discussions on the 1 December 2011 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 15 December 2011.
The preliminary composite purchasing managers’ index (PMI) remained above the 50-point expansion threshold at 54.0 in December 2019, higher than the November 2019 PMI reading of 53.1.
- Secondary market yields were also lower across most tenors on 5 November 2010 relative to their 5 November 2009 and 30 September tenors given the benign inflation environment and ample market liquidity.
Moreover, expected price pressures over the two-year policy horizon continued to be linked primarily to supply-side influences, particularly price fluctuations in the world oil market and weather-induced pressures on agricultural food prices.
Meanwhile, the cumulative expenditures for the first nine months of disbursements in the comparable period in 2008, but lower than the Q1-Q3 program at P1,131.8 billion.
The Monetary Board also continues to support fiscal efforts to sustain growth through more rapid programmed spending, as well as non-monetary interventions to address persistent supply-side pressures on prices.
Higher-thanassumed increase in transport fares and wages, low power reserves and a possible surge in global commodity prices as recovery creates supply bottlenecks, also pose additional upside risks to the inflation outlook.
- The uptick in inflation was due mainly to the increase in the inflation rates of specific food items—notably fruits and vegetables, rice, and meat.
This could further increase the potential for the economy to grow more robustly compared to a situation that is both without monetary easing and fiscal stimulus.
Given that monetary policy affects inflation with a lag, a more accommodative stance now could undermine the attainability of the inflation target in 2003.
On the other hand, several major central banks – Bank Negara Malaysia, Bank of Japan, Reserve Bank of Australia and Bank of England – have eased their monetary policy settings largely to support domestic output growth.
Towards the close of the month, the index moved sideways.
Similarly, the price of the country’s Credit Default Swaps (CDS) tied to government debt declined in early February from the end-January level.
- The peso depreciation against the US dollar slowed down to 9.8 percent year-to-date as of 29 November 2022, from 12.0 percent in October.
- Bank lending, net of banks’ reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, grew by 6.6 percent year-on-year, faster than the previous month’s growth of 4.7 percent.
Meanwhile, energy sales by Meralco rose by 3.7 percent year-on-year in September 2002 following a 1.5 percent decline in the previous month.
Rice and meat prices were also higher year-on-year.
The highlights of the discussions of the 9 February 2006 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 9 March 2006. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director of the Treasury Department, and the Director of the Department of Economic Research.
The cumulative growth rate for January-July was 6.3 percent, considerably lower than the previous year’s 17.6 percent.
Recent favorable trends in manufacturing performance could indicate a resurgence in the industry sector.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the policy stance.
Similarly, steady improvements in Japanese exports and share prices as well as the slowdown in deflation provided encouraging signs for the economy’s gradual recovery.
Stock Exchange (PSE) in April-May 2006, the country’s major corporations experienced solid revenue growth in 2005.
Meanwhile, the differential between the domestic and foreign interest rates tightened, given the larger decline in domestic rates during the period.
of 11.4 percent year-on-year in September compared to 11.9 percent in August.
Meanwhile, the official core inflation rate further eased to 5.9 percent y-o-y in September from 6.1 percent in August.
concluded that raising policy rates does not appear to be warranted, as this would reduce demand but does not address directly the key influence behind rising consumer prices, namely oil prices.
- The full year 2008 fiscal deficit reached P68.1 billion, better than the P75.0 billion program, but higher than the P12.4 billion deficit for the full year of 2007.
Nonetheless, inflation forecasts for 2016-2017 stayed close to the midpoint of the target range.
trucks and buses rose by 40.8 percent year-on-year in May, based on data from the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. (CAMPI) and the Truck Manufacturers Association percent in April relative to the same month in 2005. the Makati Central Business District (CBD) and Ortigas Center continued to rise by 15.0 percent year-on-year during the first quarter of 2006.
- Core inflation, which excludes selected volatile food and energy items to depict underlying demand-side price pressures, likewise accelerated to 3.3 percent year-on-year in August 2021 from 2.9 percent a month earlier.
An active approach through further monetary easing to increase the stimulus to economic activity and respond to the lingering weakness in overall demand; and b.
estimated at 72 days of supply, well above the required minimum inventory level of 7-15 days.
Average capacity utilization in manufacturing also improved slightly to 76.1 percent b.
- Nonetheless, the balance of risks to the inflation forecast continues to lean towards the upside.
- Meanwhile, overall manufacturing conditions in the ASEAN region remained steady, based on the latest data on the Nikkei ASEAN Manufacturing PMI in April 2021.
- The Philippine business cycle (measured as the trend cycle of growth rate for industry and services) eased for the third consecutive quarter in Q3 2018 but remained above the long-term growth trend.
The increase in the NDA, in turn, was due to the sustained increase in net domestic credits along with the slower rise in the net other items account (which includes, among other things, revaluation and capital and reserve accounts as well as placements of authorized counterparties in the BSP SDA facility).
Further, the sustained inflows of foreign exchange from overseas Filipino remittances, foreign direct and portfolio investments, BPO and tourism receipts, as well as the ample level of the country’s gross international reserves provided support to the peso.
vehicles declined in October, with the latter posting a bigger decline relative to the previous month.
- Agricultural output grew at a slower pace of 1.7 percent in the first nine months of 2005 compared to 6.6 percent in the previous year, as the crops subsector contracted due to lower _palay, corn and sugarcane_ production, while the other subsectors posted modest increases.
However, the full impact of the El Niño weather disturbance in 2003 could weigh heavily on food production, leading to lower food supply unless adequate water provisions and water-saving measures are instituted promptly.
- The peso strengthened slightly over the US dollar as the decision of the ECB to inject fresh funds into the euro zone economy prompted investors to shift back to emerging market assets, including the peso.
commercial banks rose further by 3.9 percent year-on-year in September from 3.8 percent rise in the previous month.
However, the moderation in growth in Q1 2014, particularly in the US, as well as tighter financial conditions and geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and Russia, could dampen the overall momentum for the rest of 2014.
Meanwhile, the international price of crude oil softened in November owing to stable OPEC production, although domestic prices saw another increase in late November.
Developments in Agriculture - Nationwide average retail rice prices showed mixed outturns in October covering all provinces and key cities in the country.
Sugar prices went down amid increased production in Brazil and Thailand while oil prices declined due to a combination of weak demand and favorable supply prospects.
Meanwhile, baseline inflation forecast for 2019 was lower at 3.5 percent, after considering the estimated impact of the rice tariffication bill and the suspension of the excise tax on oil.
So far, remittances and foreign direct investments are holding up.
- The National Government’s (NG) fiscal position posted a deficit of P22 billion in December, bringing the full-year deficit to only P9.4 billion, an overperformance of P53.6 billion compared to the programmed level.
The latest business cycle analysis of the BSP and various leading economic indicators monitored by the BSP point to a continued economic upturn in Q1 2015.
Consistent with improving business and consumer sentiment and favorable funding conditions, bank lending has continued to grow at double-digit rates.
growth in August, and the 0.4 percent rise in September of last year.
- The risks to the inflation outlook remain broadly balanced.
resistance level, reflecting investors’ optimism on account of positive seasonally-adjusted M3 declined further by 0.8 percent in February, compared to the 0.4 percent (revised) deceleration posted in the previous month.
Nevertheless, the year-to-date average inflation of 3.3 percent was more than a full percentage point lower than the 2002 target.
Cumulatively, the fiscal deficit reached P31.7 billion for the period January-August, higher than last year’s P25.5 billion deficit for the same period.
information available at the time of the policy meeting.
Hence, the first quarter is essentially an opportunity for investors to accumulate attractive stocks.
These downward pull factors, however, were partly offset by inflationary pressures coming from the higher-than-expected growth of domestic liquidity in January compared to the previous forecast round.
On the price front, the recent surge in oil prices contributed to a slight uptrend in global inflation.
The latest growth estimates are lower due to weaker-than-expected observations from high-frequency indicators and global economic conditions.
Unemployment rose as 1.74 million entered the labor force, exceeding the 1.40 million net jobs that were generated.
Inflation pressures at the global level appeared to be well-contained despite higher inflation outturns in recent months.
Meanwhile, government measures to address the supply constraints, namely the proposed reduction of tariffs on meat and rice imports, provide the main downside risks to inflation.
These risk factors include primarily the rise in world oil prices, which will affect the cost of producing other goods and services.
The highlights of the discussions of the 5 June 2008 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 17 June 2008. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director of the Treasury Department, and the Managing Director of the Monetary Policy Sub-sector.
Meanwhile, capital formation and exports continued to be weighed down by tepid global demand which was also reflected in the sustained drop in industrial output.
This marked the highest year-on-year growth registered since November 2001.
In turn, lower domestic oil prices could help soften the cost-side pressures on inflation.
The results of the BSP’s August 2023 round of survey on private sector economists’ inflation expectations showed a steady mean inflation forecast for 2023 at 5.5 percent relative to the July 2023 survey round.
- The pace of global economic activity moderated but remained robust in the second quarter compared to the previous quarters.
The latest forecasts also show that the country’s real GDP will return to its 2019 level by Q3 2022.
- Bank lending, net of banks’ reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, continued to grow in January, albeit at a slower pace of
- The Monetary Board noted that the challenging external environment and uneven growth prospects in advanced and key emerging economies supported a steady policy setting.
substitute for Dubai crude— was used as indicator of future world oil prices since futures data on Dubai crude were not available.
- Mean inflation forecasts from surveys of private sector economists continued to show generally elevated inflation expectations for 2018-2020.
- The futures price curve remained in backwardation, though the path appears to be noticeably lower compared to early November given increased downside risks to global oil demand.
Towards the end of the month, however, spreads eased on positive speculation that the US Fed would intervene to spur economic growth.
[3] The DCS, which replaced the Monetary Survey (MS) as the basis for measuring domestic liquidity, features an expanded list of surveyed institutions that includes the BSP, commercial banks, thrift banks, rural banks, non-stock savings and loan associations and non-banks with quasi-banking functions.
The Monetary Board argued that despite adequate liquidity in the system, banks continued to be constrained to lend actively in an effort to preserve asset quality or to avoid a further deterioration in capital base.
By contrast, economic activity across major emerging markets weakens further.
Meanwhile, contractions were observed in Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Likewise, higher year-on-year inflation rates from non-food items (clothing and footwear, health, recreation and culture, as well as restaurant and miscellaneous goods and services) tempered the negative inflation outturn in housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels during the month.
Such a prospect increases not only the risks to inflation expectations but also the likelihood of second-round effects.
- Meanwhile, the FOMC kept its policy rate unchanged during its 27 January meeting but kept its options open for the March meeting.
Adjusted for the risk premium (measured by the differential between the 10-year ROP note and the 10-year US Treasury note), the differential between the BSP policy interest rate and the US federal funds target rate narrowed to 27 basis points as of 3 March 2003.
Risks to the global growth outlook are tilted to the downside in view of tight labor markets in advanced economies as well as uncertainty on inflation and monetary policy.
The marginal increase was attributed to the higher prices of vegetable oil and meat, which slightly outweighed the decline in the prices of cereal, dairy, and sugar products.
- Philippine GDP grew at a moderate pace as consumer and government spending eased.
- Meanwhile, results of the latest Asia Pacific consensus forecasts as of January 2010 also showed within-target but slightly higher inflation for the Philippines for 2010.
[2] improving optimism for the first and second quarters of 2006.
- Weakened corporate sector performance in the first half of 2020 reflected in part the slowdown in bank lending.
The Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee voted to keep the official bank rate steady at 5.0 percent during its 6-7 December meeting.
While this was slower than the 7.1- and 7.5-percent growth posted in the first two quarters, this was faster compared to the 5.1 percent growth in the comparable period last year.
Merchandise export growth for Jan-Oct 2006 was 16.4 percent, higher than the previous year’s 3.3 percent.
Prices of beef products were steady in July.
The growth in industrial production has been sluggish, labor markets remained soft and other leading indicators have weakened.
need for the BSP to continue assessing economic and financial developments for indications of potential threats to the inflation target and, if necessary, undertake a well-timed policy adjustment.
The resulting higher interest rates along with coup’s impact on market sentiment and expectations led to a reduction in private investment.
Foreign investors have remained reluctant to invest in the domestic stock market as indicated by the decline in total foreign transactions during the period 2-6 December 2002 by 10.4 percent compared to the level in previous month.
Developments in the Utilities Sector - The ERC approved the increase in Meralco’s distribution charge in consuming 200 kilowatt-hours (kwh) per month will increase by about increase by this magnitude as the distribution charge accounts for only about 10 percent of total electricity cost.
percent from 80.1 percent (revised) in the previous month.
The 2000 and 1994 headline and core inflation series will continue to be published until June 2004, after which, only the 2000–based CPI headline and core inflation data will be reported.
Nevertheless, the growth in agriculture is projected to accelerate in the quarter due to higher palay and corn production.
- Outstanding loans of commercial banks (including RRPs) grew at a faster pace in May at 15.4 percent year-on-year, higher than the 10.3 percent (revised) and 7.7 percent posted in March and April, respectively.
However, market sentiment remains generally cautious amid the need for further fiscal adjustments on the horizon.
The country’s top import, electronic products, surged - The near-term outlook for agriculture, particularly for _palay production,_ remains favorable.
Moreover, the daily PHISIX closed at 1,027.67 on 18 October against Iraq, the slow upturn in the world economy, the depreciation of the peso and the increasing fiscal gap combined to dampen market sentiment.
- The MB also noted that prospects for global economic growth have remained subdued since the previous meeting.
Industrial production and retail sales regained some momentum.
The European Central Bank (ECB) noted that indicators pointed increasingly to a gradual improvement in economic activity, suggesting that the euro area economy would likely post a slow but gradual recovery.
momentum as consumer spending advanced strongly and business investment picked up in the second quarter.
- The country’s growth prospects remain intact for 2023 to 2025 despite global headwinds and tighter financial conditions.
NG disbursements for PS, MOOE, and IOCO grew by 10.7 percent in January-October 2023 following the improved spending performance of government agencies such as the Department of Public Works and Highways; Department of Transportation; Department of Health; Department of Social Welfare and Development; Department of Agriculture; and Department of National Defense.
The Monetary Board decided to: a) Maintain the Target RRP Rate at 6.50 percent; and b) Maintain the current interest rates on the overnight deposit facility at - The Monetary Board decided to maintain the BSP’s Target Reverse Repurchase (RRP) Rate at 6.50 percent.
Aggregate demand, to date, has been driven largely by consumer spending.
- The Board noted that the near-term inflation outlook is supported by the downward shift in the balance of risks following the easing of information available at the time of the policy meeting.
- While rice prices were steady in Metro Manila (MM), they increased in areas outside Metro Manila (AOMM) in November 2009, driving the national average up.
At the same time, the impact of recent natural calamities could pose strong headwinds to domestic economy recovery in the coming months.
Do the risks to the inflation outlook warrant an increase in policy rates in order to contain a possible build-up in price pressures?
- The MB’s decision to maintain the policy rates is based on its assessment that current monetary policy settings remain appropriate given a manageable inflation environment and subdued economic outlook.
Meanwhile, the growth in consumer loans decelerated to 13.4 percent from 15.6 percent in July due mainly to the slowdown in auto loans.
There continued to be soft spots in domestic demand, which indicate downside risks to aggregate demand moving forward.
Philippine government is implementing several measures to help cushion the impact of high oil prices.
- In August, the peso depreciated against the US dollar amid renewed global recession concerns as a result of protracted trade conflict between the US and China.
- Q2 Business Expectations Survey (BES) results show business sentiment has remained positive but has turned more cautious.
Meanwhile, about 1.3 MMT or 57.0 percent of the total NFA Council-approved volume of importation for 2010 (2.3 MMT) have arrived as of 7 April 2010.
spending continued to hold up and financial conditions showed marked improvement following a rebound in the stock market.
- Capital raising activities of listed companies in the PSE was significantly higher compared to 2009.
Water levels in major dams continued to decline, affecting the water resource for power and irrigation supply in some parts of Luzon.
- Rice prices were steady in Metro Manila (MM) but declined in areas outside Metro Manila (AOMM) in September 2009 and the first half of October.
Meanwhile, on a real, trade-weighted basis, the peso depreciated relative to the currencies of the major trading partners.
number of car sold registered a 4 percent year-on-year decline in June 2003 following a steep 40 percent decrease in the previous month.
Meanwhile, inflation is projected to revert close to the lower end of the target range by January 2024 due mainly to negative base effects and the likely deceleration in global oil and non-oil prices.
The national accounts data confirm the solid performance of domestic market oriented sectors such as construction and services.
Revenue collections increased by 12.9 percent while expenditure was higher by 14.1 percent.
These targets were set in coordination with the Development Budget and Coordination Committee (DBCC).
The resulting year-to-date average inflation of of 2.0–4.0 percent for 2022.
At the same time, inflation expectations have remained well-anchored over the policy horizon.
- Treasury bill (T-bill) auction rates eased across all tenors on 31 July 2006 relative to 26 June 2006 due to strong demand for T-bills amid ample liquidity and an improving fiscal position.
Lower year-on-year inflation rates for food, beverage and tobacco (FBT), clothing and services offset higher inflation rates for fuel, light and water - The highlights of the discussions of the 30 June 2005 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 4 August 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, Monetary Policy Sub-Sector and the Managing Director of the Treasury Department.
According to PAGASA’s latest climate outlook as of 22 November 2023, strong El Niño is present and may further strengthen toward end-2023 and early part of addition, most climate models predict that current El Niño episode will likely persist until Q2 2024.
Based on the new definition of unemployment, the jobless rate declined to 7.7 percent in July from that business optimism in the third quarter declined, but firms expect conditions to improve in the fourth quarter.
The Monetary Board also pointed out that the subdued economic activity—highlighted by the slowdown in manufacturing in the third quarter as well as continued spare capacity in manufacturing and relatively modest growth in bank lending—could help ease potential supplyside pressures on inflation.
Debt spreads also widened during the period as investors traded on a safe-haven mode, pushing yields of US Treasury bonds lower while raising yields of the relatively risky emerging market bonds higher.
The inflation rate of light increased with higher power rates as the ongoing El Niño phenomenon led to higher generation costs.
The MB also reiterated its readiness to employ macroprudential measures as necessary to pre-emptively address any potential misalignment in asset prices.
Meanwhile, the lower forecast for appreciation, and lower domestic growth outlook following the cumulative policy rate adjustments of the BSP.
The outlook for the US economy remains upbeat, while economic activity in the euro area and Japan continues to gain traction.
available series starting from January 2005 to February 2007.
The National Grid Corporation of the Philippines noted that Mindanao, which depends on hydro power for more than 50 percent of its electricity requirement, sustained power outages due to the supply deficit.
At the same time, capacity utilization in manufacturing has continued to be sluggish as it slipped slightly to 75.3 percent in April 2002 from 75.9 percent in the previous month.
Inflation expectations also remain anchored to the inflation target over the policy horizon.
Oil Price Developments - Dubai crude oil prices declined in June 2023 from the full-month average in May 2023 as weaker demand prospects outweighed the effects of pronouncements to tighten supply by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and its partners (OPEC+)[3] and Saudi Arabia.
Meanwhile, domestic retail prices of petroleum products were raised twice in the same month following the recent uptrend in international prices and were raised anew on 1 February 2006 in line with the increase in the Value Added Tax (VAT) rate.
The World Bank (WB) downgraded both its 2023 and 2024 growth outlook as tightening global financial conditions and protracted geopolitical tensions in Eastern Europe weigh on global economic output.
- Primary T-bill rates and secondary market yields for GS in September generally decreased.
However, foreign selling dominated foreign buying by P663.88 million.
The MB considered the following developments: - Year-on-year headline inflation increased to 4.4 percent in March from items, particularly light and transportation and communication services, accounted for the rise of inflation in March.
Inflation forecast for 2020 was unchanged at 3.2 percent.
need to continue monitoring the evolving economic and financial developments and to assess their impact on the long-run price path.
Market expectations indicated that world oil prices would continue to track the $22-$28 per barrel target price band of OPEC for the year, given the production limits set by the OPEC for its member countries and softer world oil demand due to concerns regarding the robustness of the US economic recovery.
Results of the BSP’s survey of private sector economists for November 2017 showed that mean inflation forecasts for 2017 and 2019 were steady at 3.3 and 3.4 percent, respectively.
Moreover, the number of CPI items with inflation rates below the threshold dropped in May relative to the previous month.
Oil Price Developments - Global oil prices have been volatile recently though Dubai crude oil prices have been generally declining in the first half of September 2022 as concerns over weaker demand outlook offset worries over supply tightness.
The negative impact of the Russian-Ukraine conflict on economic activity is not yet fully realized during the quarter but could become more apparent in subsequent periods.
- Meanwhile, the prospects for a sustainable recovery remain dependent on timely and robust responses to the pandemic and the risk of further outbreaks of COVID-19 infections.
Adverse weather conditions in the top wheat-exporting countries curbed the outlook for harvests this year while corn prices rose on speculation that demand from livestock producers will increase due to rising wheat prices combined with the expected decline in global wheat production.
The slowdown in M3 growth is also attributed to the contraction in claims on the central government which reflects the liquidity siphoned off from the system with the recent issuance of Retail Treasury Bonds by the National Government, which were deposited to the BSP.
During the 5 November auction, the Auction Committee made a full award of P1.5 billion and P2.0 billion worth of T-bills for the 91-day and 182-day tenors, but rejected in full the bids for the P2.5 billion worth of 364-day T-bills.
- In deciding on the stance of monetary policy, the MB also noted that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook has shifted toward the upside for 2020, but remained tilted to the downside for 2021.
The old unemployment definition did not consider the criterion on availability for work.
- Domestic liquidity or M3 continued to grow in July at a slightly faster pace of 12.9 percent year-on-year, relative to the 12.6 percent growth recorded in the previous month.
- The cumulative 200-basis-point policy rate cut of the BSP from 18 December 2008 to 9 July 2009 appeared to have been passed on by banks to their borrowers.
Palay production could grow by 8.9 percent year-on-year to 5.4 million MT in the fourth quarter of 2002 with the expected favorable impact of the quick turnaround scheme (QTA) and adequate rainfall brought about by the southwest monsoons.
- On 16 June 2016, Bank Indonesia (BI) decided to reduce its (12-month) BI rate and respectively, to help strengthen the country’s growth momentum.
Petitions for electricity rates and transport fare adjustments; the proposed increase in the excise taxes of alcoholic beverages; the impact of African swine fever on meat prices; and higher global oil prices are seen as the main upside risks to inflation.
The IMF viewed the risks to the global growth outlook as being broadly balanced in the near term, while still being skewed to the downside over the medium term.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is scheduled on The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Inflation increased in May 2019 due mainly to supply-side factors (food price movements linked to adverse weather conditions) and base effects.
Meanwhile, prices of some monitored vegetables rose in October following weather-related supply disturbances in producing provinces in Central and Northern Luzon.
The expansion in net foreign assets brought about by foreign exchange inflows coming mainly from overseas Filipinos’ remittances, business process outsourcing receipts, and foreign portfolio investments also contributed to M3 growth.
The highlights of the discussions during the 9 November 2017 monetary policy meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 28 November 2017.
At the same time, downside risks to the economic recovery emanate from the emergence of new COVID-19 variants as well as the potential tightening of global financial conditions.
More electricity was needed during the daytime peak periods, when electricity from generators is more expensive.
Developments in Agriculture - Nationwide average rice prices fall in October survey amid the onset of the main harvest season.
Meanwhile, the volume of production index (VOPI) declined by 5.0 percent in September, a reversal from the 5.0 percent expansion in August.
- Bank lending growth, net of banks’ RRP placements with the BSP, grew at solid pace of previous month.
Similarly, bank lending inclusive of RRPs expanded by 20.0 percent from the 19.5 percent growth posted in the previous month.
Mean inflation forecast for 2017 stood at 2.9 percent.
Banks remained cautious in extending credit due to the still high NPLs and weak demand for additional bank financing.
at 0.1 percent in the first quarter of 2003 following a 0.5 percent rise in the fourth quarter of 2002.
While domestic production is seasonally low during the lean months, recent reports attribute the increase in rice prices more to the series of domestic fuel price hikes affecting transportation and logistics costs, as well as farmgate prices, prompting traders and retailers to adjust their selling prices.
The spot price of Dubai crude oil was higher by US$4.57 per barrel in November at US$77.72 per barrel from US$73.15 per barrel in October.
- The fiscal deficit was higher for January-October 2008 compared to the comparable period a year ago.
Fears of QE tapering off also drove the general widening in debt spreads in June, with a sell-off in the fixed income market expanding spreads to levels last seen in June risk-off trading sentiment.
their latest respective monetary policy meetings.
The Conference Board's consumer confidence index is based on a mail-in survey of 5,000 households, and is more focused on labor-market conditions.
On the supply side, growth in 2014 was supported by services and industry, particularly manufacturing.
The futures price curve remained in backwardation, broadly reflecting forecasts that supply would exceed demand for most of 2022 and 2023.
- Based on the preliminary results of the January 2008 Labor Force Survey (LFS), the unemployment rate declined to 7.4 percent in - Salaries of government employees are expected to increase by 10 percent effective July 2008.
During the same period, Philippine credit default swap (CDS) spreads, or insurance-like contracts that protect investors against default or restructuring, tracked the same trend as it widened to 282 basis points from 262 basis points as of end-June.
Meanwhile, Maynilad rates were reduced as the increase in its basic charge was more than offset by the higher discount resulting from the foreign currency differential adjustment charge.
The lower PMI in February may be attributed to the further contraction of the retail and wholesale and services sectors, as well as the slower expansion of the manufacturing sector.
- By geographical location, inflation for both the National Capital Region (NCR) and areas outside NCR advanced to 0.2 percent (from 0.1 percent) and 0.5 percent (from - Results of the Consensus Economics inflation forecast survey and the BSP’s survey of private sector economists both yielded lower mean inflation forecasts for 2015 and 2016.
Net domestic credit growth also contributed to the expansion of domestic liquidity.
The Nikkei ASEAN Manufacturing PMI rose to the neutral 50.0-threshold in November due to expansion in factory production and a renewed increase in new orders.
The prices of these products were reduced by P1.25 per liter, P1.50 per liter, and P2.00 per liter, respectively, effectively reverting to their respective price levels prior to the 20 October increase.
This growth was stronger than the 3.5 percent increase reported a year earlier and was the highest growth rate recorded since the fourth quarter of 1998. grew by 6.4 percent (revised) in March 2003, a marked turnaround from the 1.1 percent (revised) decline in the previous month.
Moreover, labor conditions remained soft as unemployment reached 10.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2002, up from the 9.8 percent recorded a year ago.
- The NG fiscal deficit for the period January-August 2014 was P25.9 billion, lower than the P82.6-billion deficit incurred during the same period in 2013.
Yields declined on buying interest following the increase in the Fed funds rate target range during the US Fed’s monetary policy meeting on 25-26 July 2023, with US Fed Chairman Jerome Powell’s post policy statement seen as dovish by the market.
Meanwhile, prices of refined sugar inched up in most trading centers due to increased demand during the summer season.
There have been further signs that the pace of growth had stabilized in China while the US economy had continued to grow at a moderate pace, with the uncertainties posed by the ‘fiscal cliff’ somewhat reduced.
Over the near term, the outlook for crude oil prices remains generally weighted towards the downside in line with the expected slower pace of global economic activity.
improvements in business and consumer outlook for the fourth quarter of 2005 and for the first quarter of 2006. unemployed, which include all persons who are 15 years old and over as of their last birthday and are reported as: (1) without work and currently available for work and seeking work; or (2) without work and currently available for work but not seeking work for the following reasons: (a) tired/believed no work available; (b) awaiting results of previous job application; (c) temporary illness/disability; (d) bad weather; and (e) waiting for rehire/job recall.
In addition, most climate models predict that the current El Niño episode will likely persist until the March-April-May 2024 season.
- Further stimulus measures from central banks across the globe—particularly in the euro area, Japan, and China—helped support investor sentiment.
- Furthermore, the temporary period of strong M3 growth is not seen to lead to significant inflationary pressures.
However, elevated global commodity prices, heightened geopolitical tensions, and of macroeconomic and financial information available at the time of the policy meeting.
China’s significant growth in its manufacturing sector likewise provided support for the market and the higher commodity prices added to optimism that a recovery in developing economies will be sustained.
Compared to the previous policy meeting, baseline inflation forecast for 2013 has been revised downward due primarily to lower oil prices.
The ongoing impact of dry weather on crops output may also contribute to pressures on domestic food prices.
Concerns over the fiscal outlook could pose risks to inflation and inflation expectations over the policy horizon.
Meanwhile, Treasury bill (T-bill) rates were generally lower during the 18 July 2005 auction compared to their levels on 11 July 2005. accelerated to 12.2 percent year-on-year in May 2005, based on Depository Corporations Survey (DCS) from the 12.0 percent rise in the previous month.3 the 4.3 year-on-year growth recorded in April 2005. during the 18 July 2005 auction.
The differentials between the RP 91-day T-bill rate (net of RP withholding tax) and the 90-day US LIBOR and 90-day US T-bill rate for the month of June widened to 1.9 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively, compared to the previous month’s average differentials of 1.6 percent and 1.8 percent.
Claims on the domestic sector grew by 11.3 percent in July from 11.1 percent in June due to the continued increase in claims on the private sector (by 14.5 percent), reflecting the sustained growth in bank lending.
Rainfall conditions have normalized in most of Luzon and the approved wage hike for NCR is not expected to generate additional inflationary pressures.
The EMBI+Global spread slightly narrowed on 29 June to 446 basis points (bps), lower than the 480 bps average in May.
The differential between the BSP policy rate and the US federal funds rate narrowed in March 2009, following the BSP’s 25-basis-point cut in its policy rate.
an expected 10.8 percent year-on-year growth in the first quarter followed by an 8.7 percent growth in the second quarter.
The recent responses of monetary authorities in major economies were generally cautious with the Bank of England, Bank of Japan and European Central Bank opting to keep monetary policy settings unchanged.
[5] The government’s rice importation program could also cushion the adverse impact of the El Niño phenomenon on domestic supply.
The recommendation to maintain the present monetary settings took into consideration the BSP’s latest assessment that the prevailing monetary settings are appropriate given current financial and economic conditions.
However, uncertainty remains high during the third quarter of each year due to spring prediction barrier, which is typically associated with lower forecast accuracy.
continued to be relatively low.
Meanwhile, US EIA also revised their supply projections given the higher-than-expected supply from Russia as the country continued to search for alternative consumers.
The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance: - Year-on-year headline inflation eased in August to 2.4 percent from 2.7 percent in July on the back of lower food prices.
Meanwhile, only services had a higher positive inflation compared to March because of the higher pump prices of petroleum products in April relative to the previous month.
- Based on the assessment by the US Climate Prediction Center and International Research Institute for Climate and Society (CPC/IRI) as of 14 March 2024, El Niño conditions continued to weaken and will likely transition to ENSO-neutral during April – June 2024 with chances of La Niña developing by June – August 2024.
For the period 1-22 July, the peso further depreciated to average P43.38/US$1 as investors turned cautious of positive US employment data that may signal an earlier-than-expected scaling back of US Fed monetary stimulus.
Nonetheless, recent developments continued to indicate a rebalancing in the composition of global demand.
Latest baseline inflation forecasts using the 2006-based CPI series reflect a decelerating path, with average annual inflation for 2012-2013 falling close to the lower bound of the target range of 3-5 percent.
However, downside risks remain as weak external conditions continue to prevail.
The mean inflation forecast for 2020 went up to remained at 3.2 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively.
This brought the NG budget deficit to P172.2 billion for the period January-November 2003, P17.5 billion below the program for the same period.
The members of the Monetary Board expressed the view that a further easing of the BSP’s monetary policy stance at this time, would infuse additional liquidity in the system, which already has ample liquidity.
This was the second consecutive year that the NG outperformed its fiscal deficit goal.
- For the first week of December 2020, the peso appreciated against the US dollar amid market optimism over news of progress in the development of a vaccine against COVID-19 as well as the release of lower-than-expected Philippine unemployment data for October 2020.
The latest Consumer Expectations Survey likewise showed weaker consumer outlook for the second and third quarters of 2005.
Manufacturing conditions were broadly steady in the Philippines and in Vietnam.
Domestic liquidity (M3) growth accelerated to 9.0 percent as of endSeptember from the 7.7 percent year-on-year increase registered as of end considered by the Monetary Board on 22 October 2002 August.
Credits to the public sector likewise rose with increased investments in National Government securities, indicating strong market demand for Philippine government debt following the country’s credit rating upgrade to investment grade.
[9] Based on the input-output (I-O) analysis, a 10 percent increase in power rates would raise average inflation by about 0.48 percentage points.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.5 percent for the overnight RRP b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs and RPs; c) Set the Special Deposit Account (SDA) rate at 2.0 percent across all tenors; and d) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
The continued drop in interest rate differentials could limit the scope for a further cut in the BSP’s policy rates as this could threaten the relative stability in the foreign exchange market in case of a dramatic shift in market sentiment.
In addition, the risks to future inflation remained on the upside.
GDP posted a higher-than-expected growth in Q1 2010 at expansion was driven by the accelerated growth in all major segments.
Based on the revised data from the US Department of Commerce, US GDP grew by 1.4 percent year-on-year in real terms during the fourth quarter of 2002.
- The fiscal deficit for 2014 was P73.1 billion, 55.4 percent lower than the deficit incurred in Meanwhile, after excluding interest payments from total expenditures, the resulting primary surplus amounted to P248.1 billion, P88.7 billion or 55.7 percent higher than the level recorded in the previous year.
The Board will also remain watchful of any emerging risk to future inflation to ensure stable prices, which is a precondition to robust and durable economic growth.
The potential impact of additional transport fare increases, higher domestic prices of key food items facing ongoing supply constraints, higher-than-expected minimum wage adjustments in 2023, the potential impact of El Niño weather conditions on food prices and electricity rates, and possible second-round effects on agricultural prices from higher toll rates are the major upside risks to the inflation outlook.
In addition, the proposed increase in taxes of sweetened beverages serves as a possible upside risk to inflation.
The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 10 March 2005.
The Monetary Board also noted that a further easing of the BSP’s monetary policy stance at this time would infuse additional liquidity in the system, which already has ample liquidity.
Global economic conditions are expected to stay subdued as fiscal and banking sector headwinds in advanced economies affect global output growth and as market confidence remains fragile.
Meanwhile, adjustments in electricity rates is the main upside risk to inflation.
This was partly offset by the continued expansion in credit to the private sector, which rose by 5.8 percent from 5.2 percent, as lending to entities other than financial corporations was sustained during the month.
economic recovery for the world’s major economies.
Meanwhile, netting out the interest payments in the expenditures, the primary surplus amounted to P202.7 billion, P56.4 billion higher than the level recorded in the period January-August 2013.
- The climate outlook by the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration as of 24 April 2024 indicated that prevailing moderate El Niño conditions have subsided, with an increased likelihood of La Niña developing by H2 2024.
The average inflation rate for the first 9 months is 7.9 percent.
Declining interest differentials may encourage investors to buy more dollar-denominated assets.
J:\_aaMB Policy and Minutes\Highlights\2006 MB Minutes\MB minutes 10-08-2006 meeting_final.doc sustained decline in core inflation also implied reduced demand pressures on consumer prices.
Wage Developments - The Monetary Board noted that wage adjustments have been implemented thus far in 2018 for Regions XII, IV-A, VI, I and CARAGA.
The Nikkei ASEAN Manufacturing PMI fell in February, the first contraction since October 2020.
- The Monetary Board discussed extensively the current conditions in the global economy, including the stresses being experienced in the global financial markets.
Equally important, with supply-side forces expected to continue to drive inflation in the coming months, inflation expectations have remained elevated amid indications of second-round effects.
The following sectors registered a decline in outstanding loans: construction; agriculture; manufacturing; electricity, gas and water; and transport, storage and communication.
Meanwhile, banks re-invest excess funds with the BSP under the RRP and SDA facilities following large withdrawals in December, in anticipation of increased demand for liquidity for the holidays.
The increase in the forecasted inflation path for 2016 – 2017 could be attributed mainly to the higher-thanexpected inflation in November 2015 and the depreciation of the peso, which were partly offset by the decline in global crude oil prices.
- Meanwhile, the preliminary composite purchasing managers’ index (PMI) remained above the The average capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing sector stood at 84.3 percent in July, unchanged from the month-ago level, based on the Philippine Statistics Authority’s Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI).
- The latest staff risk-adjusted inflation forecasts for 2023 to 2024 are lower compared to the previous round, while continuing to indicate a potential breach of the target in 2024.
[11] The direction of oil prices in the near term would be dictated by potential supply shock scenarios surrounding the Middle East tensions and the Venezuela crisis interacting with the bearish demand outlook due to the tepid pace of economic recovery of the US and other major economies.
This, however, reflected an improvement from the 2.9 percent year-on-year contraction in the previous month.
Stock Market - The local bourse was at its worst in October.
The downward adjustment in the generation cost was on the back of lower costs from Independent Power Producers (IPPs) and Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM), according to Meralco.
- The Monetary Board noted that, while risks to the inflation outlook remain, these have on balance moderated.
- Inflation expectations are generally lower and in line with the target ranges for 2014-2016.
Domestic claims rose by 7.3 percent year-on-year in March from 8.8 percent in the previous month due to the improvement in bank lending to the private sector and expansion in net claims on the central government.
E. Supply-side indicators Developments in Agriculture - In February, domestic rice prices continued to increase nationwide, particularly in areas outside Metro Manila, reflecting limited deliveries before the onset of the summer harvest season.
Moreover, the Act will enhance the financial institutions’ (FIs) risk-bearing capacity and strengthen their capability to provide financial services to productive sectors of the economy.
This was preceded by the Advisory Committee[1] meeting on 3 June 2003.
However, relative to the slope of the yield curve on 4 January 2002, the yield curve has declined markedly but remained steeper at the long end.. 20.
showed that the first quarter real GDP grew by only 0.2 percent, quarter-on-quarter or by 2.2 percent from the level a year ago.
- Latest data generally showed moderate improvements in demand conditions.
This development could lead to lower headline inflation, providing monetary authorities more room for flexibility.
However, more granular data indicate that employment quality has not yet recovered relative to pre-pandemic level as recent employment gains were mostly low-skilled and less remunerative.
During the 3 December auction, the Auction Committee made a full award of the P2.0 billion and a partial award of the P2.5 billion offerings for the 182day and 364-day T-bills, respectively, but rejected the bids for the P1.5 billion offering for the 91-day T-bills.
- For advanced economies, economic growth forecast was revised downwards for 2020 but maintained for 2021 due to the expected slower growth in the US, euro area, and the UK, as well as downgrades to other advanced economies in Asia, notably Hong Kong due to the impact of the pro-democracy protests.
of macroeconomic and financial information available at the time of the policy meeting.
The decision to further tighten monetary policy settings was based on the following assessment of conditions: a) Supply shocks have proven to be more persistent.
They expressed the view that a further 25-basis point cut in the BSP’s policy rates would continue to support the country’s growth objective without endangering the inflation target for 2002.
As a result, the inflation impetus has moderated.
to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies.
- Global prospects have improved amid vaccine rollout although headwinds remain from renewed waves and new virus variants.
The continued accommodative monetary policy settings will provide an environment of affordable financing to support investments and consumption under an inclusive and sustainable economic recovery.
- In contrast, economic activity in the euro area has remained weak.
The index was likewise boosted by optimism over the forthcoming second quarter local corporate earnings reporting season and by mostly firmer regional market activity.
- Notwithstanding the recent boost in expectations, given the current global economic condition, the Energy Information Administration almost 1.4 million barrels per day (bbl/d) in 2009.
Nonetheless, the full operationalization of the FIST Act is expected to address the rise in NPLs.
In the April 2012 World Economic Outlook, the IMF revised upward its global growth forecast for 2012 and 2013 by 0.2 percentage point and 0.1 percentage point, respectively.
This suggested an improvement in the country’s external price competitiveness.
Nonetheless, the risk to the outlook remains broadly balanced for 2024.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 3.5 percent for the overnight RRP b) Set the interest rate on RRPs at 3.5 percent for all tenors; c) Set the Special Deposit Account (SDA) rate at 2.5 percent across all tenors; and d) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.
Meanwhile, net domestic assets grew at a faster pace given the stronger expansion in private sector borrowing.
[13] Meralco has filed an appeal on the said case.
In the near term, the direction of power rates would depend on several factors.
The 15 January 2004 meeting of the Monetary Board—the 1st meeting for 2004 to discuss monetary policy issues—followed the Advisory Committee meeting held on represents a moderate rise in inflation, reflecting the impact of a projected rise in output growth and improvements in aggregate demand, possible wage adjustments as well as cost-push influences of planned adjustments in import tariff rates and utility charges.
- The US economic recovery cools amid increasingly cautious business and consumer sentiments.
- Core inflation, which excludes certain food and energy items to measure generalized price pressures, was marginally higher in April at power rates.
kilogram price increase on palay sold to the agency as La Niña incentive for individual farmers and farmer cooperatives during the agency's procurement operations until March 31, 2008.
The Monetary Board (MB) decided to: a) Increase the BSP’s key policy interest rate by 50 basis points to 4.50 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) facility, effective 28 September 2018; and, b) Adjust the interest rates on the overnight deposit and overnight lending facilities accordingly.