On the other hand, further extensions of fiscal policy responses to the pandemic that increase aggregate demand and deteriorate the fiscal path may pressure the country's risk premium.
Despite the more positive public accounts data, the Committee assesses that doubts regarding the fiscal framework increase the risk of deanchoring inflation expectations, keeping the upward asymmetry in the balance of risks.
This implies a higher probability of inflation paths above the one projected under the baseline scenario.
This implies assigning greater probability to alternative scenarios that consider higher neutral interest rates.
The Committee reiterates that the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic growth.
Weaknesses in the structural reform effort and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
Next, Copom discussed the implementation of monetary policy, considering not only the baseline scenario, but also the balance of risks for inflation.
According to the baseline scenario, which uses the interest rate path extracted from the Focus survey and the exchange rate evolving according to the purchasing power parity, the inflation projections are above the target for 2022 and around the target for As for the balance of risks, the Committee pondered that the risk of a deanchoring of longer-term expectations, derived from developments in the fiscal scenario, points to an upward bias for the projections of its baseline scenario.
Hence, considering this bias due to asymmetric risks, Copom evaluated that its projections are above the target for both 2022 and Given this result, Copom concluded that the monetary tightening process should be more restrictive than that used in the baseline scenario throughout the relevant horizon.
Next, Copom assessed the appropriate pace of interest rate hikes.
For such, it analyzed its inflation projections using simulations with monetary policy paths with different terminal rates, under several alternative scenarios.
The Committee also compared scenarios with adjustments greater than 1.50 p.p. with scenarios in which the interest rate remains high for a longer period than that implied in the baseline scenario.
Based on these results, Copom members discussed the most appropriate strategy.
The Committee concluded that adjustments of 1.50 p.p.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to the targets over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2022 and Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee will persist in its strategy until the disinflation process and the expectation anchoring around its targets consolidate.
The Copom emphasizes that its future policy steps could be adjusted to ensure the convergence of inflation towards its targets and will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks, and on inflation expectations and projections for the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
