The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
In case of inconsistency, the Portuguese version prevails.
Growth in 2022 should be lower, with the reversal of fiscal stimuli and advance in the process of monetary policy normalization.
This combination implies a more challenging scenario for emerging markets.
Turning to the Brazilian economy, recently released industrial output and trade indicators show negative and below-expected results.
On the other hand, the services segments hardest hit by the pandemic continue on a robust recovery trajectory.
The Committee maintained the expectation of a recovery in activity in the second half of the year, although less intense and more concentrated in the services sector.
Consumer inflation remains high and has been more persistent than anticipated.
Price increases are more widespread and also include items more associated with core inflation.
The increase of industrial prices has not slowed down and should persist in the short term, whereas services inflation accelerated due to the gradual normalization in the sectors activity, as expected.
On the one hand, a possible reversion, even if partial, of the recent increase in the price of international commodities measured in local currency would produce a lower- than-projected inflation in the baseline scenario.
Despite the more positive public accounts data, the Committee assesses that recent questioning regarding the fiscal framework increased the risk of deanchoring inflation expectations, raising the upward asymmetry in the balance of risks.
This implies a higher probability of inflation paths above the one projected under the baseline scenario.
Assuming the current fiscal framework is maintained, in particular the control of spending growth, Copom's projections foresee a falling trajectory for the public debt as a percentage of GDP.
However, between Copom's meetings, relevant questionings arose regarding the future of the current fiscal framework, resulting in higher risk premia.
These questionings have also raised the risk of deanchoring inflation expectations, increasing the upward asymmetry in the balance of risks for the conduct of monetary policy.
This implies assigning greater probability to alternative scenarios that consider higher neutral interest rates.
The Committee reiterates that the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic growth.
Weaknesses in the structural reform effort and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
Next, Copom discussed the implementation of monetary policy, considering not only the baseline scenario, but also the balance of risks for inflation.
According to the baseline scenario, which uses the interest rate path extracted from the Focus survey and the exchange rate at purchase power parity, the inflation projections are above the target for 2022 and around the target for The Committee pondered that the asymmetry in the balance of risks resulting from the developments in the fiscal scenario implies an increase in the upward risk to its baseline scenario projections and assessed that this upside bias is now larger than previously considered.
Therefore, the Committee concluded that the appropriate degree of monetary tightening is significantly more contractionary than that used in the baseline scenario.
In view of this, Copom assessed the appropriate pace of interest rate hikes.
To this end, it analyzed the convergence of inflation to targets using simulations with different monetary policy paths under different alternative scenarios.
The Committee pondered that, at this moment, shocks in BRL-denominated commodity prices already impact the 2022 projections, raising their volatility.
Nevertheless, Copom understands that a process of deanchoring inflation expectations may cause high economic costs in the long term and thus decided to choose a pace of interest rate hikes compatible with the convergence of inflation to the target still in The Committee also considered scenarios with adjustments greater than 1.50 p.p.
The prevailing view, however, was that monetary policy tightening paths with 1.50 p.p. steps, considering different ending rates, are consistent with inflation converging to the target in 2022, even considering the current asymmetry of the balance of risks.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to the targets over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2022 and Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee considers that, given the deterioration of the balance of risks and the increase in its inflation projections, this pace is the most appropriate to guarantee inflation convergence to the targets at the relevant horizon.
At this moment, the Copoms baseline scenario and balance of risks indicate as appropriate to advance the process of monetary tightening even further into the restrictive territory.
Copom emphasizes that its future policy steps could be adjusted to ensure the achievement of the inflation target and will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks, and on inflation expectations and projections for the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
