Consumer inflation has been persistent.
Recent indicators show a worse composition.
It is noteworthy the surprise with the underlying services inflation and the continuing pressure on industrial goods, which cause core measures to rise.
Furthermore, there is new pressure in volatile components, such as the possible additional increase in electricity fares and food prices, both due to adverse weather conditions.
Altogether, these factors imply significant revisions in short-term forecasts.
On the one hand, a possible reversion, even if partial, of the recent increase in the price of international commodities measured in local currency would produce a lower- than-projected inflation in the baseline scenario.
On the other hand, further extensions of fiscal policy responses to the pandemic that increase aggregate demand and deteriorate the fiscal path may pressure the country's risk premium.
Despite the recent improvement of debt sustainability indicators, the elevated fiscal risk creates an upward asymmetry in the balance of risks, i.e., in the direction of higher-than-expected paths for inflation over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
In this regard further discussions about the risk of a lasting inflation increase in the United States and the associated repricing of financial assets could turn the environment for emerging economies challenging.
The Copom members discussed the evolution of domestic economic activity in light of the available information and indicators.
They considered that the latest available data continues to evolve positively, in line with growth forecasts.
In the Committees view, the second half of the year should bring a robust recovery, as the effects of the vaccination are felt more broadly.
The Committee noticed that the median of growth forecasts in the Focus survey is appreciably more optimistic than those of its baseline scenario and pondered whether the difficulties related to seasonal adjustments due to the pandemic shock would explain this divergence.
The Copom members then debated the level of economic slack.
Although the economic slack as a whole is quickly returning to the late 2019 level, the Committee considered that the pandemic still produces heterogeneous effects on economic sectors and, in particular, on the labor market, with consequences for the recent and prospective dynamics of inflation.
Next, the Copom discussed the implementation of monetary policy, considering not only the baseline scenario, but also the balance of risks for inflation.
According to the baseline scenario, which uses the interest rate path extracted from the Focus survey, the exchange rate at purchasing power parity, and commodity prices in USD stable in real terms, the inflation projections are aligned to the targets for 2022 and The Committee judged that the fiscal risks continue to imply an upward bias in the projections.
This asymmetry in the balance of risks affects the appropriate degree of monetary stimulus, thus justifying a path for monetary policy that is more restrictive than the one used in the baseline scenario.
Copom then evaluated different tightening paths for monetary policy.
Considering the baseline scenario and the balance of risks, the Committee assessed that should there be no changes in the inflation conditioning factors subsequent uninterrupted interest rate increases are required up to a level above the neutral rate, to obtain projections around the inflation targets in the relevant horizon.
Therefore, a tightening cycle of the policy rate to a level consistent with restrictive monetary policy has become appropriate.
The Committee opted to communicate this decision, maintaining transparency about the monetary policy path implied in its projections, and reaffirming that this view will be systematically reassessed as changes in inflation determinants or in the balance of risks occur.
The Committee discussed potential explanations for the difference between its baseline scenarios projections and the inflation expectations extracted from the Focus survey.
First, expectations may incorporate different assumptions about the determinants of inflation, such as administered prices and economic growth, as well as contain different perceptions on risk or alternative scenarios.
Second, the long sequence of shocks and one-way revisions of expectations may increase the perception of inflationary inertia.
Finally, market participants may have different assumptions about the reaction function of monetary policy.
As a result, Copom evaluated that the recent worsening in inertial components of inflation, amid the reopening of the service sector, could cause a further deterioration in inflation expectations, raising the costs for its future convergence.
The Committee felt that it should once again underscore its unequivocal commitment to the pursuit of its inflation targets over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, guided by its baseline scenario as well as its assessment of the balance of risks.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks and is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2022 and, to a lesser extent, The adjustment also reflects the Committees perception that the recent deterioration of inertial components of inflation, in a moment of reopening of the service sector, could result in an additional deterioration of inflation expectations.
The Committee understands that, at this moment, the strategy of a quicker monetary adjustment is the most appropriate to guarantee the anchoring of inflation expectations.
Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
At this moment, the Copoms baseline scenario and the balance of risks indicate as appropriate a tightening cycle of the policy rate to a level above the neutral.
Copom emphasizes that its future policy steps could be adjusted to ensure the achievement of the inflation target and will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks, and on inflation expectations and projections for the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
