Besides, the latest readings do not capture the effects of the recent sharp increase in the number of Covid-19 cases.
Prospectively, uncertainty about economic growth remains larger than usual, especially for the first and second quarters of this year.
The continuing increase in commodity prices, measured in local currency, is affecting current inflation, and has triggered additional increases in inflation forecasts for the next months, especially through its effects on fuel prices.
Despite these stronger and more persistent than expected short-term inflationary pressures, the Committee maintains the diagnosis that the current shocks are temporary but continues to closely monitor its evolution.
On the one hand, the worsening of the pandemic may delay the economic recovery, producing a lower-than-expected prospective inflation trajectory.
On the other hand, an extension of fiscal policy responses to the pandemic that aggravates the fiscal path or a frustration with the continuation of the reform agenda may increase the risk premium.
The relative increase in the risks of these events implies an upward asymmetry to the balance of risks, i.e., in the direction of higher-than- expected paths for inflation over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
However, the discussion about reflation has increased volatility in some markets.
This repricing of important financial assets could result in a more challenging environment for emerging economies.
The Copom members discussed the evolution of domestic economic activity in light of the available information and indicators.
They evaluated that, despite the partial reduction in governmental emergency transfer programs, the economic recovery has been better than expected.
However, they noted that the latest available data do not yet account for the possible effects of the recent sharp increase in the number of Covid- 19 cases, and that there is considerable uncertainty about the pace of economic growth in the first and second quarters of this year.
Looking ahead, the Committee assessed that a possible economic recovery setback due to the worsening of the pandemic would be less extreme than the one observed last year and would probably be followed by another fast recovery.
For the Committee, the second half of the year may show a robust recovery, as the effects of vaccination are felt more broadly.
Next, the Copom members debated on the level of economic slack.
The Committee believes that the pandemic produced heterogeneous effects across economic sectors, and that governmental emergency transfer programs reduced the slack in the goods sector.
The Copom judges that economic activity and formal labor market data suggest that the overall slack has declined faster than anticipated, despite the increase in the unemployment rate.
Next, the Copom turned to the monetary policy discussion.
In the Committees opinion, in addition to the strong pace of growth in recent months, with a consequent reduction in economic slack, there has been a reversal in inflation expectations.
These expectations have moved to the upper part of the tolerance interval of the inflation target for 2021, and to around the target for 2022, the two calendar years within the relevant monetary policy horizon.
As a result, the Copom members concluded that the current scenario ceased to prescribe an extraordinary degree of stimulus, and that the Copom should begin a process of partial normalization of the policy rate.
The Copom then discussed the implementation of monetary policy, considering not only the baseline scenario, but also the balance of risks for inflation.
According to the baseline scenario, which uses the interest rate trajectory extracted from the Focus survey, the inflation projections are near the upper bound of the tolerance interval in 2021, and around the target in The Committee pondered that despite the recent approval of important reforms, which will bring benefits in the medium term, the fiscal risks remain high in the short term due to the worsening of the pandemic, which implies an upward bias to these projections.
This asymmetry in the balance of risks affects the appropriate degree of monetary stimulus, justifying a trajectory with a larger initial increase in the policy rate than that implied by the baseline scenario.
The Committee also highlighted that the delay in the normalization of the production chains, which puts pressure on production costs and inflation in specific sectors, suggests that there is also a positive demand shock at work.
Several members also stressed that the inflationary pressures observed in 2021 may affect inflation expectations for 2022, risking a de-anchoring of expectations over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
Finally, regarding the recent dynamics of inflation, the Committee pointed out that, despite the diagnosis that the current shocks are temporary, the Brazilian inflation targeting regime aims at headline inflation in the calendar year.
Based on all these considerations, the Committee concluded that an initial adjustment of 0.75 p.p. in the Selic rate would be the most appropriate.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2021 and, mainly, The Committee believes that persevering in the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that uncertainty regarding the continuation of the reform agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
The Copom members consider that the current conditions ceased to prescribe an extraordinary stimulus.
GDP ended 2020 growing strongly at the margin, recovering most of its first half-year decline, and inflation expectations rose above target at the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
Additionally, inflation projections increased to levels close to the upper bound of the target for Therefore, the Copom decided to start a process of partial normalization by reducing the extraordinary degree of monetary stimulus.
For all the aforementioned reasons, the Committee considered appropriate an adjustment of 0.75 p.p. in the Selic rate.
