On 28 October 2016, the Board of Directors of the Bank of Russia decided
to keep the
key
rate
at 10.00 per annum. The Board
of Directors notes that the dynamics of inflation and economic activity are
overall in line with the forecast. At the same time, inflation is slowing down
to a great extent on the back of temporary factors, while deceleration in
inflation expectations remains unsteady. For the trend towards inflation
slowdown to become sustainable, according to Bank of Russia estimates, it is
necessary to hold the current key rate throughout 2016, with its potential
downgrades due in 2017 Q1-Q2. Given this decision and considering that the
moderately tight monetary policy is maintained, annual growth in consumer
prices is set to total less than 4.5% for October 2017, dropping to the target
level of 4% by the end of 2017. When making its key rate decisions in the
months ahead, the Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks alongside
with the alignment of inflation dynamics and economic performance with the
baseline forecast.
In making
its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors was
guided by the following considerations:
First.
Annual inflation continues its decline in line with the Bank of Russia’s
baseline forecast; however, this is largely due to temporary factors. Estimates
as of 24 October indicate that annual consumer price growth was down to 6.2% from
6.4% seen in September. A meaningful contribution to the inflation reduction is
made by the performance of the ruble exchange rate as oil prices have been
higher than expected and Russian financial assets are becoming more attractive
to external investors. Also, the good harvest helped lower food price
growth. The disinflationary impact of domestic demand is however going down,
which translates into slower deceleration of non-food product prices.
Households have thus far been abiding by a saving-oriented model of behaviour.
However, tentative signs of rising real wages may contribute to a gradual
recovery in demand for goods and services. The key rate held at the current
level long enough is expected to determine monetary conditions further on,
which are critical to support incentives to save and shore up the trend towards
sustainable inflation reduction, impacted by demand-side constraints. This will
enable a further decline in inflation expectations. Considering the decision
made and the maintenance of moderately tight monetary policy, the Bank
of Russia forecasts that annual inflation will stand at less than
4.5% in October 2017, thereafter reaching the 4% target by late
2017.
Second.
The further path of the key rate outlined by the Bank of
Russia in September sought to adjust expectations of market participants, who
forecast faster key rate reduction and slower inflation decline than predicted
by the Bank of Russia. The announcement shifted the yield curve upwards in the
financial market and preserved moderately tight monetary conditions. However, inflation
expectations of market actors for late 2017 hold above the Bank of Russia’s 4%
inflation target. The correction of the level of interest
rates in the financial market was responsible for preserving moderately
tight monetary conditions, expected to remain in the economy long enough.
Positive real interest rates will be held at a level which, while securing
demand for credit, will exclude heightened inflationary pressure and keep
incentives to save. Tentative signs of recovery in consumer lending do not bear
substantial inflation risks so far given that a considerable part of current
loans is used to refinance previously extended loans.
Third.
The revival of production remains unstable and varies across
industries and regions. The Bank of Russia estimates that moderately tight
monetary conditions do not hinder economic recovery, with structural factors
being the main restrictions. The labour market is adjusting to the new economic
environment, and unemployment remains stable and low. Import substitution is progressing
and certain items of non-commodity exports show an upward trend. Industry,
including high-tech
production, finds
new growth
factors. However,
they are still unable to ensure that overall production dynamics remains
sustainably positive. At the same time, individual industries are stagnant or
show lower output growth. The emerging signs of recovery in investment activity
are persistently weak. Positive trends need time to develop and root. The year
2016 will see an overall 0.5-0.7% drop in the output of goods and services, while
the fourth quarter is expected to post a slight quarterly growth. In 2017, economic
growth will be low (under 1%). This forecast is based on conservative
assumptions about low growth of the global economy, average oil prices of about
$40 per barrel, moderate capital outflow, and persistent structural
restrictions of Russian economic development.
Fourth.
Risks remain that the 4% inflation target may not be reached in 2017. This mainly
results from inertial inflation expectations, possible weakening of households’
propensity to save, and higher real wages not supported with a rise in labour
productivity. No legislative decision has yet been taken with regard to
specific medium-term fiscal consolidation measures, including the indexation of
wages in the public sector and social benefits. Volatility of global commodity
and financial markets may also have a negative impact on exchange rate and
inflation expectations.
The
Bank of Russia estimates that the key rate needs to be maintained at the
current level until the end of 2016 and can be cut in 2017 Q1-Q2 to anchor the
downward inflation trend. The Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks and
compliance of economic performance and inflation with the baseline scenario
when it makes its key rate decision in the upcoming months.
The
Bank of Russia Board of Directors will hold its next rate review
meeting on
16
December 2016
. The press release on the Bank
of Russia Board’s decision is to be published at 13.30
Moscow time.
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia major operations
(% p.a.)
Purpose
Type of instrument
Instrument
Term
Rate since 14.06.16
Rate since 19.09.16
Liquidity provision
Standing facilities
Overnight loans; FX swaps (ruble leg); Lombard loans; REPO
1 day
11.50
11.00
Loans secured by gold
1 day
11.50
11.00
from 2 to 549 days
1
12.00
11.50
Loans secured by non-marketable assets or guarantees
1 day
11.50
11.00
from 2 to 549 days
1
12.25
11.75
Open market operations (min bid rates)
Loans secured by non-marketable assets, auctions
1
from 1 to 3 weeks
2
, 3 months, 18 months
2
10.75
10.25
Lombard credit auctions
1,2
36 months
10.75
10.25
REPO and FX swap auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
, 1 week
10.50
(key rate)
10.00
(key rate)
Liquidity absorption
Open market operations (max bid rates)
Deposit auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
, 1 week
Standing facilities
Deposit operations
1 day, call
9.50
9.00
Memo item:
Refinancing rate
4
1
Loans provided at a floating interest rate, linked to the Bank of Russia key rate.
2
Starting from 01.07.2016 auctions were discontinued.
3
Fine-tuning operations.
4
Starting from 1 January 2016 the refinancing rate was set equal to the Bank of Russia key rate set as of the respective date. Starting from 1 January 2016, the independent value of the refinancing rate will not be set.
Refinancing rate values prior to 01.01.2016
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia suspended operations
The reference to the Press Service is mandatory if you intend to use this material.