The chairman first explained the reason for calling the unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting as follows. (1) Strains in global financial markets stemming from the subprime mortgage problem had increased further. At the Group of Seven (G-7) meeting held on October 10, the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Plan of Action was finalized, and countries around the world had been introducing series of measures, for example, measures to enable financial institutions to raise capital from public sources. (2) In this situation, central banks in major economies had been introducing various measures to provide liquidity. The Bank of Japan announced on October 8 that it would examine possible ways to enhance the effectiveness of monetary operations. In the joint statement released on October 13, the Federal Reserve in the United States and three European central banks announced that they would conduct tenders of U.S. dollar funding at fixed interest rates and permit counterparties in these operations to borrow any amount they wished against the appropriate collateral. The Bank of Japan announced that it would be considering the introduction of similar measures. (3) One appropriate response by the Bank to the situation would be to introduce measures to enhance the effectiveness of money market operations, in order to facilitate them and maintain the smooth functioning of the money market as well as ensure stability in financial markets. With regard to recent global financial market developments, the staff reported that stock prices had dropped substantially in Japan, the United States, and Europe, but had surged recently. Long-term interest rates had been rising with large fluctuations. In foreign exchange markets, appreciation of the yen and the U.S. dollar as well as depreciation of the euro continued, but there had been some movement in the opposite direction in each currency recently. In credit markets, U.S. and European corporate bond spreads had expanded widely particularly in the financial sector, and credit default swap (CDS) premiums continued to be elevated. In U.S. dollar funding markets, interest rates on overnight instruments had been fluctuating considerably and those on term instruments remained at an elevated level. U.S. dollar Libor-OIS spreads remained significantly widened. Liquidity in foreign exchange swap markets was low, and there continued to be intense funding strains in markets for U.S. dollar funds maturing beyond the year-end. In Japanese financial markets, repo transactions continued to be difficult, and repo rates remained at an elevated level. Distortion in Japanese government securities (JGS) markets had increased, particularly in the inflation-indexed bond and floating-rate bond markets, due partly to the decline in the functioning of the repo market. In the CP market, credit spreads between JGSs and CP at issuance were on a widening trend. With regard to asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), most of it had been issued with backup lines of credit provided by private banks. In view of recent developments in financial markets at home and abroad, the staff reported that they would make the following adjustments to the Bank's money market operations, in addition to proposing measures that required approval at the Monetary Policy Meeting (see Section IV below). First, as a measure to improve liquidity in the Japanese government bond (JGB) repo market, the Bank would lower the minimum fee rates applied to its securities lending facility from 1 percent to 0.5 percent as a temporary measure that would apply through January 16, 2009. Second, as a measure to facilitate corporate financing in the market, the Bank would increase the frequency and the size of CP repo operations. And third, the Bank would work to ensure that sufficient funds maturing beyond the year-end would be available by starting its operations to supply such funds at an earlier date. Against the background of recent developments in global financial markets, liquidity pressures in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets remained intense. In Japanese financial markets, liquidity had declined in the JGB repo market, and corporate financing via the markets had become somewhat difficult for certain firms. In this situation, the staff would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps to introduce measures to adjust its money market operations with a view to safeguarding stability in Japanese financial markets as well as facilitating money market operations. First, the Bank should amend the Principal Terms and Conditions for the Purchase/Sale of Japanese Government Securities with Repurchase Agreements to expand the range of JGBs eligible for its repo operations by adding floating-rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, and 30-year bonds to the list of eligible JGBs. Second, the Bank should establish the Temporary Rules regarding Eligibility Standards for Asset-Backed Commercial Paper and Dematerialized Asset-Backed Commercial Paper to temporarily broaden the range of eligible ABCP by accepting debt obligations guaranteed by the Bank's counterparty financial institutions as collateral. And third, the Bank should amend the Principal Terms and Conditions for U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral to introduce U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations whereby an unlimited amount of funds would be provided at a fixed rate set for each operation against pooled collateral. The Bank announced on October 8, 2008 that it would "swiftly examine possible ways to further enhance the effectiveness of monetary operations," and the staff was therefore proposing a set of measures that required approval at the Monetary Policy Meeting, while measures pertaining to the Bank's reserve system were under review. Members first discussed recent developments in financial markets, and confirmed that issues had arisen in the following areas: liquidity in the JGB repo and CP markets; availability of funds maturing over the year-end; and liquidity in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. Members concurred that it was necessary that the Bank, as a central bank, take appropriate measures to address these issues. Members then discussed the efficacy of and the points to be aware of in each of the following proposed measures: expansion of the range of JGBs eligible for the Bank's repo operations; broadening of the range of ABCP eligible as collateral; and introduction of further measures to enhance U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. The discussion concluded with members in agreement that it would be appropriate to approve the staff proposal. Regarding the proposed expansion of the range of JGBs eligible for the Bank's repo operations, one member said that it would be necessary to clearly explain that it was different in nature from the expansion of the range of those eligible for its outright purchases. Another member said that in order to maintain the soundness of the Bank's assets, the broadening of the range of eligible ABCP should be introduced as a temporary measure as in the staff proposal. Regarding the proposed introduction of an auction method that would provide U.S. dollar funds at a fixed rate, one member commented that, although there was a possibility that it might impair the proper functioning of the market mechanism, it would be necessary in order to address the issue of U.S. dollar liquidity. Another member said that it would be appropriate to adopt the auction method that would provide funds at a fixed rate, so that U.S. dollar funding in the Tokyo market would not be disadvantageous compared with funding in the U.S. and European markets. One member also pointed out that the Bank should swiftly review its reserve system. The Policy Board decided at the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 6 and 7, 2008 to maintain the current guideline for money market operations that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent. Since an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting was being held today, it was necessary for the Policy Board to once again decide the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period. Members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the current guideline until the next Monetary Policy Meeting to be held on October 31, 2008, as only a limited number of economic and price indicators had been released since the previous meeting and it would be appropriate to hold thorough discussions on economic and price situation at the next meeting, closely examining the various indicators to be released toward the end of October. The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) In the statement released on October 8, the Bank announced that it would examine to the current financial crisis. (2) In addition, at the G-7 meeting held on October 10, finance ministers and central bank governors agreed that they would "take all necessary steps." The government considered that these commitments had been received very positively so far by the market in each of the G-7 countries. (3) The government would respect the Bank's decision at this meeting, since the measures proposed would be introduced based on the result of further deliberations at the Bank following the October 8 statement and on the G-7 agreement. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) The government welcomed the measures proposed at this meeting as they would be timely and appropriate measures that were also in line with the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Plan of Action released on October 10. (2) Given the rapid changes in financial markets, the government would like to continue to monitor carefully developments in financial markets worldwide as well as their effects on the Japanese economy, and would respond appropriately to the situation. (3) The government would like to request the Bank to continue to implement monetary policy in a timely and appropriate manner, and to firmly support the economy from the financial side in view of the current severe economic situation. Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public. To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to the vote: