The chairman first explained the reason for calling the unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting as follows. (1) Instability in global financial markets stemming from the subprime mortgage problem had lately been increasing. In particular, most recently financial institutions had been facing difficulty in obtaining U.S. dollar funds following the failure of a major U.S. investment bank, and this difficulty, in its turn, had generated an increased risk of a negative impact on liquidity conditions in the yen funding markets. (2) Given this situation, central banks in major economies would today take coordinated measures to facilitate the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity. In the Bank's case, one appropriate response to the situation would be the introduction of U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. The staff reported that liquidity conditions in U.S. dollar funding markets had deteriorated significantly worldwide. More specifically, with the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. on September 15, concerns about the soundness of U.S. and European financial institutions had intensified again, and as a result stock prices had plunged and credit default swap (CDS) premiums had widened markedly. Against this background, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments in U.S. dollar funding markets had surged, and were continuing to show significant intraday fluctuations. Concerns about obtaining U.S. dollar funds maturing beyond the year-end had also become more pronounced, with the result that U.S. dollar Libor-OIS spreads had reached unprecedented highs. Many market participants in Japan had said that, although they had so far been able to obtain the U.S. dollar funds needed, there had been indications that the functioning of U.S. dollar funding markets had declined considerably, and conditions for obtaining such funds through foreign exchange swaps had deteriorated appreciably. Costs of funding U.S. dollars in exchange for yen had surged recently, with significant fluctuations. With the aim of further facilitating money market operations and maintaining the smooth functioning of the money market as well as ensuring stability in financial markets in view of the possible impact of recent liquidity pressures in the U.S. dollar money market on liquidity in the yen money market, the staff made the following proposal to introduce U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral as a temporary measure effective through January 30, 2009: the Bank should establish the Principal Terms and Conditions for selection of eligible counterparties in those operations, and enter into a U.S. dollar-yen swap agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The staff explained that the introduction of the operations would be part of coordinated measures to be announced by central banks in major economies designed to address the continued elevated pressures in short-term funding markets. Members first discussed recent developments in global financial markets, and confirmed that liquidity pressures in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets had intensified considerably. Members then discussed the following points concerning the staff proposal to introduce U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral: the Bank's management of foreign exchange risks; selection criteria for eligible counterparties; and specific procedures to be employed as well as other details of the operations. The discussion concluded with members in agreement that it would be appropriate to introduce the operations at the current juncture, taking into account also the fact that the introduction would be part of coordinated measures of central banks in major economies. Some members stressed the importance of the following points when informing the public about the introduction of the operations. A few of these members commented that the Bank should explain clearly that the measures were not intended directly to support Japanese financial institutions in obtaining U.S. dollar funds. Another observed that, in order to prevent such a misunderstanding, it would be important to make clear that the operations would be introduced as part of coordinated measures of central banks in major economies. On monetary policy for the intermeeting period ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the current guideline for money market operations that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent, as there had been no additional economic data or other information since the Monetary Policy Meeting held on the preceding day. The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) The government would respect the Bank's decision at this meeting, since the action proposed as part of coordinated measures of central banks in major economies would not require approval in advance by the Minister of Finance under the terms of the Bank of Japan Act, and would be an emergency measure that would contribute to addressing the present elevated pressures in financial markets, with the aim of facilitating money market operations and maintaining the smooth functioning of the money market as well as ensuring stability in financial markets. (2) To respond to the situation, the government would monitor carefully developments in financial markets both at home and abroad as well as their effects on the Japanese economy and the world economy as a whole. The government would also like the Bank to continue to react appropriately to ensure stability in financial markets. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) Participants of the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy also confirmed, at their meeting on September 17, 2008, that it was important for the authorities to work together closely in cooperation with their overseas counterparts and to do their utmost to ensure financial system stability. (2) The government welcomed the measures proposed at this meeting as a swift and appropriate response to address the current situation. Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public. To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to the vote: