The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 94th meeting) on September 24 in Beijing. The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus sustained overall economic recovery. The sound monetary policy has maintained its continuity, consistency, and sustainability to guide market expectations in a scientific way，to make great efforts to serve the real economy and to prevent and manage financial risks effectively. With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform yielding continuous dividends, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and loan rates have steadily dropped. The RMB exchange rate is expected to be basically stable, and it has been moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a macroeconomic stabilizer. The pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic recovery remains unstable and imbalanced, said the meeting. The PBC will enhance its assessment and analysis of the marginal changes in domestic and international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, guard against external shocks, focus on domestic issues, attach importance to cross-cycle policy design, and coordinate macro policies between 2021 and 2022, thereby bolstering high-quality economic development. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, keep the growth of money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio. The PBC will continue to give even greater priority to serving the real economy to keep the economy generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development. Tools such as central bank lending and discount, and monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy will play a guiding role. Specifically, the PBC will fully utilize the RMB300 billion new quota of central bank lending for micro and small businesses (MSBs), support the growth of loans granted to MSBs and self-employed businesses, continue the policy of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and of the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans, and introduce comprehensive policies to support coordinated regional development. The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, guide large banks to shift the focus of their services to the lower levels, and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and tasks. With these efforts, the financial market is expected to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed. The PBC will give more support to banks in replenishing capital so that banks will be more capable of serving the real economy and forestalling and defusing financial risks. The PBC will enhance market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system, optimize regulation over deposit rates, constantly unleash the potential of the LPR reform and further bring down actual loan rates. The central bank will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, guide financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, and strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development. It will take steps to put in place the support instrument for carbon emission reduction, and promote the green finance system for peaking carbon dioxide emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. The PBC will keep the real estate market stable and protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers. In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capacity in an open economy. The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Adhering to the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, and placing a top priority on stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively. The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform, speed up the building of a new development paradigm, and stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand. The PBC will ensure stability on six key fronts and maintain security in six key areas. The PBC will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and strengthen the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies. The PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and promote the high-quality development of the economy.