The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 92nd meeting) on March 24 in Beijing. The meeting discussed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development have bolstered the sustained economic recovery. The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of expectations has been scientific and effective. Necessary support has been rendered for economic recovery. With financial risks under effective control, the financial sector has gradually improved its quality and efficiency in serving the real economy. With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and the lending rates have stabilized and dropped. Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and played its role as a stabilizer of the macro economy. It was pointed out at the meeting that the economic recovery is still uneven despite the growth of driving forces for domestic economic development and the remarkable increase of positive factors. The spread of COVID-19 outside China and the world economy sees prospects for turnaround, but the overall situations remain complicated and challenging. The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, while strengthening coordination of international macroeconomic policies. It will concentrate on running its own affairs well and delivering good cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate. The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of the monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio. The PBC will further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy. Specifically, it will continue to implement the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, to reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance through central bank lending and central bank discounts, and to guide financial institutions to step up support for areas such as sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development. The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses. In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness. The PBC will work to improve the market-based mechanism of interest rate formation and transmission and the central bank policy rate system. It will continue to unleash the potential of the reform to lower lending rates, optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and facilitate further decline in real lending rates. The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and develop funding chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby creating a virtuous circle and interaction among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector and industries. By guiding financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, it will strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development. It will also support the coordinated regional development, and promote the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality. In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy. It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place an utmost priority on stability. Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy, build the new development paradigm, and focus on promoting high-quality development. It will pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task, stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and consolidate and expand achievements made in pandemic containment and economic and social development. The PBC will ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments. It will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, so as to ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range. It will contribute to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period with high-quality development, and celebrate with outstanding accomplishments the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC.