On 25 April 2014 the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to raise
the key rate
to 7.5 percent per annum due to higher inflation risks. The 
probability of inflation exceeding the 5.0% target at the end of 2014 has 
increased substantially. This has been caused by more pronounced than expected 
pass-through effect of the exchange rate dynamics on consumer prices, the rise 
in inflation expectations, as well as unfavourable conditions in the markets for 
some goods. The Bank of Russia does not intend to lower the key rate in the 
coming months. The Bank of Russia estimates that the adopted decision would 
ensure the decline in inflation to no more than 6.0% by the end of 2014.
In March - April 2014, the year-on-year consumer price growth rate rose and 
stood at 7.2% as of 21 April 2014. Weekly inflation has persisted at 0.2%. 
Inflation acceleration has been mainly caused by the larger than expected impact 
of exchange rate dynamics. Unfavourable conditions in the markets for some 
goods, such as dairy products, sugar, pork, and petrol, also have contributed to 
higher inflation rates. Some additional inflationary pressure has come from a 
temporary surge in consumer demand for non-food goods amid the rise of inflation 
expectations. As a result, there was the increase in prices for a wide range of 
goods, including domestically produced goods, as well as services. In March 
2014, core inflation accelerated to 6.0% from 5.6% in February.
The current economic slowdown is predominantly structural by nature and thus 
does not exert any noticeable downward pressure on inflation. Historically low 
unemployment rate constrains economic growth potential. Due to demographic 
trends the impact of this factor will persist in the long run. Utilisation of 
commercially viable production capacity remains relatively high. Labour 
productivity growth is sluggish, while fixed capital investment continues to 
contract because of declining profits in the real sector, limited access to 
long-term financing in both international and domestic markets, as well as low 
producer and consumer confidence. Uncertainty about international political 
situation also hampers production and investment. Besides, weak economic 
activity in most countries, which are Russia’s trading partners, restrains the 
economic growth of Russia. At the same time, persistently high oil prices have a 
stabilising effect on the domestic economy and public finance.
In March - April 2014, household rouble deposit rates began to grow. This was 
caused by the conversion of funds to foreign currency due to higher inflation 
expectations and by increasing bank funding costs, inter alia, as a result of 
the Bank of Russia’s decision to raise the key rate in March 2014. In addition, 
banks tighten lending conditions, in particular, by increasing loan rates. At 
the same time, weak economic activity restrains demand for loans and 
respectively curbs a rise of interest rates on loans.
According to the Bank of Russia projections, a year of 2014 will continue to 
witness a downward trend in economic growth. Boost to economy from the observed 
rouble depreciation will be limited. Amid economic uncertainty and declining 
producer confidence there is a strong probability of a reduction in fixed 
capital investment. Combination of slower growth in real wages and a decline in 
household lending growth rates will have a dampening effect on consumer 
activity.
Inflation will stay around the current level until the mid-2014. In the 
second half of the year, consumer price growth will decelerate as a result of 
lower planned hikes in administered prices and tariffs, falling inflation 
expectations, and the aggregate output of goods and services remaining below 
potential. Since monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, the probability 
of inflation exceeding the 5.0% target at end-2014 has increased substantially. 
The adopted decision on the key rate would ensure the decline in inflation to no 
more than 6.0% by the end of 2014 and help to maintain the appropriate balance 
of inflation risks and the risks of further economic slowdown. In the medium 
term the effect of factors behind the observed acceleration in consumer price 
growth will be exhausted and in the absence of any new shocks to the economy 
inflation will hit the target levels set in the Guidelines for the Single State 
Monetary Policy in 2014 and for 2015 and 2016.
The next meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors on the key rate is 
scheduled for
16 
June 2014
. The press-release on the Bank of Russia Board of Directors’ 
decision is to be published at 13:30, Moscow time.
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia major 
operations
1
(% p.a.)
Purpose
Type of instrument
Instrument
Term
Rate since 03.03.14
(from 11:00 Moscow time)
Rate since 28.04.14
Liquidity provision
Standing facilities (fixed rates)
REPO
Overnight loans
Lombard loans
Loans secured by gold
Loans secured by non-marketable assets and guarantees
FX swaps (rouble leg)
1 day
8.00
8.50
Open market operations (minimum interest 
		rates)
Loans secured by non-marketable assets, auctions
2
3 months
7.25
7.75
REPO auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
, 1 week
7.00
(key rate)
7.50
(key rate)
Liquidity absorption
Open market operations (maximum interest rates)
Deposit auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
, 1 week
Standing facilities (fixed rates)
Deposit operations
1 day, call
6.00
6.50
Memo item:
Refinancing rate
8.25
8.25
1
Complete information on interest rates on the Bank of Russia 
operations is given in the Table
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia operations
.
2
A floating interest rate linked to the level of the Bank of 
Russia key rate.
3
Fine-tuning operations.
Information notice "On the procedure for conducting fine-tuning operations"
.
Information notice "On fine-tuning operations to absorb liquidity"
.
The reference to the Press Service is mandatory if you intend to use this material.