On December 27, 2019, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 87th meeting) in Beijing. The attendees analyzed the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad. It is agreed at the meeting that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing old ones. The loan prime rate (LPR) is comprehensively applied, and the pricing of loan rates has become more market-based. The RMB exchange rate is generally stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks. The sound monetary policy responds to the need for countercyclical adjustment. The macro leverage ratio remains basically stable, financial risks have been effectively controlled, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy. The real economy and financial sector have both made good progress in structural adjustments, yet the downward pressure on China’s economy is still remarkable. The international economic and financial situation is complicated, and it has been more apparent that global uncertainty is evolving at a faster speed. It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, act skillfully in turning external pressure into strong drive for deepening reforms and opening up, and focus on performing our own duties. It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, keep the sound monetary policy appropriate and flexible, use a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity reasonably adequate, and to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth. The PBC will refrain from “flooding the market with liquidity,” and maintain generally stable prices. It will deepen the financial supply-side structural reform, encourage large banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level, push small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary duties and tasks, optimize financing and credit structures, provide stronger support for high-quality development, and improve the highly adaptive, competitive and inclusive modern financial system. The PBC will work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission to lower the cost of social financing, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, and encourage financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises. Efforts will be made so that private enterprises receive financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development. The PBC will facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development. In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in both directions. The PBC will strengthen the ability to manage economic and financial situations and prevent risks in an open market, as well as the ability to participate in international financial governance. It is emphasized by the attendees that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, properly and soundly manage the intensity of countercyclical adjustments of macro policies, strengthen its efforts to invigorate micro entities, and fully maintain stability in employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign and domestic investments, and expectations. The mechanism for the coordination between  and the transmission and implementation of fiscal, monetary and employment policies will be improved to ensure that the economic performance is within a reasonable range. The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, facilitate the transition of pricing benchmark of outstanding loans with floating rates, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. Work will be done to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between ensuring stable growth and preventing risks, focus on diffusing risks amid reform and development, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.