For large companies, combined analysis of the indicators of supply, demand and approval scenario suggests more restrictive scenario.
In relation to credit for micro, small and medium enterprises, the indicators reveal a scenario moderately more restrictive in terms of supply, and moderately stronger in terms of demand.
Regarding credit to consumption, in contrast to that observed in the quarter that began in July, participants expect the percentage of approval of new lines for the fourth quarter to be moderately higher than in the previous quarter, consistent with the seasonal pattern.
Services and trade were the sectors that mostly contributed for the formal employment increase in the month.
In short, evidences indicate that although the labor market remains robust, there are signs of moderation at the margin.
In the coming months, the retail trajectory will continue to be positively influenced by governmental transfers, by the growth pace of real payroll, by the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
Thus, capacity utilization stood 1.6 p.p. and 1.7 p.p.
The rates of capacity utilization have been retreating, reflecting, in part, the reduction in 3 the pace of production growth and the maturity of investments.
Global economy faces a period of uncertainty above the usual, with deterioration in activity prospects.
Risks to global financial stability are high, among other factors, due to the exposure of international banks to sovereign debts of countries with fiscal imbalances, especially in the Euro Zone.
From another perspective, high persistent unemployment rates, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, as well as limited scope for monetary policy actions and political uncertainty, have contributed for the reduction of growth projections in advanced countries or even of their potential growth, indicating wider and more volatile economic cycle.
In specific cases, the probability of recession increased.
There has also been continued reduction in growth projections for important emerging economies.
Regarding monetary policy, mature economies have continued to adopt accommodative monetary stances and, in specific cases, with new non-conventional initiatives in the field of monetary policy.
In emerging economies, in general, the bias of monetary policy is expansionary.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Regarding the other commodities, it is noteworthy the continuity of the decline in the international prices of the ones related to agriculture and metals.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The spread for the third quarter of 2013 is 54 bps.
For 2012, the inflation projections decreased in both the benchmark and the market scenarios, and stand around the midpoint of the target in both scenarios.
For 2013 Q3, projected inflation also decreased and stands around the midpoint of the target in the benchmark scenario and above, in the market scenario.
In the main scenario considered by the Copom, projected inflation stands around the midpoint of the target in This scenario was developed and analyzed from the perspective of models that identify in a broader manner the transmission mechanisms of external developments to the Brazilian economy among others, the trade, imports prices and the external volatility channels.
As a working hypothesis, it considers that the current deterioration in the international scenario will have an impact on the Brazilian economy equivalent to one fourth of the impact observed during the international crisis.
Moreover, it assumes that the current deterioration of the international scenario is more persistent than the one verified in , but less acute, without observance of extreme events.
According to this mains scenario, domestic economic activity moderates and commodities prices in international markets and the exchange rate show some stability, among other effects.
Even with a moderate adjustment in the basic interest rate level, the inflation rate in the relevant horizon stands around the target in 2012, at a level below the one that would be observed if the above mentioned effect of the international crisis were not considered.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the inflation targeting regime maturing process stands at an advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last seven years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the reduction of both FX and inflationary risk premia, among other factors, seem to have determined significant reduction in the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has been increasing in the last years, despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the monetary policy traction increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, inflationary pressures are currently contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
The Committee understands that the chances that the restrictions to which several mature economies are now exposed extend for a period longer than previously anticipated remain high.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited scope for using monetary policy, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails.
In addition, for the main emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, a consequence of policy actions and the weakening of external demand, through the trade channel.
Therefore, the Committee considers that the international scenario shows disinflationary bias for the relevant horizon.
For the Copom, there are cumulative evidences supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy can be materialized through many channels, among others, the reduction of total trade flows, the moderation in investment inflows, tighter credit conditions and the worsening 6 in consumer and businessmen confidence.
The Committee understands that the effects of the complexity surrounding the international environment add up to the those stemming from the moderation of domestic activity observed this semester, which is already mirrored, for instance, in the retreat of growth projections for the Brazilian economy this year and in the upcoming year.
In other words, the ongoing moderation process of the economy - a result of the policy actions implemented since the end of last year - tends to be boosted by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates that, although ongoing moderation of domestic demand growth is observed, prospects for economic activity are still favorable.
This assessment is supported by signs that, despite showing some cooling, point to the fact that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers confidence, notwithstanding the accommodation at the margin, stands at historically high levels.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that inflation accumulated in twelve months peaked in the last quarter, and it begins to retreat in the current quarter, therefore, moving towards the targets path.
The Committee evaluates that, by itself, this reversion of trend will contribute to improve the expectations of economic agents, especially those of the price setters, about the dynamics of inflation in the upcoming quarters.
Additionally, the Committee believes that this improved perception will be boosted by the ongoing process of reassessment of the economic activity pace, both domestic and external, in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Copom notes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatches between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the trend of the public debt-to-GDP ratio reduction.
It bears highlighting that, since the beginning of this year, important decisions have been taken and implemented, which reinforce the view that a fiscal consolidation process is underway.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderation in credit market expansion.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the adoption of initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates that, at the start of the year, inflation was strongly and negatively impacted by domestic and external supply shocks, as well as by the atypical concentration of regulated prices adjustments.
In decreasing intensity, these developments should also indirectly impact the dynamics of consumer prices, through inertia, among other mechanisms.
The Copom evaluates as relevant, despite decreasing, the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates.
Moreover, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market.
Despite signs of moderation in this market, it considers that, under such circumstances, an important risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and from its negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has retreated and is below the longterm trend, that is, it is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain price pressures.
The Committee also observes that, at the end of last year and at the start of this year, the risks associated to commodities prices trajectory were key to the prospective scenario.
However, since April these prices have retreated in international markets.
The Copom notes that, according to the main scenario, the inflation rate stands around the target in 2012 and identifies decreasing risks to the confirmation of a scenario in which inflation timely converges to the midpoint target.
Domestic demand is still robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
This scenario tends to prevail in the upcoming quarters, when the domestic demand will be impacted by the effects of the monetary policy actions recently implemented which, in short, are lagged and cumulative.
On the other hand, recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Another important factor to curb aggregate demand is the substantial deterioration in the international scenario.
These elements and the quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The monthly result for IPCA reflected the deceleration of market and regulated prices.
The main contributions to the change of industrial prices came from metallic minerals and petroleum and alcohol byproducts, each one contributing 0.11 p.p..
Four out of the five IPCA core inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed relative stability in October, compared to the previous month.
Three measures decelerated in the twelve months through October, compared to the twelve months through September.
The monthly result was mainly driven by the respective contributions of 0.53 p.p. and 0.28 p.p.
Nine out of the 26 manufacturing industry activities surveyed increased in the month.
The result reflected the retractions of 0.5 p.p.
On the other hand, the Nuci for capital goods increased 0.1 p.p..
Out of this total, there was the creation of 77.2 thousand jobs in the services sector, 60.9 thousand in commerce, 10.3 thousand in civil construction and 5.2 thousand in manufacturing industry, while in the agricultural sector 29.9 thousand jobs were eliminated.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased to 491 days in October, representing an increase of one day month-on-month.
The tenure related to corporate segments decreased two days, while the one related to individuals increased three days, reaching 399 days and 590 days, respectively.
External Environment In the third quarter, economic activity accelerated in the US and Japan, but decelerated in the Euro Zone and in China.
However, in the labor and housing markets, credit conditions and consumer confidence remain depressed.
Additionally, the need for 12 fiscal consolidation and the volatility in financial markets continue as downward drivers for the economic growth in the country.
In Japan, part of the growth reflected the reversion of the effects stemming from the natural disasters occurred in March.
China, despite decelerating, continues with significant pace of economic activity.
The difficulties of policy coordination and the lack of consistent rescue mechanisms for the Euro Zone countries favored the intensification of the movement of risk aversion in financial markets since the end of October, leading to increased cost of debt financing in the countries of the region.
Regarding agricultural commodities, satisfactory results of the harvest in important production regions of the Northern Hemisphere and positive outlook for the grain crop in South America also contributed to the decline in prices.
Among emerging economies, the annual change in CPI showed a downward trend in China, Korea, Indonesia and Russia, but maintained upward trend in South Africa, Hungary, Turkey and India.
In the last meetings of their monetary policy committees, central banks in the US, Japan and England maintained their basic interest rates.
In October, there were no monetary authority's interventions in the domestic spot market.
This movement was driven mainly by the substantial deterioration of the external environment, due to the worsening of the sovereign debts of countries in the Euro Zone and the potential consequences for the global economy.
Regarding the domestic outlook, the release of data that indicate deceleration in economic growth and less intense growth of formal employment, the improvement of the prospective scenario for inflation and the expectation of extending the monetary easing cycle also contributed to the fall in interest rates.
The BCB also borrowed money through 27 very short-term operations.
The main factors that contributed to the contraction of liquidity in the period were the net revenues of the Union and the net issuance of Treasury bonds.
