Food prices trajectory performed relevant role for 2010 headline inflation.
The recent elevation in food price inflation has partially mirrored domestic and external supply shocks, heightened by the high liquidity environment in international financial markets and global demand increase.
In line with the evolution of headline inflation, each one of the three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB has recorded high values.
With the diffusion index at this level, evidences support hypothesis of prices acceleration.
Industrial activity has not still shown consistent signs of a new expansion cycle.
This recovery has partially been supported by the growth of industrial activity financing by public financial institutions.
Considering the three-month moving average ended in November, all categories increased.
Out of the ten sectors surveyed, eight sectors performed positively month-on-month in November.
In the upcoming months, the retail sales trajectory should continue to be benefited by governmental transfers, real payroll growth, moderate credit expansion and consumer confidence.
The four use categories retreated.
Consumer goods industry utilization rate retreated 0.8 p.p.
Therefore, the installed capacity utilization rates have been stable at high levels.
The high occupation level reflects the recent expansion in economic activity, whose effects have not been totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The behavior of remittances of profits and dividends, which also reflects the growth differential between the Brazilian economy and other economies, has been contributing to elevate the current account deficit.
The disaggregated indicators by country suggest acceleration on the growth pace in the US and France, and expectation of continued growth in the other G7 countries, except for Japan.
The Euro Area prospects, in particular, show quite asymmetrical, as uncertainties regarding the solvency of some peripheral economies persist, at the same time that the expansion pace remains strong in Germany.
The Peoples Bank of China announced, in January this year, the fourth increase in reserve requirements since November last year.
However, it bears highlighting oil prices volatility, a result of low predictability of some global demand components, of dependency of supply growth on the maturity pace of risky investment projects and of geopolitical complexity that is typical to the sector.
The main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in Regarding the prices of other commodities, it is noteworthy the increase in the agricultural international prices.
In recent past, the high volatility observed in commodities prices seems to have been strongly impacted by the abundant global liquidity, in a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations of demand growth and to the remarkable volatility in FX markets.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
For 2012, the projection stands above the midpoint target in the benchmark scenario and around the target in the market scenario.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation-targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, mainly price setters.
It is additionally noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reinforce the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2011 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the process of maturing of the inflation target regime stands at an advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last seven years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the FX and the inflationary risk premiums reduction, among other factors, seem to have determined in significant reduction of the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has increased in the last years, despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the traction of monetary policy increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
Prices of relevant commodities grew, without movements, in the opposite direction, of domestic assets and, in general, the prospects for external funding of Brazilian economy remain favorable.
Meanwhile, the trajectory of prices indices shows the increase of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas concerns regarding the prospects of deflation in other economies tend to deplete.
The Copom evaluates that domestic economy activity prospects are favorable in this and in the upcoming quarters.
This assessment is supported by signs that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, despite at a moderate pace, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, notwithstanding some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the dynamism of domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the vigor of labor market, mirrored in the historical low unemployment rates and substantial growth of real wages, particularly in the public sector.
In fact, in the last quarter of 2010, inflation was strongly and negatively impacted by the dynamics of food prices, which in part reflected domestic and external supply shocks.
These developments tend to be transmitted to the prospective scenario, among other mechanisms, through inertia, as pointed by the figures considered by the Committee in its inflation forecasts, as well as market analysts projections.
The Committee considers relevant the risks derived from the persistence of the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates.
It is also noteworthy the narrow margin in production factors idleness, especially in labor force.
Under such circumstances, a relevant risk is posed by the possibility of concession of nominal wages increase incompatible with productivity growth.
The prospective scenario considers the seasonal aspect of inflation in the first quarter, as well as the atypical concentration of regulated prices adjustments foreseen to be implemented in this period, although, for the year as a whole, the behavior of these items tend to be relatively benign.
The benchmark scenario also considers the potential negative impact stemming from extremely adverse weather conditions observed in the beginning of this year in some regions of the country, although it attributes significant probability to the hypotheses that, at least in part, this process may be reverted during the year.
The Copom reaffirms that the inflation main scenario considers the materialization of its trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario for inflation also considers moderation in credit expansion, for which the macroprudential actions recently adopted contribute.
The Committee considers that, in part, such regulatory changes should materialize as an element of aggregate demand constraint through the credit channel, as well as by the reduction of incentives to the adoption of strategies such as the simple broadening of contract tenures, among others.
The available information confirm this opinion, by evidencing relevant impacts both in prices and in volume of goods traded in the credit market.
Additionally, it is plausible to affirm that the current regulatory framework, compared to the previous one, tends to heighten the impacts of conventional monetary policy actions.
In short, the Copom recognizes an economic environment in which an above-than-usual uncertainty level prevails, and identifies increasing risks to the materialization of a scenario where inflation promptly converges to the midpoint target.
From another point-of-view, they reveal the still ambiguous influence of the international outlook over domestic inflation behavior.
Regarding the domestic outlook, the recently announced macroprudential actions, a fast and powerful tool to contain local demand pressures, will still have their effects incorporated to price dynamics.
Although uncertainties that surround the global outlook and, at a minor magnitude, the domestic one, do not allow the clear identification the degree of permanence of recent pressures, the Committee evaluates that the inflation prospective scenario evolved unfavorably.
Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
Moreover, although tending to cool down, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in the last quarters, and should still contribute for the activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness level of factors at low levels.
The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of initiatives taken during the recent financial crisis, by the not yet very favorable prospects for global economy and, mainly, by recent macroprudential actions.
These elements and the developments in the fiscal outlook are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Nuci in the capital goods, construction material and intermediate goods industries reduced 0.4 p.p., 0.4 p.p. and 0.3 p.p., respectively, in the period.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations increased from 456 days in October to 469 days in November, representing an increase of thirteen and twelve days for tenures related to individuals and corporate segments, which reached 551 days and 395 days, respectively.
In the US, the current prospects consider better domestic demand development, mainly consumption, in an environment of reduction of uncertainties associated to employment and income.
The recent extension of tax cuts fiscal law in the US, which included reduction in taxes levied on payroll, contributes for this favorable prospect.
Commodities international prices registered strong increase in the last months of 2010, in some cases exceeding the record highs reached in Heightened by investors actions in financial markets, the occurrence of adverse weather conditions and consumption strengthening worldwide were the main drivers of that behavior.
In special, the performance of agricultural commodities prices trend was highly impacted by the deterioration of supply conditions in several regions, reflecting the climate impact caused by La Nia phenomena.
December inflation indices captured the trajectory of commodities prices increase.
This trend reflects, in emerging markets, increases in the prices of agricultural commodities, domestic demand strengthening and product gap reduction in their economies, while in the US and in the Euro Area, December hikes are mainly associated to increases in energy prices.
In this context, the central banks in the US and Euro Area maintained the accommodative stance of their policies, choosing by keeping their respective basic interest rates unchanged, being followed by the UK and Japan central banks.
This movement was influenced by several factors, among which the release of high current inflation indices, including different core measures; the upward trajectory of commodities prices in the international market; and uncertainties related to the implementation of the fiscal adjustment announced by the government.
Moreover, for the short term tenures, the market agents prospects regarding the start of a new cycle of basic interest rate increase also contributed for the upward movement in the rates.
One-, twoand three-year interest rates increased 0.43 p.p., 0.41 p.p. and 0.45 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 31 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main driver of liquidity expansion in the period was the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury.
