The underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB, in general, showed similar trend to that of headline inflation, as that there was an increase in the average of monthly changes and in twelve-month accumulated inflation.
From the aggregated supply perspective, there was deceleration in all the sectors of activity, yearover-year.
The accumulated contribution of domestic demand to GDP growth in four quarters continued to be moderate.
In fact, it shifted from 10.3 p.p. in 2010Q4, to 8.8 p.p.
Services and manufacturing industry were the sectors that mostly contributed for the formal employment increase in the month.
In the coming months, the retail trajectory will continue to be positively influenced by governmental transfers, by the growth pace of real payroll, by the consumer confidence level and by moderate credit expansion.
Thus, capacity utilization was 1.4 p.p. and 1.5 p.p. lower than the levels observed in August and September 2010, respectively.
The rates of capacity utilization have been retreating, reflecting, in part, the 3 moderation in the pace of production growth and the maturity of investments.
Global economy faces a period of uncertainty far above the usual, with significant deterioration in growth prospects in advanced countries and moderation of activity in emerging countries.
In this environment, risks to global financial stability, of fiscal and financial nature, increased, among other factors, due to exposure of international banks to sovereign debt of countries with fiscal imbalances, especially in the Euro Area.
From another perspective, high persistent unemployment rates, coupled with the need for fiscal adjustments, as well as limited scope for monetary policy actions, have contributed for the reduction of growth projections in advanced countries or even of their potential growth, indicating a wider and more volatile business cycle.
There has also been reduction in growth projections for major emerging economies.
Regarding monetary policy, mature economies have continued to adopt accommodative monetary stances, in specific cases, with new non-conventional initiatives in the field of monetary policy.
In emerging economies, in general, the bias of monetary policy is expansionary.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which is also a reflex of the low predictability of some global demand components and of the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Regarding the other commodities, it is noteworthy the significant drop in the international prices of the ones related to agriculture and metals.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
For 2012, the projections increased in both the benchmark and the market scenarios, and stand above the midpoint of the target in both scenarios.
For 2013Q3, projected inflation stands around the midpoint of the target in the benchmark scenario and above, in the market scenario.
In the main scenario considered by the Copom, projected inflation stands around the midpoint of the target in This scenario was developed and analyzed from the perspective of models that broadly identify the transmission mechanisms of external developments to the Brazilian economy - among others, the channels of trade, the price of imports and the external volatility.
As a working hypothesis, it considers that the current deterioration in the international scenario will have an impact on the Brazilian economy equivalent to one quarter of the impact observed during the international crisis.
Moreover, it assumes that the current deterioration of the international scenario is more persistent than the one verified in , but less acute, without observance of extreme events.
According to this main scenario, domestic economic activity moderates and commodities prices in international markets and the exchange rate show some stability among other effects.
Even with a moderate adjustment in the basic interest rate level, the inflation rate in the relevant horizon stands around the target in 2012, at a level below the one that would be observed if the above mentioned effect of the international crisis were not considered.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low 5 risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly price setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increas in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for houseeholds and companies.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not originate any lasting results for economic and employment growth; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path, which requires that deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the inflation targeting regime maturing process stands at an advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last seven years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the reduction of both FX and inflationary risk premia, among other factors, seem to have determined significant reduction in the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has been increasing in the last years, despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the monetary policy traction increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
The Committee understands that the chances that the restrictions to which several mature economies are now exposed extend for a period longer than previously anticipated remain high.
It also notes that, in these economies, there seems to be limited scope for using monetary policy, and a scenario of fiscal restraint also prevails.
In addition, for the main emerging economies, despite the resilience of domestic demand, the pace of activity has moderated, in part, a consequence of policy actions and weakening external demand through the trade channel.
Therefore, the Committee considers that the international scenario shows disinflationary bias for the relevant horizon.
For the Copom, there has been accumulated evidence supporting the view that the transmission of external developments to the Brazilian economy can be realized through many channels, among others, the reduction of total trade flows, the moderation in investment inflows, tighter credit conditions and the worsening in consumer and business confidence.
The Committee understands that the complexity surrounding the international environment will contribute to intensify and accelerate the ongoing moderation in domestic activity, which is already mirrored, for instance, in the retreat of growth projections for the Brazilian economy this year and in the upcoming year.
In other words, the ongoing moderation process of the economy - a result of the policy actions implemented since the end of last year - tends to be boosted by the weakness of the global economy.
The Copom evaluates that, although ongoing moderation of domestic demand growth is observed, prospects for economic activity are still favorable.
This assessment is supported by signs that, despite showing some cooling, point to the fact that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers confidence stands at historically high levels, notwithstanding some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the public transfers, as well as by the labor market vigor, mirrored in historically low unemployment rates and in wages growth, despite some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom reaffirms its view that accumulated inflation in the twelve months peaked in the last quarter, and it begins to retreat in the current quarter, therefore, moving towards the target path.
The Committee evaluates that, by itself, this reversion of trend will contribute to improve the expectations of economic agents about the dynamics of inflation in the upcoming quarters, especially those of the price setters.
Additionally, the Committee believes that this improved perception will be boosted by the ongoing process of reassessment of the pace of both domestic and external economic activity, in this and in the upcoming semesters.
The Copom reaffirms that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
It bears highlighting that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the hypotheses considered for inflation projections, in addition to contributing to reduce the mismatches between supply and demand growth rates, will strengthen the trend in the reduction of the public debt-to-GDP ratio.
It bears highlighting that, since the beginning of this year, important decisions have been taken and implemented, which reinforce the view that a fiscal consolidation process is underway.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario for inflation also considers moderation in credit market expansion, for which macroprudential and conventional monetary policy actions recently adopted contribute.
Still about the credit market, the Committee considers opportune the introduction of initiatives with the aim of moderating the concession of subsidies through credit operations.
The Copom evaluates that, at the start of the year, inflation was strongly and negatively impacted by domestic and external supply shocks, as well as by the atypical concentration of regulated prices adjustments.
Although in decreasing intensity, these developments should also indirectly impact the dynamics of consumer prices, through inertia, among other mechanisms.
At the same time, it evaluates, as relevant, despite decreasing, the risks stemming from the persistence of the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates.
Moreover, it highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market.
Despite signs of moderation in this market, considers that in such circumstances, a very important risk stems from the possibility of concession of nominal wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and from its negative impacts over inflation dynamics.
On the other hand, the Copom notes that the level of installed capacity utilization has retreated and is below the longterm trend, or is contributing to the opening of the output gap and to contain price pressures.
The Committee also observes that, at the end of last year and at the start of this year, the risks associated to commodities prices trajectory were key to the prospective scenario.
However, since April these prices have retreated in international markets.
The Copom notes that, according to the main scenario, the inflation rate stands around the target in 2012 and identifies decreasing risks to the confirmation of a scenario in which inflation timely converges to the midpoint target.
Domestic demand is still robust, especially household consumption, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
However, recent initiatives reinforce a scenario for restrained public sector expenditures.
Other important factors to curb domestic demand are the substantial deterioration of the international scenario and the macroprudential actions implemented.
These elements and 7 the quasi fiscal developments are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
In the month, it bears highlighting the drivers housing, and health and personal care, contributing 0.22 p.p. and 0.05 p.p., respectively, for the increase of the index.
Four out of the five IPCA core inflation measures calculated by the BCB accelerated in September, compared to August.
All five measures increased in the twelve months through September, compared to the twelve months through August.
The monthly result was mainly driven by the increase in the price of food products, which contributed 0.66 p.p..
The result reflected the retractions of 1.3 p.p., 0.6 p.p. and 0.4 p.p. in durable consumer goods, non-durable consumer goods and intermediate goods, respectively; the increase of 0.3 p.p.
After nine consecutive reductions, the index reached its lowest level since August 2009, 2.9 points below the 2003 average.
Out of this total, 91.8 thousand jobs were created in the services sector; 66.3 thousand in industry; 42.4 thousand in commerce and 25 thousand in civil construction.
There was also the elimination of 20.9 thousand jobs in the agricultural sector.
The average tenure on reference credit operations increased to 493 days in August, representing an increase of seven days, month-on-month.
The tenure related to corporate segments increased eight days, while the one related to individuals increased five days, reaching 407 days and 583 days, respectively.
External Environment Global economy scenario still presents low dynamism.
Real estate market is still depressed.
In the Euro Area, economic activity prospects are more negative, inclusive by the possibility of fiscal and banking problems outbreak.
In Japan, exports seem to lose pace, impacted by the global economy cooling, yen appreciation and the country energy restrictions.
Considering the high global economy uncertainties, financial markets operated in high volatility environment.
Risk perception kept high, reflecting the European countries fiscal deterioration, the concerns of new recessive dip in the Euro Area and in the US and the uncertainties regarding the European banking system solvency, which resulted in important losses in the main stock markets, overall in the financial segment.
European debt market development continues to be determinant for the financial market evolution.
Following financial market observed trend, commodities prices partially recovered in the first two weeks of October.
However, commodities prices reduction, specially energetic and agricultural ones, has not reversed the inflationary trend observed in the last months in the main developed economies.
At the same time, these monetary authorities expanded their liquidity provision measures to their banking systems.
The BoE increased it assets acquisition program by 75 billion, to 275 billion, and the BoJ extended the deadline to the adhesion and the effective period of easing of eligibility conditions for the participation in the program of funds provision to the institutions located in calamitous areas.
In the domestic scenario, this movement was influenced by the expectation of monetary easing cycle that started in August and by the release of data signaling accommodation in the activity level.
Regarding the external outlook, the increase in uncertainties stemming from the developments of European countries debt crisis, the release of economic indicators weaker than expected in the main economies and the reduction in commodities prices also contributed to the fall in interest rates.
The BCB also borrowed money through 34 very short-term operations and carried out two-working-day management operations, at the end of the day.
