Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Sydney – 4 December 2018


					Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
					Philip Gaetjens, Ian Harper, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AM, Catherine Tanna
					

					Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets),
					Alexandra Heath (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Gianni La Cava (Senior Research Manager,
					Economic Research Department)
					Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Secretary)
					

					Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that conditions had remained
					positive, particularly in the major advanced economies, where growth had remained around or above
					potential and labour markets had continued to tighten. However, growth in a number of economies had
					slowed this year; softer external demand, at least partly related to trade tensions and the
					associated uncertainty, had been a common driver of the slowdown. Bilateral US–China trade had
					contracted following the increase in import tariffs between the two countries, while indicators of
					external demand, such as new export orders, had softened in the euro area, Japan and other parts of
					Asia.
					

					In the major advanced economies, GDP growth outcomes had diverged further in the September quarter,
					although there had been some loss of momentum in external demand in all regions. In the United
					States, growth had remained strong in the September quarter, driven in part by fiscal stimulus. In
					Japan, the pronounced slowing in year-ended GDP growth had been at least partly the result of
					disruptions in the wake of natural disasters. One-off factors had weighed on growth in some parts of
					the euro area, and business conditions and investment intentions there had also declined.
					

					Employment growth had remained higher than growth in working-age populations across the major
					advanced economies and unemployment rates had edged lower from already low levels. Wages growth had
					continued to increase, but, with the exception of the United States, this had not yet translated
					into higher inflation in underlying terms. Core inflation had remained below target in the euro area
					and Japan. Members noted that headline inflation was likely to ease in coming months following the
					recent decline in oil prices.
					

					Members noted that it had continued to be difficult to gauge the underlying momentum in the Chinese
					economy. Conditions had remained subdued in a number of sectors, including machinery & equipment
					production and food & clothing. By contrast, the central authorities' direction to local governments
					to bring forward public spending had contributed to a rebound in infrastructure investment, and the
					production of construction-related products had strengthened further. Infrastructure investment was
					expected to continue to support growth in coming months. Growth in investment in the real estate
					sector had continued to be driven by land purchases.
					

					Elsewhere in east Asia, surveyed business conditions had remained around average and growth in
					domestic demand had generally maintained its momentum. However, new export orders had declined and
					growth in industrial production and export volumes had also eased somewhat in recent months. Growth
					in the Indian economy had eased in the September quarter, but had remained strong in year-ended
					terms.
					

					The slowing in global trade and concerns about Chinese demand had been reflected in lower commodity
					prices over preceding weeks. Iron ore prices had followed the recent decline in Chinese steel
					prices, returning to levels previously seen in mid 2018. Coking coal prices had increased over the
					previous month despite the fall in steel prices. Thermal coal prices had declined slightly, while
					prices of rural commodities and base metals had been little changed.
					

					Members noted that oil prices had declined by more than 30 per cent since their peak in early
					October, mainly reflecting recent and prospective increases in global supply. Oil supply from the
					United States had increased rapidly since the trough in oil prices in early 2016 and was expected to
					increase further, while production from Saudi Arabia and Russia was expected to be sustained at high
					levels. Members observed that the nature of US oil production allowed supply flexibility in response
					to changes in oil prices.
					

					Members noted that the national accounts for the September quarter would be released the day after
					the meeting. Based on the partial data that were available, GDP was expected to have increased by
					more than 3 per cent over the year to the September quarter, above most estimates of potential
					growth and in line with the most recent set of Bank forecasts.
					

					In relation to household consumption, members noted that liaison with retailers suggested that
					underlying trading conditions had been stable and surveys suggested that households' views about
					their financial situation had remained around average.
					

					Conditions in established housing markets had continued to ease. In Sydney, housing prices had
					fallen by around 9 per cent since their peak in July 2017, to be around September 2016 levels. In
					Melbourne, housing prices had returned to levels prevailing around March 2017, having fallen by a
					little under 6 per cent since their peak in November 2017. Members observed that housing prices had
					fallen across all price segments in Sydney, but housing prices had been fairly flat at the lower end
					of the market in Melbourne. Auction clearance rates and indicators of private-treaty activity had
					also declined a little further in both cities. Housing prices in Perth and Darwin had returned to
					levels seen a decade earlier. At the same time, price rises were being recorded in some other
					cities.
					

					Preliminary data suggested that dwelling investment had continued around its recent high level in
					the September quarter. Given the substantial amount of work outstanding and recent data on dwelling
					approvals, dwelling investment was expected to remain around this level for at least the following
					year or so before moderating. Liaison with developers indicated that demand for new detached housing
					in eastern Australia had eased over the previous year or so and some developers had reported that
					this decline in demand had become more pronounced. Demand for off-the-plan apartments had declined
					significantly since mid 2017.
					

					Partial indicators, including the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) capital expenditure (Capex)
					survey, suggested that both mining and non-mining business investment had declined in the September
					quarter. Investment intentions for 2018/19 in the non-mining sector, as reported in the Capex
					survey, had been revised higher. Members noted that these revised expectations were consistent with
					surveyed business conditions, which had remained above average, and with the relatively high levels
					of non-residential building approvals and work yet to be done on non-residential construction
					projects.
					

					Members observed that labour market conditions had continued to improve. Employment had increased
					solidly in October to be 2.5 per cent higher over the year. This was well above growth in the
					working-age population and had been driven largely by growth in full-time employment. Leading
					indicators of labour demand had continued to point to employment growth being above average over the
					following couple of quarters. The unemployment rate had remained at 5 per cent in October, following
					the sharp decline in the previous month. Unemployment rates had fallen in almost all states and
					territories over 2018. In trend terms, the unemployment rates in Victoria and New South Wales were
					both at their lowest levels in a decade, at around 4½ per cent. Members noted that youth employment
					(those aged between 15 and 24 years) had increased significantly over the previous year and the
					youth unemployment rate had declined.
					

					Wages growth had picked up a little in the September quarter. The wage price index (WPI) had
					increased by 0.6 per cent in the September quarter to be 2.3 per cent higher over the year. This
					pick-up had built on the small, gradual increases in WPI growth recorded over the previous two
					years. The 3.5 per cent increase in minimum and award wages had contributed to growth in the
					September quarter. Joint Reserve Bank–ABS analysis suggested that wages growth for jobs covered by
					the other two wage-setting methods, namely enterprise agreements and individual agreements, had also
					been stronger than a year earlier. This job-level analysis had also shown that, although there had
					been little change over the preceding year in the size of a typical wage increase, the share of the
					workforce receiving an increase in any given quarter had increased. Year-ended growth in the WPI had
					picked up compared with the previous year across most industries and in all states and territories.
					

					Even so, average earnings had increased at roughly the same rate as consumer prices over the
					previous five years or so, leaving real average earnings relatively unchanged despite moderate
					productivity growth. This had followed an extended period during the resources boom when real
					average earnings had consistently risen faster than productivity. As a result, the gap between real
					average earnings and productivity that had opened up during the resources boom had been largely
					closed.
					

					Members also discussed a paper on some longer-term trends in the division of aggregate income
					between labour and capital. In Australia, the share of total income paid to workers in wages and
					salaries (the ‘labour share’) had risen over the 1960s and 1970s but had gradually declined since
					then. Over the same period, the share of income accruing to profits (the ‘capital share’) had risen.
					Abstracting from fluctuations associated with the terms of trade cycle, the labour and capital
					shares had been fairly stable for at least the previous decade. Although the Australian experience
					appeared to have been similar to that observed in other advanced economies, the factors driving the
					trends had been somewhat different. Members noted that the long-run increase in the capital share in
					Australia had stemmed almost entirely from higher profits accruing to financial institutions (since
					financial deregulation in the 1980s) and from higher rents paid to landlords and imputed to home
					owners (particularly before the 1990s). Members observed that the increasing use of technology to
					replace manual effort in the finance sector and long-run increases in the quality and size of homes,
					as well as a greater number of dwellings per capita, were likely to have contributed to these
					trends. Members also noted the measurement challenges associated with both financial services and
					housing services in the national accounts.
					

					Members commenced their discussion of financial market developments by noting the pick-up in
					business credit growth in Australia in the second half of 2018. While foreign banks had been the
					main driver of growth in business lending for some time, the major Australian banks had also made a
					noticeable contribution to business credit growth in recent months. The pick-up in business lending
					by the major banks had occurred as growth in their housing lending had continued to slow. Members
					observed that lending to large businesses had accounted for the bulk of the growth in business
					credit over preceding years and all of the pick-up in business credit growth in the most recent few
					months.
					

					By contrast, lending by banks to small businesses had increased only modestly over the preceding few
					years and had been flat in 2018. Moreover, small businesses' perceptions of their access to finance
					had deteriorated sharply over the year, according to the Sensis survey. Members noted that the
					Australian Government had recently announced a number of initiatives to support lending to small
					businesses.
					

					Turning to housing credit, members noted that growth in lending to investors had remained very weak
					and growth in lending to owner-occupiers had continued to ease, to be 5–6 per cent in annualised
					terms. The slowing in housing credit growth had been almost entirely accounted for by the major
					banks, where the rate of growth in lending had been the slowest in many years. Housing lending by
					other financial institutions had continued to grow more strongly.
					

					Members observed that the slowing in housing credit growth appeared to reflect both tighter lending
					conditions and some weakening in demand. On the demand side, declining housing prices in some
					markets had reduced investor demand. In this context, lenders had continued to compete for borrowers
					of high credit quality by offering new loans at lower interest rates than those offered on
					outstanding loans. On the supply side, credit conditions were tighter than they had been for some
					time. Members noted that the focus on responsible lending obligations in response to the Royal
					Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry was likely
					to have reduced some lenders' appetite for lending to both households and small businesses.
					

					Mortgage interest rates remained low by historical standards, but had risen a little for many
					borrowers in previous months, as most lenders had passed on the increase in their funding costs
					resulting from the rise in bank bill swap rates earlier in 2018.
					

					Members noted that financial market pricing implied that the cash rate was expected to remain
					unchanged for a considerable period.
					

					Turning to global financial conditions, members noted that financial conditions in the advanced
					economies remained accommodative, although they had become less so over the course of the year. A
					few central banks had continued gradually to remove monetary policy stimulus and more recently
					global equity prices had declined and credit spreads had widened a little (although spreads remained
					relatively low).
					

					Expectations regarding policy paths of the major central banks implied by financial market pricing
					had been generally little changed over the previous month. However, in the United States the path
					for the federal funds rate over 2019 implied by market pricing had moved further below that implied
					by the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) members' projections published following the
					September FOMC meeting. Recent public comments by senior Federal Reserve officials had emphasised
					that further withdrawal of monetary stimulus would increasingly depend on how the economy evolves.
					

					Members noted that 10-year government bond yields in major markets had declined in November. In
					part, this was likely to have reflected the lowering of market expectations for the federal funds
					rate in 2019, as well as the recent sharp decline in oil prices and some easing in expectations for
					global economic growth. In the United Kingdom, uncertainty surrounding the approval of a Brexit deal
					was also likely to have weighed on long-term bond yields.
					

					Over the year as a whole, diverging central bank policy paths and economic outlooks had seen bond
					yields in the United States rise relative to those in Europe and Japan. Consistent with this, the US
					dollar had appreciated by 5 per cent over 2018 on a trade-weighted basis.
					

					Global equity prices had declined in October reflecting a range of factors, including US–China trade
					tensions, building cost pressures in some countries and a moderation in earnings growth expectations
					for 2019. Also, equity valuations in the United States had earlier been somewhat elevated. Members
					noted, however, that the US equity market continued to be supported by strong growth in underlying
					corporate earnings, with analysts' expectations for earnings growth in 2019 having been revised down
					only a little recently. In Europe, ongoing concerns about Italian fiscal policy settings, as well as
					the moderation in growth in the euro area in 2018, had weighed on equity prices, particularly for
					companies in the financial sector. Chinese equity prices had been declining throughout 2018,
					although they had not fallen further in November. The decline over the year was likely to have
					reflected concerns over US–China trade tensions and an easing in growth in economic activity.
					

					Members observed that US corporate credit spreads had widened a little recently, although they
					remained low by historical standards. Members noted that this modest tightening in credit market
					conditions had occurred against a background of increased corporate leverage, with US non-financial
					corporations having increasingly sourced funding from securities markets over the preceding decade
					or so. Issuance of investment-grade bonds and, to a lesser extent, leveraged loans had been strong.
					Members also observed that securities markets had been increasingly facilitating lending to
					lower-rated corporations. While Europe and Australia had also seen increases in investment-grade
					bond financing by corporations, banks remained the predominant source of corporate funding in these
					markets.
					

					Members noted that, although overall corporate leverage in the United States had increased over
					preceding years, it was not high compared with levels in other economies. Nevertheless, high and
					rising debt-servicing burdens and the relative increase in debt owed by borrowers of lower credit
					quality were likely to have increased the vulnerability of the corporate sector to adverse future
					shocks. On the lending side, the non-bank institutional investors that had recently provided most of
					the debt financing for corporations tended to have more stable funding and less leverage than banks.
					Members discussed implications of this for financial stability, given that, by itself, the reduced
					lending role of banks means that the US financial system would be better placed to withstand a
					deterioration in credit conditions than in the past. Overall, members agreed that developments in
					these markets warranted continued monitoring.
					

					In China, growth in total social financing had slowed through much of 2018, mostly due to a
					contraction in non-bank lending, which had previously been a key source of funding for private
					firms. This followed earlier measures by the authorities to restrict the availability of credit
					provided by non-bank entities in order to reduce risks in the financial system. By contrast, growth
					in bank lending, which historically had been disproportionately directed towards state-owned
					enterprises, had been stable at a solid rate for a number of years. In recent months, the
					authorities had been taking steps to encourage banks to increase their lending to the private sector
					(especially smaller enterprises), although members noted that, relative to smaller banks and
					non-bank lenders, larger banks were less accustomed to lending to this sector.
					

					Globally, the economic expansion had continued, although there had been some signs of a slowing in
					global trade in the September quarter. In China, the authorities had continued to ease policy in a
					targeted way to support growth, while paying close attention to the risks in the financial sector.
					Members noted that balancing these considerations remained a key challenge for the Chinese
					authorities. Globally, inflation remained low, although wages growth had picked up in economies
					where labour markets had tightened significantly. Core inflation had picked up in the United States,
					which had experienced a sizeable fiscal stimulus against the background of very tight labour market
					conditions, but core inflation had remained low elsewhere. Members noted that the significant fall
					in oil prices was likely to reduce global headline inflation over the following year or so, should
					it be sustained.
					

					Financial conditions in the advanced economies remained expansionary but had tightened somewhat
					because of lower equity prices, higher credit spreads and a broad-based appreciation of the US
					dollar over 2018, as the gradual withdrawal of US monetary policy accommodation had continued. In
					Australia, there had been a generalised tightening of credit availability. There had been little net
					growth in credit to small businesses in prior months. Standard variable mortgage rates were a little
					higher than a few months earlier, while the rates charged to new borrowers for housing were
					generally lower than for outstanding loans. The Australian dollar remained within its range of
					recent years on a trade-weighted basis. Australia's terms of trade had increased over recent years,
					which had helped to boost national income.
					

					Members noted that the Australian economy had continued to perform well. GDP growth was expected to
					remain above potential over this year and next, before slowing in 2020 as resource exports were
					expected to reach peak production levels around the end of 2019. Business conditions were positive
					and non-mining business investment was expected to increase. Higher levels of public infrastructure
					investment were also supporting the economy. The drought had led to difficult conditions in parts of
					the farm sector.
					

					The outlook for household consumption continued to be a source of uncertainty because growth in
					household income remained low, debt levels were high and housing prices had declined. Members noted
					that this combination of factors posed downside risks. Notwithstanding this, the central scenario
					remained for steady growth in consumption, supported by continued strength in labour market
					conditions and a gradual pick-up in wages growth. The unemployment rate was 5 per cent, its lowest
					level in six years, and further falls in the unemployment rate were likely given the expectation
					that the economy would continue to grow above trend. The vacancy rate was high and there were
					reports of skills shortages in some areas.
					

					Conditions in the Sydney and Melbourne housing markets had continued to ease and nationwide rent
					inflation was low. Growth in housing credit was very weak for investors and had also eased for
					owner-occupiers, reflecting both tighter lending conditions and some softening in demand. Mortgage
					rates remained low, and competition was strongest for borrowers of high credit quality.
					

						Taking account of the available information on current economic and financial conditions, members
					assessed that the current stance of monetary policy would continue to support economic growth and
					allow for further gradual progress to be made in reducing the unemployment rate and returning
					inflation towards the midpoint of the target. In these circumstances, members continued to agree
					that the next move in the cash rate was more likely to be an increase than a decrease, but that
					there was no strong case for a near-term adjustment in monetary policy. Rather, members assessed
					that it would be appropriate to hold the cash rate steady and for the Bank to be a source of
					stability and confidence while this progress unfolds. Members judged that holding the stance of
					monetary policy unchanged at this meeting would be consistent with sustainable growth in the economy
					and achieving the inflation target over time.
					
The Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent.

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				