The declining trend for the commercial loan portfolio halted and the mortgage and consumer portfolios strengthened their surge.
The directors agree that the restrictive monetary policy stance has fulfilled its objective of reducing excess spending in the economy, which, exacerbated by the multiple and persistent supply shocks that occurred since the pandemic, unleashed the strongest inflationary spiral the country has undergone since the adoption of the target inflation policy at the end of 1999.
Economic conditions in Europe continue to deteriorate.
Available indicators for the third quarter show that performance not live up to expectations and tended to decline.
Moreover, the deterioration of the economic and financial situation in Europe, and the effects this may have on world demand, may continue to be a limiting factor to their exports.
(ii) The current real rate is below its probable long term balance and is inconsistent with the growth that is expected to be close to its potential in 2011 and 2012 and a projected inflation that is close to the midpoint of the long term target range.
Others mentioned that the transmission of the reduction in the benchmark interest rate has not yet ended, therefore the assessment of the evolution of all credit variables should continue.The possible effects of narrower international financial conditions on the long-term real interest rate and on the assessment of the monetary policy stance were also discussed.Within this context, despite a negative output gap, with stable inflation (albeit above the target), and a highly uncertain external context, there is an evident economic recovery.
This revision is due, in part, to the performance of the world economy and private spending, which have been weaker than anticipated.
In Europe, positive performance of consumer confidence indicators and of perception by industrialists continues.Colombia's terms of trade to March increased thanks to the increase in the prices of its main export products.
Price indices for new and used housing are at their maximums.
Meanwhile, the slowdown in lending to households continued.
In the Euro zone, in turn, the weakening of productive activity was generalized and, with the exception of France, the largest economies contracted in the last quarter of 2011.
Retail sales reported by DANE for the month of January fell to an annual rate of 4.5%, continuing the downward tendency begun in - 2008.
In the first case, the annual change was 0.77%.
This was mainly due to the performance of regulated and food prices.
(vi) Annual inflation (2.27%) in September remained stable with respect to the month before and the same was true of the average of the core inflation measurements.
According to the same source, food supply in the central markets remains high.The annual variation of the PPI exhibited a significant reduction (from 8.38% in July to 4.89% in August).
Sales to Venezuela during September were down 49.5% with respect to the same month in 2008.
The production of cement and shipments, in turn, surged between the second and third quarters.
The rate on mortgage loans was 12.1%, which is 11bp less than what is was in December.
And those that were the most affected by the weather grew 15% or, in other words, three times more than the imported food items and other national ones.
Exports bolstered by a weak dollar could explain part of this outcome.
However, for the countries which are exporters of raw materials such as those in the region, the inflationary situation is more complex since the fall in the prices will tend to be accompanied by a depreciation of their currencies.
Generally speaking, the macroeconomic conditions continue to signal an important amount of economic growth in 2011.
This clash in prices, which took place in all world economies, produced a substantial increase in inflation and led to the non-fulfillment of the targets.
Contrary to what was observed in 2007, during the first semester of 2008 the economy has fully received the impact of the clash of prices for food products, fuels, and metals which has been affecting world economy, in addition to the impact of local climatic factors.
Also, certain indicators of business confidence and expectations for the region have improved somewhat in recent months (December and January).In the United States, the first estimate of 2012 growth was lower than the central forecast in the previous edition of Banco de la República’s Inflation Report.
They also stated that they do not consider the adjustment of domestic demand and growth to be excessive, considering that the current account deficit is still high, for which they believe the behavior of theses variables is part of the adjustment process.
Some emerging market economies are benefitting from the recovery in commodity prices, and countries such as China and Korea are showing signs of recovery.
In this context, given the accumulated depreciation until January of 2015, there is a risk that consumer inflation continues to increase this year.
Likewise, in June a reduction of 3.74% to 3.2%) was seen in the annual variation in the CPI for the non-tradables without foods and regulated items; it can be attributed in good part to a high comparison basis.
These prospects, together with trade tensions between the US and China in the context of very low inflationary pressures, have determined that major central banks continue to pursue a broadly expansionary monetary policy.
The drop in total inflation during the month was mainly due to the slowdown in the variation of food prices.
The Bank's technical staff continues to forecast GDP growth for 2013 at 3.0% to 5.0%, with 4.3% being the most likely figure.
The average of the four core inflation indicators (5.74%) also continues to fall.
Acceleration of inflation was explained mainly by the greater pace of increase in the prices of food and those of tradables excepting food and regulated goods.
Information on other activities such as oil, coffee and cement production suggests good behaviors.As for the labor market, the figures to March 2015 show that the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate continues at historically low levels, with a dynamic occupation rate which is explained mainly by salaried employment.In April, total corporate and household debt grew at a lower pace than the one registered in the first quarter, but greater than the nominal GDP increase estimated for the present year.
With this information, we calculate that the Colombian economy grew between 3.7% and 4.3% in 2013 with 4.1% as the most probable percentage.Information for 2014 is still very scarce and preliminary.
On the other hand, that reform implied a reduction in VAT from 10% to 5% on pre-paid medical care and other health expenses, which translated into price reductions for these items.
Inflation and the economic situation were discussed with respect to growth and prospects for the future, and monetary-policy decisions were reached    BACKGROUDa.
The total demand for energy for consumption and production was up by only 1% in January compared to the same month in 2008.
In May, annual producer price inflation (PPI) was 1.3%, as opposed to an annual variation of 0.3% in April.
The latter percent is due to the imports of intermediate goods (-27%).
This slowdown would continue to contribute to the reduction of the current account deficit.
The following is a summary of the principal issues addressed during the meeting Background Annual inflation was 6.35% at the end of February, which represents an increase for the fifth month in a row.
The monetary policy rate is in a contractionary stance, with which a path of convergence towards the target inflation rate of 3% is expected to be guaranteed.
In November, total exports in dollars grew 42.5% per year, this fact mainly explained by an increase of 52.1% in the foreign sales of the main products of mining origin (oil, coal, gold, ferronickel).
The Colombian peso has continued to appreciate, returning to levels not seen since -2022.
However, these factors may be partially offset by the recent depreciation of the exchange rate External Sector and the Balance of PaymentsThe members of the Board discussed the effects of the external and the domestic situations on the forecast for the balance of payments.
In the case of Latin America, inflation in Brazil and Peru continues to rise.
These board members highlighted that significant gaps in employment and investment remain, compared to pre-pandemic levels, and suggested that cash flow problems still being faced by many Colombian companies could be accentuated by an accelerated increase in the interest rate.
As a result, the external boost to aggregate spending would be less than in previous years.
Below is a summary of the main topics dealt with in this meeting Annual consumer inflation in July was 3.42% (monthly was 0.14%), which was 19 basis points (bp) higher than in June.
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR) performed similarly.
The areas of transportation and financial GDP also presented slowdowns.
The other three measures of basic inflation also decreased, and the average of the four indicators was 2.63%.Along the year and until September, an inflation of 3.08% has stockpiled, a figure that already surpasses the long-term goal of 3.0%.
Therefore, they ratify that decisions will depend on the information available at a given moment in time.
The annual variation of this basket went up to 5.7%, this being the strongest monthly increase (110 bp) in the course of the year.
China continues slowing down moderately; as for Latin America, GDP growth in Chile, Mexico and Peru was low and similar to that observed in recent quarters.
They emphasized that the demand in the economy entered contractionary territory in November and December, as can be deduced from various indicators such as retail sales, fuel consumption, automobile sales, and the behavior of imports.
They noted that the concern of a significant impact on food or power costs by the El Niño phenomenon has been waning.
Price hikes for several regulated items were offset by lower prices for processed foods and reductions in the non-tradable CPI excluding food and regulated items.Within the non-food CPI, one of the most notable aspects in May was the increase in the annual change in regulated prices (1.25% as opposed to 0.9% in April).
On the other side, the annual growth of the aggregated demand to March was 6.7%, facing 11.1% of the fourth trimester of 2007 and 10.3% in all of last year.
Factors such as the greater growth of the world economy, the improvements in agents’ confidence and the momentum of various leading indicators show the strength of the growth.
This was the result of a rise in tradable and non-tradable basket prices after the exclusion of foods and regulated items.
This suggests that the conceptual basis of the models usually employed by analysts and by the Board itself, usually assuming a process of convergence towards the 3.0% target, could be evolving adversely and could threaten the nature of the target as a nominal anchor as it has been over the years.
On the other hand, the active average rate calculated by Central Bank of Colombia reduced in 26pb as compared to the previous month, reaching 17.1%.
Total exports in dollars were down in August at an annual rate of 9% (not including re-exports of aircraft; when these are included, the annual variation is -7.6%).
The Board anticipates a gradual recovery of employment as the economic activity recovers.The members of the Board discussed the inflation figure in June (2.19%, below the target), and, particularly, inflation excluding food and regulated items, which reduced to 1.6%.
In the latter case, this is the result of the inflow of capital related to the changes in the JP Morgan benchmark portfolios.
This range width is due to uncertainty around the size of global slowdown and its impact on the Colombian economy, as well as with respect to the recovery of works and the overcoming of some negative supply shocks currently affecting the industrial and mining sectors.
Also, the effect of El Niño on food supply and the prices of some regulated services will further increase inflation, and could additionally affect inflation expectations.Finally, one of the members from the group that proposed a 50 bp increase stressed that annual inflation to October (-5.9%) doubles the target, is the highest in six-and-a-half years, and has remained above the upper limit of the target range over nine consecutive months.
Within this basket, the increases in gas, fuel and urban transport service rates continued to exceed the average for the CPI.With respect to the annual change in tradables excluding food and regulated prices, the figure in March was 0.68%, or five (5) bp less than in February.
Between that date and March 11, the inter-bank interest rate (TIB in Spanish) and the Bank Reference Indicator (IBR in Spanish) had accumulated a drop of 130 b and were in line with the policy rate, which was 8%.
They highlighted that this greater deficit takes place in an environment of lower external demand, wide international liquidity, and higher growth of the economy.In this context, the Board unanimously decided to maintain the current level of the benchmark interest rate for monetary policy intervention, which it considers as moderately expansionary DECISIONThe Board of Directors unanimously decided to maintain the benchmark interest rate unaltered at 4.25%.
Yet, the Board emphasized that the technical staff’s projection for the end of the year was affected by the expected increase in food inflation and by inflation of regulated items, the latter due to the upward pressures of the international price of oil.Vis-à-visthe previous meeting, the risk that persists on this front is due to the external context, in which the level of uncertainty is high.
Similarly, the merchants surveyed by Fenalco maintained the positive trend in current sales, although sales expectations at six months showed some deterioration.
Food inflation went from 13.2% in December to 12.
In the same period, other commodities exported and imported by Colombia descended.
Thus, even though the terms of trade for November are lower than those seen at the beginning of the year, they are still historically high and contribute to the support of Colombia’s income.
The following is a summary of the principal topics addressed during the meeting Annual consumer inflation in July was 2.24%, which is 1 bp less than in June.
With respect to the way inflation performed during the month, the Board of Directors emphasized the following: i) annual consumer inflation ended the year at 2%.
Something similar occurred with the corresponding 24-month expectation that went from 4.5% to 4.0%.
On the job market, salaried employment is falling, while so-called “self- employment” continues to grow at a good pace The External Context The international financial crisis worsened in September, predominantly in the United States.
According to the monthly survey of market operators, total inflation anticipated by December and February 2013 would be approximately 3.5%, which is 10 bp less than the rate expected a month earlier.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of how Banco de la República’s technical team views the macroeconomic situation (Section 1), followed by a review of the key policy discussion points considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2).Amore detailed description of the macroeconomic situation, prepared by Banco de la República’s technical team, is provided in the data section of the June 2014 edition of the Inflation Report and in the statistical appendixTHE CONTEXTThe technical team underscores the following aspects with respect to the macroeconomic context:The new information in this report suggests the average growth forecast for Colombia's trading partners in 2014 could be somewhat lower compared to the last report.
Foreign sales of the main agricultural products (coffee, bananas, and flowers) dropped 8.3% annually due to the poor coffee harvest.
(v) In the near future, there will be relevant information available on the international monetary conditions and their impact on emerging economies.
Favorable levels in the terms of trade are also expected although lower than the ones seen in 2013.
On the other hand, economies like Mexico, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela go on growing at a good pace, although some of them with increases below their true potential.
However, there is an increase in global uncertainty that could be transmitted to these projections.The risk premia in Latin America increased after the results of the elections in the United States.
Expectations drawn from the financial markets for 1, 5, and 8 years forward, adjusted for the inflation risk premium, were revised upward and stood at 5.2%, 4.6%, and 4.2% respectively.
For instance, in the emerging economies, the Central Banks of Brazil, China and South Korea have recently lowered their interest rates in an attempt to counteract the effects of a deceleration in demand.
Recent Developments in InflationThere was a substantial decline in the annual consumer inflation in October and one that was significantly larger than expected.
In Ecuador, the figure for the first quarters suggests a deepening of the recession.In recent weeks, the international financial markets maintained a low volatility.
Likewise, based on the figures as of August, retail sales completed several months of monthly growth and are slowing down their annual decline.
Economic growth is also expected to continue becoming stronger partly driven by the investment in construction of buildings and public works.
(ii) In contrast, the strength of private (4%) and public (4.8%) consumption in the third quarter was similar to what had been seen in the second and a little better than had been expected.
The continuation of the tapering off of the monetary stimulus on the part of the FED at a time when the outlook for growth is evidently lower in some economies seems to be the cause for the rise in the risk perception.
However, additional -19 outbreaks of unknown intensity and duration, as well as uncertain fiscal conditions, make it necessary to consider alternative risk scenarios that, should they materialize, would instead point to growth between 3.6% and 5.2%.Total annual inflation and inflation excluding food and regulated items fell less than projected by the technical staff and market analysts, registering 1.51% and 0.94% through March, respectively.
The creation of employment was concentrated in wage-earning labor and the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate dropped in comparison to what had been seen in March and February.
There is a lot of uncertainty about the future of these variables and, therefore, maintaining the current level of the benchmark interest rate is considered appropriate.Another group of directors thought it was possible that the output gap could be more negative than previously stated if the fact that both core inflation and the -point of the inflation projections are remaining at around 2.5%, which is below the long term target, is considered.
In the discussion, there were different views on the existing margin to continue reducing it.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the intervention rate unchanged.
(Only available in Spanish)  CONTEXTWith figures to the first half of 2017, the country's current account of the balance of payments registered a deficit of USD $6,119 (4.1% of GDP), higher in US dollars than a year ago (USD $5,992 , 4.6% of GDP), but similar to that forecast by the technical staff at the Central Bank.
The reduced European dynamism has began to affect the behavior of the emerging economies in Asia as reflected in the weakening of both exports and industrial production, and accentuating the ongoing slowdown they had been exhibiting since -2011, generated by the withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimulus policies Except for Indonesia, the April 2012 figures of industrial production in the major emerging Asian economies show deceleration.
The Fenalco indicators, with February data, show a rise in sales for the sector, although they still are at low levels.
Additionally, they pointed to the recent decrease in inflation, excluding food and regulated items, driven by favorable trends in goods prices.
S/he also pointed out that the tripartite minimum wage increase reflects the increase in inflation for low-income households plus the increase in productivity, and these together add up to 15.6%.
In this regard, he expressed concern about the behavior of non-food inflation expectations for the end of 2023.
The new information available suggests that the global economy is deteriorating at a higher rate than expected.
A look at the different types of loans shows mortgage lending was the most dynamic, having gone from 14.6% annual growth in September to an annual rate of 18.3% for the year to date in January.
While some countries such as Colombia, Taiwan, and Korea have low declining inflation, others such as Brazil, India, and Indonesia are showing higher upswings in their price levels.The terms of trade declined in October but remain at high levels.
(viii) By December, the price indexes for new and existing homes continued to rise at elevated rates, reaching historic highs.In short, the Colombian economy currently is growing below its potential and inflation is under 3%.
This is the result of no growth in the euro area during the second quarter and a sharper slowdown than expected in several countries of the region.
Recent data from the labor market indicate that the recovery taking place in the first months of the year might cease to make satisfactory progress in the second semester.
Moreover, given the significant weight of external factors in the explanation for the slowdown in the country’s economic growth, lower interest rates probably would not have a major positive impact on productive activity.
This figure was lower than the projection of the Bank’s technical team and what was expected for the market’s average.
It also agreed to supply a larger portion of permanent liquidity to meet the liquidity needs that usually increase at year’s end.
The preceding was more than offset by the rise in the employment rate and because of that the unemployment rate dropped.
The total demand for energy rose 4.4% during May, in annual terms, posting increases compared to the fourth quarter of 2009 and the early months of 2010.
There has been no growth in the balance of the loan portfolio in domestic currency during the last eight (8) weeks (15.8% annual growth at the end of February compared to 18.5% in December).
In the financial system, loan portfolio growth continued to slow.
In addition, the countries on the periphery of the Euro Zone –Greece, Portugal and Spain– remained stagnant or were shrinking.
Most of the core inflation indicators dropped faster than at the beginning of the year or at the end of 2008.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed that the new information confirms a slowdown of the output higher than forecast by the Central Bank's technical staff.
Imports rose 0.9% annually, a figure that is lower than what was registered the month before (1.6%).With respect to inflation expectations, according to the Bank’s monthly survey of financial market analysts, inflation expected for December of this year is 2.2% while the expectations for the coming 12 months are at 2.9%.
(iii) The government announced a budget cut for 2008 of Col$1.5 trillion, which is equivalent to 0.4% of the GNP and one of whose fundamental objectives is to alleviate the pressure over the monetary policy derived from the increase of inflation.
In the case of Venezuela, annual growth during the first quarter (-5.8%) and the forecast for 2010 as a whole reflect an economy in recession that has cut back drastically on its imports.
The region’s stock markets have dropped, but not as much as those in the developed countries.
Meanwhile, the real interest rate on preferential commercial loans was 6.2%, as opposed to 27.4%, for credit card lending, and 5.8% for treasury loans.
In Germany, the country in the Euro Zone that has grown the most, the indicator of economic sentiment among analysts (ZEW) entered negative terrain in September, (-4.3 points; 14 points were expected) and reached its lowest level in 19 months.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Friday, September 30, 2016.
Downward pressure came from the annual variation in food prices, which was 3.9% in March versus 4.4% in February.
Given the possible implications that less growth in the world economy could have for Colombia’s economic growth, they advised waiting for new information before making a decision on benchmark interest rates.
On the other hand, in most emerging economies, interest rate stability or reductions are expected.
With respect to the labor market, the unemployment rate rose slightly over the last few months, however, the rate of job creation increased.Economic activity in the euro zone, in turn, continues to recover at a modest rate.
The Directors noted that annual headline inflation, after stabilizing at a figure slightly above 13% during the first quarter, registered successive decreases in April and May due to the decrease in food inflation; downward adjustments in the international price of some food and transportation costs; the revaluation of the country’s exchange rate; and the decline in producer price inflation, among other factors.
However, the quality of the latter has deteriorated; (vii) In April, annual inflation (3.43%) was slightly less than estimated and similar to the previous month’s record.
In the case of mortgages, the growth rate registered an uptick as it went from growing at a rate of 15.37% to 15.59% during the same period.
(iv) China will continue to grow at high rates but the news has not been exceptionally encouraging in the last few months.
Some of the indicators on the supply side point to good momentum at the start of 2012.
At the same time, the recent events in Europe have raised the perception of risk in the international markets.
However, this indicator has tightened less than it in the first and second quarters (17.4% and 14.2% respectively).
On the other hand, the increase in value-added tax and other indirect taxes would pressure inflation upwards.
So far this year, among the main countries of the region with an inflation targeting scheme, the Brazilian real and the Colombian peso have been the most depreciated currencies vis-à-vis the US dollarSo far in June, the prices of oil exhibited levels higher than the projections for all of 2015, but they are still far lower than the average observed in the last five years.
Performance figures for its productive sector show a new decline in gross domestic product during the first quarter of 2013.
External demand would exhibit a slight recovery resulting from growth of the main trading partners, somewhat better than in 2016.The current account deficit for 2017 would stand between 3.0% and 4.4% of GDP, with 3.7% in the baseline scenario.
As for the core inflation indicators, their average went from 2.4% in November to 2.5% in December.
The Board of Directors is mindful of the risks associated with peso appreciation in an atmosphere of weak external demand, and will continue to monitor the exchange market carefully.
The annual growth of the portfolio in national currency went from 12.45% to 12.91% between July and August while the foreign currency portfolio dropped from 37.07% to 30.66% during the same period.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households saw an annual growth rate of 13.21% which is 6 bp lower than the previous month.
As has been the case for several months, the minor adjustments in food prices are largely responsible for this result.
With respect to exports, the new results showed an upsurge in foreign sales in dollars.
As of June the annual variation for food was 4.1%.
The fact that part of this fall was because of one less working day in February this year (the year before was a leap year) should be kept in mind.With regards to the area of mining, production of coal was affected in February and March by labor strikes in Cerrejon and the environmental problem Drummond had which caused a stop in production due to the restrictions on transportation of the product to the port (temporary suspension of the freight license).
With this information, the technical staff kept its growth forecast for Colombia’s trading partners unchanged Oil prices have fallen to levels lower than forecast in the previous quarter.
If the international situation does not deteriorate further, it can be predicted that this behavior may remain unchanged in the course of 2012.
For Colombia, this should bring about a lower path for risk premia, with a slower convergence to its historical average.The price of oil has exceeded the forecasts made a month ago, largely as a result from the observed and expected supply constraints in the crude oil market.
Although over the course of the year (January-July) they have plunged 19.2% annually, the levels are above those for the same period in 2007.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on May 23, 2008.
(iii) The increased weight Colombian public debt securities have in the benchmark portfolios of some international investors could offset to some degree the effects that the adjustment in global liquidity has on the exchange rate and market interest rates in Colombia.
The two (2) remaining Board Members voted for a 25 bp reduction.Bogotá, DUpdated: 13:57 technical issues.
(v) Bank loans are growing at stable rates that were above the nominal GDP.
The consumer and mortgage loan portfolios remain the most dynamic, posting respective annual variations of 20.9% and 17.5%.
This would make the convergence of inflation to the target slower and more difficult and require increases in the interest rate in the future that could coincide with a pronounced slowdown in expenditure and output DECISIONThe Board of Directors ofBanco de la República, by majority, decided to increase the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp to 5.75%.
The average of core inflation indicators monitored by the Central Bank stood at 5.73% on a yearly basis.16.The annual CPI variation in January is the highest since December 2008.17.According to the monthly survey applied to financial analysts in February, a yearly inflation rate of 5.49% is expected for December 2016, a figure higher than expected in the January survey.
Added to that, there was a slump in car sales on the order of 16.4% in February according to the Colombian Automobile Committee and the figures published by Econometria.
The lower percentage registered with respect to August was due to the downward pressure from perishables, non-tradable excluding food and regulated prices and from regulated prices.
Given the high degree of uncertainty, the members of the Board highlighted that it is difficult to determine the amount of spare capacity.Additionally, the Board Members expressed their concern regarding the marked deterioration of the labor market.
Coupled with the expectation of weak global growth, this indicates monetary policy in the developed economies and in several emerging markets would remain expansive.
Thus, special care needs to be taken regarding the extent of monetary policy rate cuts.The director who opted for a 75-bps decrease mostly agreed with the majority group's diagnosis regarding the favorable conditions that support continuing the interest rate cuts initiated in December.
A path of increases strengthens the signal of the Board's commitment to inflation targets, allows to better calibrate an optimal response to new external shocks, and makes the movements of the Board of Directors more predictable for the market, thereby improving the pass-though of monetary policy.The credibility of the monetary authority must be sustained by a consistent and weighted action looking towards the policy horizon.
The new most probable outcome for 2015 (5.3%) would be similar to the deficit observed in 2014 (5.2%).
Tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, were the only group to experience less inflation, which went from 2.4% in April to 2.2% in May.
In this projection, both consumption (public and private) as well as investment continue slowing down, partly as a response to the slower dynamics of national income.For 2017, growth of the economy is estimated within a range between 1.5% and 3.5%.In June, yearly consumer inflation increased, reaching 8.60%.
The rise in inflation during December was due essentially to the behavior of food and regulated prices.
This, among its multiple benefits, would contribute to increasing tax revenues and strengthening the country's public finances.With today's decision, the Board continues with growth-enhancing policy rate cuts while maintaining a policy stance in line with the objective of driving inflation to its target by -2025.
On the supply side, the indicators available for the second quarter of 2016 show that the industry and trade recorded favorable dynamics, while mining, agriculture, and energy had a less-dynamic performance.The seasonally adjusted labor market series show that, to May, the unemployment rate remains low, given that the labor supply (measured as the global participation rate) has fallen, which has offset the deterioration in employment creation.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Friday, July 29, 2016.
The outlook at six months, in turn, not show significant changes and stayed at levels similar to those from the last two months.
Public spending surged and household consumption grew steadily.
Annual inflation in non-tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, stayed at 4.7% in June.
The performance described is in line with what is contemplated in the September Inflation Report where there is a range of output growth for the entire year that is between 5% and 6% Financial Variables Total loans in national (NC) and foreign (FC) currency are maintaining high rates of growth.
The downward trend in international prices for food, raw materials and oil continues and could have a major impact on total inflation.
The increase in employment and the reduction of unemployment, together with the observed increase in vacancy rates (which show a significant recovery in demand for new jobs), point to a tighter labor market.In an environment of a robust domestic demand and despite the improvement in the terms of trade, the current account registered a 6.4% deficit as a share of the quarterly GDP in the first quarter of the year, increasing from the 4.1% deficit as a share of GDP for the same period of last year.
The most dynamic sectors were agriculture (7.7%) and financial services (4.4%), while mining, construction, retail, and transport fell (-9.4% -1.4%, -0.5%, and -0.3%, respectively).
If the series is adjusted by working days, the indicator would be up by 2.4%.
In this period, the growth of the United States was low and below expectations, while the expansion of the euro zone was weak, although somewhat greater than had been forecast.
Hikes in external interest rates, higher risk premia and the volatility in international financial markets also influenced this decision.
The annual change in the IPI excluding coffee threshing was 2.8% for the month of February.
Nevertheless, the positive economic performance, the risk premiums that are still low and the favorable level of prices for some commodities should continue to contribute to the capital flows into emerging economies.
For the next year, the most recent predictions of the major international agencies continue to point to a worldwide growth recovering as compared to 2012, although at a slower pace than estimated in previous months.
As to deposits, the shift towards certificates of deposit continued throughout the month.
Respecting the former, demand grew 6.4% annually and the level it reached surpassed the records for the last six months.
The last few months also saw fewer liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR).
(iii) Extremely low interest rates for too long a period of time ultimately can pose a risk to financial stability, the sustainability of growth and future inflation.
Furthermore, the agreements and measures directed towards solving the public debt and financial system problems have not had the expected impact so far.
The United States is growing at a slow rate, Europe continues to contract, and Japan seems to be starting to react to the strong monetary stimulus measures.
Specifically, while Germany is expanding at a favorable rate, some weakening of productive activity can be seen in France.
The figures released by DANE show retail sales rose 1.2% in April.
Eventually, this temporarily will make the Central Bank a net debtor.
These premiums could be affected by the particularly vulnerable situation in several countries of the Eastern Europe.
April witnessed a continued increase in price for some of Colombia’s major exports.
Under these circumstances and with the information that is available, one cannot expect higher inflation to result in more growth.
The indicators on hand with respect to economic activity during the year to date, particularly in terms of retail sales and the demand for energy, also point to added momentum in the economy.
In fact, the rest of investment spending - largely private investment - was what declined the most.
The drop in this item is primarily due to the -50.5% change in rolling stock.With respect to supply, the few indicators available for the third quarter of 2013 suggest improvements in commerce, construction, and industry.
The monthly survey conducted by Banco de la República indicates inflation is expected to be 2.6% by December of this year (7 bp higher than the expectation a month ago) and 3.1% at twelve months (an increase of 8 bp compared to April).
Investment, especially investment in buildings, should grow at high rates while consumption will probably grow at about the same rate as it in the first half of the year.
With respect to tradables without foods and regulated items, their result in June was 1.0%, similar to that in May though higher than the percentage observed in the first quarter of the year (about 0.7%).
The members of the Board emphasized the goodness and efficacy of the decisions on monetary policy adopted since April 2006, addressed to eliminating the excess of demand and the growth of credit, controlling the entrance of foreign speculative capital, strengthening the position of international reserves, and mitigating the effects over the inflation expectations of the highest international prices of basic products.
In contrast, the growth of total imports in dollars showed a minor rise in September with an annual change of 43% compared to the 41.9% registered in August.
Finally, the consumer confidence index (CCI) published by shows higher levels in April and May than those observed in the first three months of 2013, and is above the historical average for the series (since 2001).As for the indicators associated with supply, the signals were mixed.
The decrease was concentrated in perishables where significant drops were seen in the prices for potatoes and a large variety of other products (tubers, vegetables, and fruit).
In January 2009, the annual decline in total imports was 5.2%.
In the same month, external sales of the main agricultural products and other sectors also descended.
The forecasts show that it will begin to converge towards its target in the second semester of 2016.Meanwhile, the adjustment of domestic demand facing the impact in the terms of trade has been lower than expected, exhibiting reinforcement in the last quarters of the year.
Based on the available information, five Directors voted to reduce the policy rate by 50 basis points, while two Directors voted for a 75 basis point cut.The majority group reiterated several factors supporting the shift towards a less contractionary monetary policy stance but cautioned that a policy interest rate reduction exceeding 50 basis points might not be sustainable over time and could jeopardize the continuity of the process.
The increases have been particularly significant in the case of agricultural products, including coffee, and in goods exported by Colombia, such as coal and gold Financial Variables M3 is up by about 18% since September.
Compared to the second quarter of that year, thirdquarter GDP rose 0.2%, thereby completing three consecutive periods of slow quarterly GDP growth.
This projection, which also incorporates the best scenario of commodity prices and growth of the major trading partners, suggests an additional adjustment of the trade balance.
However, recent weeks have seen a significant reduction in interest rates on home mortgages.
The average of the four indicators monitored by the Bank was at 2.44% in comparison to 2.51% for the previous month.
Although some improvement was observed in the financial conditions in the USA during the second trimester, this trend was not maintained in the last few weeks.
In July the rise in rent prices (6 bp with respect to the level in June) was offset by the decline in the prices for other items that this basket is made up of.
However, other market-basket components have declined, thanks to (i) lower meat prices as a result of weak internal demand and closure of exports to the Venezuelan market, (ii) moderate adjustments in the price of food outside the home, also due to weak internal demand and the moderate minimum wage hike, and (iii) stability in the price of imported foods.
This, together with the absence of inflationary pressures, would be postponing the increase in the Fed's benchmark interest rate.On the other hand, sovereign risk premia in the region have declined in recent months.
The rise in exports of industrial goods is attributed to added sales to Venezuela (52%), the United States (1.8%), Ecuador (1.7%) and the rest of Latin America (7.1%).
The reductions were concentrated in the imported component of the indicator.
Nevertheless, recent information makes it evident that the economy is expanding at a favorable rate.
As for exports of coffee, banana, and flowers, they experienced reductions of 57%, 10.9% and 18.7% respectively.
Signs of economic slowdown in Latin America were more evident during the last month and a half.
Based on this, it is probable that the terms of trade will stay at favorable levels.
In the view of these members, in this environment, with a widening of the excesses of installed capacity and good anchorage of the forecasts and inflation expectations, a reduction in the intervention interest rates is suitable.Some members from the majoritarian group pointed out that external risks persist that limit the possibilities of carrying out a more expansionary monetary policy.
In the domestic economic activity, it is highlighted that inflation, as well as the expectations, have continued to converge to the midpoint of the target range.
There has been a change in the monetary policy stance of the Fed towards a more moderate pace of increase of its interest rates, the price of oil has partially recovered, and the reactivation of the Latin American economy will boost demand for manufacturing exports and tourist activity in the country.
The group of foods presented smaller rhythms of increase, and upon excluding them from the CPI, their complement also slowed down in the latest month.
Colombia and Mexico are a case in point, with around 4% appreciation, while Brazil and Chile have seen their currencies appreciate by about 2.5%.
Expectations regarding the slow liquidity adjustment in the United States remain the same.Likewise, the expansionary monetary posture in other advanced economies is expected to persist for a lengthy period AND OPTIONSThe Board of Directors took the following relevant aspects into consideration:(i) Inflation and the average for the four measurements of core inflation continued to converge towards 3% in March.
International prices for food, raw materials and oil continue to decline.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on August 30, 2013.
The dramatic deterioration in the international situation during the past month was emphasized.
Although this fall is due to comparing the current record with past year’s high levels, also some stagnation in the indicator can be seen.
The most recent information from Europe, in turn, continues to show a slow recovery in spite of the surge seen in Germany and France in the first and second quarters.
The sectors that grew the most were agriculture (7.6%) and construction (6.4%).
Particularly, it is expected that in 2016 Venezuela and Brazil register contractions in their product again, while countries such as Ecuador, Chile, Mexico and Peru would continue exhibiting lower growth ratesWith all the aforesaid, growth for Colombia's major trading partners in 2015 would be lower than had been forecast a quarter ago.
According to information from the Colombian Motor Vehicle Committee, the rate at which those sales rose in February was high as well (10%).
In spite of that, the current values are relatively high compared to the historical average for the series.Other indicators with information as of January available are: i) the total demand for electricity, which rose 2.9% annually, expanded at every level and its trend shows a positive slope; ii) petroleum production was one million fourteen thousand barrels daily on average which, although it shows a low growth of 0.3%, implies an increase compared to the last four months.Thus, for all of 2014 the growth forecast remains within a range of 3.3% to 5.3% with 4.3% being the most probable figure Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) registered an annual growth rate of 12.2% in January, which is similar to the level seen the previous month.
The average for all of them was at 2.48%, 4 bp below the datum for the previous month and the lowest level since October 2010.The annual change in the PPI remained in negative territory in April (-2.4%) due to the decline in the local component (produced and consumed) since the imported component rose.
The available information suggests that in the year, domestic demand would have stalled versus 2015 as a result of the slowdown in consumption (households and Government) and a fall in investment.
The reading of the latest data is positive, particularly observing the evolution of the different core inflation indicators, which have stood around 3.0%.
The slowdown and low level of growth in household consumption (3.1% in the second quarter) were particularly conspicuous.
Given medium-term inflation expectations that remain close to the target and information related to economic activity that points to recovery, they considered a deepening of the current expansionary policy stance unnecessary.One of the directors in the majority, by contrast, considered it possible that inflation could settle at a lower trajectory and that market expectations could account for this view.
(vii) The risks to inflation stemming from expectations have become more moderate.
This reduction in the productive dynamics continues to be reflected in the increase of the national unemployment rate and the fall of hired employment.
Consumer confidence levels during the third quarter were less than in the second.
Analysts’ average inflation expectations and those calculated based on government bond rates are similar to the inflation target, which is 3%.In short, the economic indicators and economic projections show less output than can be generated with the country’s installed capacity.
However, the increase in labor supply (global participation rate) was greater, probably because of deteriorating household income.
The momentum in private demand will continue to be the primary source of that growth, in terms of both household consumption and investment.
Mortgage rates declined to a lesser extent (-94 bp), as those on credit card lending (-73 bp), ordinary commercial loans (-104 bp) and lending for home construction (-124 bp).In March, the real interest rate on consumer loans was 15.6% as opposed to 9.8% on mortgages, 5.6% on preferential loans and 8.9% on regular commercial lending.
So far this year, up to July, terms of trade have shown a better average than in past years.
In fact, there was a major increase in traditional exports (21.2%).
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of how Banco de la República’s technical team views the macroeconomic situation (Section 1), followed by a review of the key policy discussion points considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2).A moredetailed description of the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank is provided in the data section of the September 2014 edition of the Inflation Report, as well as in the statistical appendix CONTEXTRegarding the macroeconomic context, the technical staff highlights the following elements:In the present report, the growth forecast for external demand was reduced for this and the following year, as compared to the estimations from the previous quarter.
Acting without the necessary precaution would reduce the capacity of the monetary policy to operate in an anti-cyclic manner in the future.
Consumer lending continued to grow at a very low annual rate (0.2%) and mortgage lending tended to accelerate (from 11.9% in August to 12.9% on October 9).
Furthermore, the CPI excluding food has been at the -point of the target range (3.05%, 2.57%, and 3.03% in 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively).
In April and May, according to the DANE (the National Administrative Department of Statistics), retail sales contracted down to an average annual rate of 1,0% (the first annual fall registered in almost three years).
Supply problems associated with the heavy rain in the first half of the year as well as the normal price and production cycle would explain these registers.
Investment in construction would also have continued growing based on the developments in building licenses.
The second-quarter average for the Consumer Confidence Index shows household consumption was still growing at a good pace.
The average for the four indicators that are monitored by the Banco de la República was 2.49% compared to 2.59% in January.The annual change in the PPI remained in negative territory at -2.47% in February, which is 4 bp more that what was registered in January.
When the effect of the sales of vehicles (cars and motorcycles) is discounted, sales grew 3.2% in the same period and their growth trend is continuing.
Industrial production in the United States showed a sharp contraction in August and slowed down as seen in the annual comparison; this situation might be repeated in the next months as anticipated by the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) in the manufacturing sector.
Growth in the Colombian economy during the second half of 2010 was less than what was forecast several months back.
In the emerging market economies, the signals are mixed.
By February, a sharp contraction in economic activity in Japan, the European Union and a number of Eastern European and Asian countries was patently obvious, while emerging economies such as China and India reflected a sharp slowdown.
(v) Growth in lending continues to slow, and the new and used housing price indexes are at historically high levels.
Other members voiced their preference for a 50 bp cut in the intervention interest rate and an announcement to the effect that, with the data at hand, no further changes in that rate are anticipated in the near future.
Under these conditions, household consumption has continued to show strong performance, especially in relationship to the purchases of durable goods.
This is the lowest level since -2006.
The commercial portfolio keeps growing at rates close to 20% per year.
The CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated prices, in turn, was at 0.6% (annual variation) compared to 0.4% the previous month.
In real terms, they are staying below their historical averages (except for credit card rates) and are driving economic growth.
These shocks, which are transitorily increasing inflation, may affect inflation expectations, causing several mechanisms of indexation of prices and wages to operate with greater intensity than in earlier periods, and generate a slower convergence of inflation to the target.In summary, inflation expectations have increased and the risk of a slowdown in domestic demand, beyond that which is consistent with the decline registered in national income, has moderated AND OPTIONSAll Board Members agree that the Colombian economy has experienced a strong impact on income derived from the fall in the international price of oil, generating a substantial depreciation of the peso, which is necessary to achieve a sectoral re-orientation of spending and production, leading to the adjustment of the country’s external accounts.Due to its magnitude, devaluation has increased inflation of consumer prices.
Those derived from the TES at different maturities remained close to 4%.
Both these situations are associated with favorable performance in the sector.
This was due to the stability in consumer loans (12.90% in both July and August) and the slight dip in the portfolio for housing purchases which went from 14.28% in July to 14.06% in August.
(iii) The consecutive, early increase in the Bank’s interest rates contributes to keeping inflation within the target range and reduces the risk of financial imbalances that later lead to an unnecessary volatility in the interest rates, output and employment.
With respect to the economic situation for the second quarter, most part of information available shows a slowdown in the economic activity.
Both the average of those measurements and the inflation expectations are at or below the target (3%).In summary, the growth of the Colombian economy was below 3% in the first quarter, but the monetary policy and fiscal actions that have been taken so far are expected to contribute to getting the output to go to its potential level over the course of the year.
On the one hand, the central banks of major economies (USA, Euro Zone, China) have reduced their rates upon perceiving lower inflationary risks and due to the existing preoccupation regarding growth.
However, uncertainty about the external and internal conditions and on the volatility of oil prices remains high, all of which could affect the dynamics of prices and economic activity AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board noted the reduction in the inflation rate that has been taking place throughout 2018 as positive, although it has slowed down its downward trend in recent months.
However, available activity and perception indicators for the fourth quarter continue to show a low dynamism in the economy and reveal that several of the downside risks in growth would be materializing.The credit slowdown continued in the last month, explained mainly by the moderation in household indebtedness, particularly in the consumer modality.The commercial credit also slowed down in November and registered an annual growth of 5.1%.In November, annual consumer inflation increased for the fourth consecutive month and stood at 4.12%, above that expected by the technical staff and by the market.
This indicator continues to be affected, for the most part, by the sharp drop in automobile sales.
The slowdown occurred in both the group of imported goods and the one of locally produced and consumed goods Growth The latest indicators of economic activity for the third quarter of 2011 confirmed that the annual growth rate for the economy surged in comparison to what had been seen in the first half of the year.
The reduction in vehicle prices (-4.6% annual inflation) was a high point in this respect.
Up to March, the principal reaction was in the rates on consumer lending (-165 bp), preferential loans (-152 bp) and micro-credit (-182 bp).
(v)  For 2013, the technical team forecasts between 2.5% and 4.5% economic growth, with 4% being the most likely figure.
According to indicators for the third quarter, there is an incipient recovery in the euro zone.
In investment in buildings, the lower outlays occurred in both housing and non-residential construction.In contrast, the strength of private (4%) and public (4.8%) consumption in the third quarter was similar to what had been seen in the second and better than expected even when the growth of durable goods presented an annual contraction of 5.9% in the third quarter of 2012.
They emphasize that the creation of 21,000 jobs last July is the lowest job creation figure seen post-pandemic.
At the same time, inflation of non-tradables excluding food and regulated prices, which more faithfully reflects possible demand pressures, has been declining: 4.57%, 3.53%, and 3.49% for October of 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively.
Those embedded in public debt bonds to more than two years were reduced.
The surge was concentrated in the prices of perishable food (from -0.2% to 2.1% annually).
This performance was due to the combined fall in the imports of capital goods (-6.1%), raw materials (-3.9%), and consumer goods (-5.4%).
As to third quarter, the various available indicators suggest the economy continued to slow, as illustrated by industrial growth figures for the month of August (-8.8%) compared to the same month in 2007 (-0.8% for the year to August).
Accumulated inflation in the first five months of the year was 5.1%.
In these circumstances, they prefer to wait for the full impact that the 11.25 percentage point increase in the aggregate policy rate since September 2021 will have on the economy.
This takes place in an environment of economic activity that would recover, but still with an excess of installed capacity.
The core inflation indicators continued to decline.
As for the emerging market economies, the growth rates witnessed in the final quarter of 2011 were close to those for the long term, and 2012 should see this performance continue.
In the case of the United States Federal Reserve, the cutbacks in monthly purchases of assets remained in line with what was expected by the market and the first increase in the benchmark rate is expected to occur towards -2015.
Specifically, the weak job market and the restrictions on bank loans could tone down the recovery in consumption and investment during the coming quarters.
The local component rose with respect to the month before (57 bp).
The annual difference in prices for non-tradable goods and services, excluding food and regulated items, rose slightly and was 3.42% in February, having been 3.37% in January.
Those embedded in public debt bonds are between 3.3% and 3.6% In all, for 2017, the strong transitory shocks that diverted inflation from its target are expected to continue fading in an environment of a weaker economic activity.
TheLey de financiamientowill contribute to the reactivation by means of higher levels of investment.
Something similar happened with expectations for production three months out.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Greater detail of the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff atBanco de la Repúblicawill be presented in theMonetary Policy Report for June 2018and in thestatistical annex (Only Available in Spanish) CONTEXTIn this report, the projection of the 2018 average growth of some of the country's main trading partners was maintained, which implies an acceleration compared to 2017.
Thus, the estimates suggest that the output gap in 2014 will be negative but close to zero and that, in 2015, it will be above this value With respect to prices, inflation was 0.46% in April.
Generally, all the inflation indicators have remained within the target range; (vii) Credit dynamics and the increasing value of assets may be due to structural factors, and not only to a low interest rate; (viii) In any ways, imagining prudential regulation measures additional to the interest rate is justified; (ix) Market interest rates have increased recently; this suggests that there is no excess liquidity level in the economy The Board of Directors has unanimously agreed to keep the intervention interest rate unaltered at 4.5%.
In contrast, Asia and Latin America are showing a better pace and outlook for growth.
This would continue driving the recovery in the country's terms of trade and the positive effects on national income.This report assumes three additional increases in the FED's benchmark interest rate during 2018; consequently, the rate would move within the range of 2.25% to 2.50% at the end of the year.
Given the aforesaid, the panorama of the monetary policy is very diverse.
Mortgage lending rates remained stable at 12.9%.
Up to the third quarter, imports of capital goods showed high expansion rates which implied the favorable performance of the investment in transportation equipment, machinery and equipment.
However, the Board considers that this shock is temporary, given that an additional, strong and continuous depreciation is not expected; also, they expect the phenomena affecting food prices to disappear in the policy horizon.Although there have been different perceptions concerning the risks of a fall in the rate of growth that could lead to the possibility that a larger-than-necessary adjustment may take place (particularly in a context of weak external demand), such perceptions have diminished.On the contrary, the risks of inflation expectations becoming “unanchored” in the presence of a continuous and higher-than-expected increase of inflation and core inflation indicators have augmented.
The fall in quantity came from the lower foreign sales of coffee (-21%) and flowers (-19%).
In the same period, external sales of the main agricultural products increased 22.5%, while those of the remaining sectors descended 11%So far this year, total imports accumulate a fall of 3.8%, due to the lower external purchases of intermediate goods (-18.4%).
The highlights in terms of the response by May include the prime lending rate (-238 bp), the mortgage rate (-203 bp) (partly due to government backing for home purchases), the ordinary commercial rate (-201 bp) and the rate for home construction (-190 bp), following by reductions in the consumer loan rate (-177 bp), microcredit (-174 bp) and the rate on credit card lending (-134 bp).Interest rates also declined in real terms, but to a lesser extent, due to the effect of the slump in inflation.
This includes an annual reduction of 12.7%, primarily as a result of fewer sales to the United States (-8.2%) and Venezuela (-33.5%).
At the same time, businessmen still had real interest rates that were lower than the averages since 1998 in spite of the rise last month (40 bp).
Compared to that from the quarter immediately before it, the GDP for the first quarter rose 1.5%, a figure that corresponds to an annualized rate of 6.2%.
Future decisions by the Board will be determined according to new information available.
Between the same dates, the growth rate of commercial loans tumbled from 21.2% to 12.4%.
Moreover, the increase in local demand has decline, but continues to exceed the growth in national production.
In turn, the manufacturing industry and exploitation of mines and quarries were the only sectors that presented a downturn in their activity.10.The new data for the second quarter of 2015 regarding retail trade, consumer confidence, and the survey of economic expectations by Banco de la República suggest that private consumption grows at a somewhat lower rate than the one registered at the beginning of the year.
The final domestic demand grew at an annual rhythm of 5.4% during the first trimester, which implied a slowdown against what was observed in 2007, yet still over the historic average.
Retail sales posted an annual increase of 2.0% during November.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá, , on January 30, 2015.
Non-tradable inflation, without food and regulated prices, was 5.36%.
In a globalized economy, there are multiple channels for contagion as the experience from the crisis in 2009 demonstrated.
As occurred throughout the year, the slowdown in inflation was explained, yet again, by less of an increase in the CPI for regulated items and food.
In contrast, the credit card loans are above their average Foreign ContextIn the last few months, global activity has continued recovering mainly in the developed economies and to a lesser degree in some emerging countries in Asia.
(iv) It must be stressed that the monetary policy adopted by the Board since April 2006 has proved on account of its results that it has moved in the right direction.
This is the best figure on record for annual growth in one month since April 2008.
The average for the three indicators monitored by the Banco de la Republica was at 3.34%, which is 7 bp more than the month before.
While the contraction in Europe persists, a rapid recovery in productive activity is ongoing in Japan.
The most recent measures passed by the European authorities, such as the possibility of direct capitalization for the Spanish banking system through the use of resources from the region‟s rescue funds, and the 120.000 billion euros (equal to 1% of the region‟s GDP) to foster economic growth have temporarily reduced uncertainty; but they have not yet managed to persuade markets of the likelihood of a fast regional recovery.
The Venezuelan economy contracted 5.8% during the fourth quarter and 3.3% during the year as a whole.
Annual inflation in non-tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, declined from 4.5% in November to 4.4% in December.
The overall demand for energy (regulated and non-regulated) increased at an annual rate of 3.4% in December and 2.6% during the entire last quarter, which was the largest expansion witnessed since the end of 2007.
The annual increase of the “FBKF” was 20%, and it displaced household consumption as the main engine of growth.
(v) In Latin America, industry has lost momentum and several of the economies have cooled down.
This was mainly due to fewer sales of transport equipment.
With respect to foreign trade, Colombian exports grew at an annual rate of 36% in dollars from the beginning of the year to May.
In terms of origin, all of them declined: industrial exports -21.7%, mining exports -16.2% and agricultural exports -7.2%.
The monetary and fiscal policy actions taken so far are expected to contribute to strengthening this trend    Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) in August registered an annual growth rate of 13.9%, which is slightly higher than what was seen the month before (13.8%).
They pointed out that the positive behavior of goods prices has contributed to a noticeable decrease in inflation excluding food and regulated items.
The widening of this imbalance is partly due to the impact of domestic demand on imports, which has only been partially offset by the rebound in exports.
As a result, their currencies have depreciated and their stock markets underwent devaluations.
The Colombia peso, in particular, has appreciated around 8% so far this year.
The exports from these sectors also rose in terms of volume (18.0% and 43.7%, respectively).
Bogota , December 30, 2010
Annual appreciation, the stability or decline in international prices, and a good agricultural supply explain this behavior.Inflation expectations continued to fall in December and early January.
The loan portfolio in national currency showed a growth rate of 13.2%, which is up slightly from that of last month, while the one in foreign currency surged as it went from an annual growth rate of 0.4% to one of 1.9%.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households had an annual growth of 13.2% in February, which is slightly lower than the growth the previous month (13.5%).
Some members from this group highlighted that Core inflation is still above the target, and that inflation expectations increased slightly in the last month.
The strong trend in building permits from the beginning of the year to May also indicates a positive performance in construction activity in the coming months.
This policy option encompasses the fact that both the output gap and inflation will be closing over the course of the year and counteracts the downward pressure that the rise in inflation will generate on the real interest rates.
Although these increments appear small, they align with historically high product levels that reflect marginal variations of significant GDP expansions that occurred in 2021 and 2022.
In the first weeks of the year, there have been significant capital inflows to emerging economies.For 2017, it is expected that the strong transitory shocks that diverted inflation from its target continue to fade, in an environment of a weak economic activity.
However, earlier this year, several indicators of economic activity and expectations in large economies such as Germany, the United States and China, showed signs of recovery and may suggest a moderation in the global slowdown.
This was due to all the sub-groups and particularly public utilities.
The international price for petroleum remains at high levels, in turn, and the prices for coal, nickel, and coffee stopped falling.
As a result, the interest rates for loans to households and to businesses are at historically low levels.
The government in Venezuela decreed a sharp devaluation of the bolívar.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and the full-time co-directors Messrs. Fernando Tenjo Galarza, Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Juan José Echavarría Soto, Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo and César Vallejo Mejía.
Note that the performance of investment in public works, housing construction, and public consumption is a source of high uncertainty for these forecasts Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) in November registered an annual growth rate of 13.30%, a level which is lower than the one seen the previous month (14.03%).
(iv) Private consumption grew at a rate close to its historic average, and it is feasible to expect it will slow somewhat this year, but not significantly.
Moreover, despite less global growth, international prices for oil and other commodities remain high.
This could be related to depreciation of the peso in recent months.
They also highlighted that gas price subsidies, which have provided relief to consumers, are unlikely to be sustainable.
This figure is 42 b less than the one in February and comes after five months of consecutive increases.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on March 22, 2013.
Nevertheless, conditions on the financial markets and with respect to government debt have improved compared to the previous quarter, thanks partly to the announcements by the European Central Bank on unlimited purchases of sovereign bonds (OMT).
José Darío Uribe, Governor of the Central Bank of ColombiaFull-time Board Members in Attendance:Mr. Carlos Gustavo CanoMr.
For what is left of the year and for 2011, substantial changes in their levels are not expected, as a result of which, the terms of trade for countries that are exporters of raw materials like Colombia will continue to be favored.
The poor results for this latter branch contrast with its significant rate of expansion seen in the first half of this year (10.8%) and is the result of supply shocks in the production of oil and coal.
Likewise, other categories relating to house cleaning, hygiene and wardrobe have started showing some rises.
Food products, beverages and clothing were the items that registered the largest reduction in volume.
All inflation expectations also declined.
Cumulative inflation was 1.98% for the year-to-date at October.
In real terms, all average interest rates increased during February, with the exception of those on treasury and consumer loans.
In the area of supply, the construction sector will have been the main source of growth, followed by agriculture, mining and commerce.
(vii) The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and growth projections.
Despite these improvements, inflation levels and expectations continue to surpass the target, as seen in the inflation expectation for 2024, which stands at 5.0%.
This behavior has been much more accentuated in oil-producing countries such as Colombia.This has taken place within a context of weak global economic activity, driven mainly by the economy of the USA.
In view of that fact and the weak forecast for growth, no major inflationary pressure is anticipated for the coming quarters.
With the exception of Venezuela, our major trading partners in Latin America experienced high growth rates during the second quarter of 2010, although those rates are expected to be more moderate during the remainder of the year.
The Board of Directors believes its expansive monetary policy contributes to economic growth in an environment characterized by a healthy financial system The Board of Directors agreed to make no change in the Central Bank’s intervention rate, which will remain at 3%.
This widening implies a smaller current surplus in the mining sector and supposes that the wide use of the external savings by the remaining sectors would have continued in the second half of the year.As for Colombia’s economic growth, the most recent indicators of supply and demand suggest that in the second half of 2014 the GDP would grow at a good pace, although less than the one registered in the first half of the year.
Some directors add that the labor market shows signs of weakening by registering in July 2024 a national unemployment rate of 9.9%, higher by 0.3 pp than the 9.6% level seen in July 2023.
Should this risk materialize, world economy would grow considerably less than expected, the international prices of basic goods may fall, and global risk aversion may be exacerbated, all of which would have adverse effects on the Colombian economy.
The trend in business and consumer confidence indicators has been favorable so far during the third quarter, as has the trend in indicators of sentiment in the manufacturing and service sectors.
However, this will also depend on what happens with inflation expectations.One Co-Director noted that: (a) Yearly inflation continued to increase and reached 9.0% in July, the highest in 16 years, having remained for a year and a half above the upper limit of the target range, exceeding it by 125%.
The main points of discussion among the Board members centered on: (i) the effect of monetary-policy measures, given the time it takes them to work through to the economy; (ii) the elements that influence inflation forecasts for 2008 and 2009; (iii) the advisability of adopting monetary policy measures in a scenario of rising international prices for food and fuel; (iv) the continued upward trend in non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices; (v) a current account deficit that reflect more growth in local demand compared to the increase in national production; (vi) the effects of appreciation in the exchange rate; (vii) the possibility that developments on the international scene, in a situation with a current account deficit, might lead to future exchange rate adjustments; (viii) the uncertainty created by highly volatile international markets and how that volatility might affect the Colombian economy; (ix) the difficulty in assessing available data in a situation where there is a break in the cycle of sustained growth; (x) the risk balance between growth and inflation in a context of rising inflation expectations and a slowdown in the economy; and (xi) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility as a way to anchor inflation expectations, given the possible side-effects of international food and fuel prices; The Board underscored the persistence of inflationary pressures worldwide, and stressed the importance of anchoring inflation and expectations of inflation to the targets, given the inflation forecasts for the coming months.
The inflation expectations revealed in the Central Bank’s monthly survey at the beginning of February were up slightly, but remained within the long-term target range defined by the Board of Directors.
However, some of the factors that have generated oversupply of oil continue, and inventories remain high.
Production of coffee continues to expand at favorable rates.
(iii) The international prices of basic products remain at high levels and encourage the national income of the producing countries.
Recent announcements by the central banks of the major advanced economies suggest that high liquidity and low international interest rates will remain on the policy horizon.
Exports to the United States have maintained their momentum, registering an increase of 54%, largely due to sales of petroleum and derivatives.
For all of 2015, the most probable growth figure was revised downward, from 3.6% to 3.2%, within a range of 2.0% and 4.0%.
The price index for used housing is at historically high levels.
The annual change in the prices of regulated goods and services, driven by utilities and fuel, went from 5.62% in September to 5.94% in October.
The sharpest decline was in lending rates, primarily those for retail (92 b), preferred (72 b) and ordinary credit (49 b).
S/He said that, despite the fact that there are signs of recovery, the figures for economic activity are still weak and could be bolstered by a further reduction of the intervention rate, considering that inflation forecasts continue exhibiting convergence to the 3.0% inflation target in 2018     DECISIONThe Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicadecided by majority to maintain the benchmark interest rate unaltered at 4.5 %.The decision to maintain the intervention rate at 4.5% was approved by six Board Members.
As for non-tradables, the annual variation was 3.70% as opposed to 3.64% the month before.
Generally, in 2011, significant household consumption growth would have been possible (by duplicating its growth average in the past decade), and a strong acceleration in investment growth.
Sales of vehicles continued to rise per unit in November.
The evolution of the agenda over better fiscal and financial integration would determine the way risk perception will behave in the next few months.
According to the Comprehensive Household Survey (GEIH), employment between January and June 2009 rose at an average rate of 2.1% for the nationwide total and 1.5% in the 13 metropolitan areas.
Exports were again driven by the positive performance of products like coffee, coal, nickel-iron, gold, petroleum and its derivatives in the international market.
(v) In March, annual inflation (3.40%) slowed faster than Bank’s technical team and the market expected.
They consider inflation will continue converging to its target, as it has done up to now, and what is relevant at this time is to provide a greater stimulus to the recovery of growth.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the intervention rate unchanged.
They note that these adjustments bring the economy closer to a more sustainable future growth path and thus improve Colombia's international financial conditions.
In this context, Colombia's sovereign risk premium fell in 2023, and the peso appreciated at a higher rate than the currency of comparable countries in the region.The increase in the minimum wage for 2024 exceeded expectations, which influences the price path projected by the technical staff, especially in the services basket.
Cement production is down by 15.1% during the course of the year to May.
A slowdown is expected this year, the extent of which will depend on the international situation.
The unemployment rate declined during the first three months of the year.
Given this scenario, long-term interest rates on United States treasuries ceased to decline in recent weeks and were situated above the average observed in 2013.A number of countries in the region have seen their risk premiums increase in the last few weeks; nevertheless, they are still low and below the average for 2013. International oil prices declined, as prices for some of the commodities exported by Colombia.
The first-quarter average for the consumer confidence index remained high and growth rates for merchandise exports during the early months of the year were higher than at the end of 2007.
According to the figures released by DANE, industrial production in August of this year was 3.3% less than in August 2008.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, Carolina Soto Losada, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Further detail on the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank will be presented in the monthlyMonetary Policy Report for July 2018and in the statistical annex (Only Available in Spanish)  CONTEXTThe average growth forecast for Colombia’s main trading partners for 2018 was revised downwards in this report (2.4%).
Annual producer price inflation (PPI) in July was 1.8% as opposed to 2.1% in June Growth The indicators at hand show the momentum in local demand witnessed at the start of the year continued during the second quarter and, although less evident, in the third.
With respect to the United States, the 2.0% growth (a/q) for the third quarter of 2010 was slightly above that registered for the second quarter of the same year, 1.7% (a/q).
The favorable performance of household consumption in the fourth quarter of last year was confirmed by the changes in imports and employment in December.
Added to this is the major downward adjustment in perishable food and non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices, and the possible adverse effects the US recession and the world crisis might have on Colombia’s economic growth, apart from the uncertainty surrounding the fate and sustainability of developments in the Venezuelan economy.
In tradables (excluding food and regulated items), the annual variation rose to 1.1%; that is, four (4) bp more than the rate in May, as has been the case since April.
As a result, the number of licenses remained at levels that are similar to those of five years ago.
The sector’s -term trends are also favorable as indicated by the area being approved for construction pursuant to licenses granted.
The annual variation of producer prices (PPI) was 4.8% in May compared to 4.7% in April.
Changes in inflation are likely to continue to be affected by ample excess productive capacity, which should progressively reduce over time.
In February, industrial production and the confidence index in the manufacturing sector rose surprisingly.Asia’s other emerging market economies have experienced several surges in industrial activity and in exports associated with normalization of the supply chain in Thailand and increased purchases from China.The Latin American economies continued to grow at a pace slightly below their potential.
On the contrary, most Latin American currencies appreciated last month.
The registers for retail trade, consumer confidence, and sales expectations suggest so.
(iii) The industrial confidence index is still at high levels while consumer confidence has remained on a rising trend for several months and is at one of the highest historical levels.
With respect to the predictions for growth and the unemployment rate, some improvements were presented for 2013 and 2014.So far, the reaction of some market indicators has not been very strong in view of the announcement.
(vii) In November, there was a pause in the moderate growth bank loans (N/ and F/C) have seen.
FOB imports between January and April totaled USD 10,058 and experienced an annual reduction of 12.5%.
Recent developments in inflationIn February, annual consumer inflation (2.32%) registered a surge of 19 basis points (bp) compared to what was registered in January.
Exports to Asia rose 233% and to the European Union, 55.6%.
The real lending rate approached its historic average (12.3% actual vs. 12.5% average), while the real fixed-term deposit rate (DTF) has reached it already (4.8%) Discussion and Policy Options The Board emphasized the following points in its deliberations: Continued price increases at a rate that exceeds the targets set by the Board of Directors; The considerable weight food brings to bear on prices in an international scenario marked by upward pressures; Uncertainty about how regulated prices will behave in the future, given the indexation mechanisms used to determine those rates; The major increase in production costs for companies in terms of raw materials and labor; Uncertainty about what is in store for the world economy and Colombia’s main export markets, particularly Venezuela; How recent peso revaluation has affected inflation and the outlook for growth in the tradable sectors; The course of inflation expectations, which are still above the targets set by the Board of Directors.
As to the different types of lending, most of the momentum centered on commercial loans, which posted an annual increase of 19.6% during the first week of May, as opposed to 17% in March.
Building permits for the month of August, for both housing and other purposes, continued to show annual downswings of more than 25%.
With this, on the demand side, growth in 2017 would be more balanced than the one observed in 2016.As for inflation, it stood at 4.69% on a yearly basis in March, while core inflation, measured as the average of the four indicators monitored by the Central Bank, continued with no significant changes.While most of the deceleration in the month is explained by the behavior of food, the decline in inflation of tradables (excluding food and regulated items) suggests that the upward effect of the tax reform and the Liquor Act would have taken place, for the most part, in the first months of the year.
To April, oil production remained at levels similar to those of the past 6 months, and coffee reduced substantially compared to the first quarter.
With respect to the CPI without foods, its annual variation remained virtually stable at 2.75% resulting from a rise in the non-tradable component and a fall in tradable and regulated items.
As was the case throughout the year, this item was bolstered considerably by purchases of transport equipment and machinery and equipment.
In Germany and France, the two growth engines in the region, a deceleration of exports has been witnessed.
(vi) The reductions in the Banco de la Republica’s interest rates have been transmitted to the interest rates for deposits and loans in the financial system.
Additionally, salaried and formal employment have slowed down in recent months.Real interest rates continue at a level below their historical averages calculated since 2000 (except for credit cards).
In attendance were Mr. Juan Carlos Echeverry, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and full-time co-directors Messrs. Carlos Gustavo Cano, Juan José Echavarría, Fernando Tenjo, Juan Pablo Zárate and César Vallejo.
In this scenario, fears of a global recession have generated large volatility in financial markets and a decrease in some commodity prices such as oil and copper.Based on these considerations, all members of the BDBR agreed on the need to continue the monetary policy adjustment process that ensures a return to the 3% annual inflation target within a setting of an economy that continues to grow at a good pace amid the intensifying inflationary pressures.
In addition, households in January continued to have a real interest rate for consumption that is lower than the average has been since 1998.
(vii) Annual inflation in May (2%) was similar to what it was in April.
As of May the annual variation for food was 3.6%, a percentage that corrects an unexpected slowdown for this group in the month of April.
Nevertheless, on average, the market analysts and some multilateral entities are still predicting a slowdown in the world economy in 2011.
However, Colombia’s trading partners in the region continue to exhibit low performance of their economic activity.
This decision also incorporates the possibility of detecting a substantial change in foreign economic conditions on time and reacting to them rapidly.
In January, total exports in dollars fell again at a rate similar to the fall in the prices of oil.
According to the Bank’s monthly survey of financial market analysts, expected inflation for December of this year remained at 2.6% while the inflation expectations for the coming 12 months were at 3.0%, 7 bp lower than the previous month.
Less of an adjustment in banking services and stability in annual rental inflation were important factors in this respect.
Likewise, if the trend that has been seen in prices for the main export products continues, the average terms of trade in 2013 will be lower than those seen last year AND OPTIONSThe board of directors took the following relevant aspects under consideration:(i) The growth of our trading partners will probably be lower than expected and, as a result, the contribution of foreign demand to the growth of the country will remain low.
According to the survey, manufacturers believe the major problems they faced in 2012 were the exchange rate, access to raw materials and low demand, in that order.
Reverse-repo auctions through remunerated deposits not subject to reserve requirements will be closed temporarily as of Monday, October 27.
Some inflation basket items continue to show lower price increases.
In the case of commerce, the information from Fedesarrollo and Fenalco shows a weakening in the outlook the merchants have of the future.
These rates are below the respective averages calculated since 2000 The External Context The latest figures show Europe continues to contract and the United States is experiencing moderate growth.
The Board expects annual inflation to end the year below the floor of the target range (4.5%).
Thus, they considered that economic growth in 2019 will be very close to 3.5%.Vis-à-visthe previous Board meeting, international liquidity has tended to improve.
This largely reflects the effect of the global slowdown on Colombia’s foreign trade as well as the drops seen in the production of petroleum and coal in the third quarter due to supply shocks which will provisionally be transitory.
During the fourth quarter, exports in dollars fell by nearly 6% compared to the same period in 2008.
In their opinion, the risks of excessive deceleration and persistence of inflation have risen simultaneously, increasing the uncertainty about the pace at which further reductions to the interest rates should take place.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the benchmark interest rate unaltered.
So far this year, there has been a slowdown in commercial loans denominated in pesos but a rise in financing through the issuance of bonds by firms together with greater foreign indebtedness.
Finally one board member proposed that macro-prudential measures be applied to speed up the transmission of monetary policy to demand Based on the present evaluation of the balance of these risks, the Board of Directors decided to raise the benchmark interest rate of the Banco de la Republica by 25 basis points.
As has been observed so far, the trade balance (goods and non-factor services) would have contributed mostly to the adjustment of the external imbalance.
This has caused a drop in the terms of trade of exporting countries and has deteriorated their national income.
At the same time, the annual change in the CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated items stayed at 1.3% in October.
However, foreign sales of the country’s leading agricultural products declined at an annual rate of 19.2%, given the drop in exports of coffee and bananas.
However, these results contrast with the indicator for total retail sales, which declined 0.3% annually (excluding cars, the dip was 0.2%).
The dynamism of output has been weaker than projected, inflation has lowered, but inflation expectations exceed the target.
Perishable foods more generally affected by weather conditions were those having experienced the most noticeable decreases (from 1.1% to -2.0%), as explained in part by a recovery in the farming supply propelled by the relatively high prices of several of these food items until past year‟s third quarter.
The lower growth of the GDP and of domestic demand originated from the area of gross fixed capital formation, specifically from the poor performance of investments in public works projects, construction and buildings, and transportation equipment.
Other indicators of economic activity are compatible with the technical staff's growth forecast for 2016 (2.7% as the most likely figure, within a range between 1.5% and 3.2%) AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed on the need to continue increasing the benchmark interest rate in order to ensure convergence of inflation expectations to the goal and an increase of domestic demand consistent with a lower growth of national income.
The commercial loan portfolio is the one least subject to supply constraints.
They emphasized that the lower growth of credit and monetary aggregates reinforce the downward adjustment in the excess aggregate demand.
This expansion rate, together with that registered in the forth quarter of 2006, is the highest seen since 1979.
They noted the slowdown in the rise of core inflation and the reduction seen in inflation expectations as the peso appreciated, despite increases in gasoline prices that exert upward pressure on the regulated items component of the consumer basket.
Business opinion surveys confirm the economic slowdown that is reflected in the sector indicators.
Once again, electrical power rates dropped sharply.There were no significant changes in the core inflation indicators during March.