Other factors such as devaluation of the “strong bolívar” and the loss of confidence in the Venezuela market among Colombian exporters make it difficult to be optimistic about an increase in exports should trade relations be reestablished fully.
Respectively, these variations were 3.45% and -0.06% in April compared to 3.4% and -0.17% in March.
On the monthly level, the trade balance in October (FOB) showed a surplus of US$134 From January to October, it still showed a positive balance of US$1.188 , a level that is similar to that from the same period last year.
According to the Comprehensive Household Survey (GEIH), employment rose during the June-August 2009 moving quarter at an annual rate of 6.6% nationwide and 3.6% in the 13 major areas.
This represents a better-than-expected behavior of national income during this period, and means that there was a decline in the external vulnerability of the economy.
In this scenario, it is essential for the monetary authority to continue monitoring the external conditions and the domestic effects of likely shocks.From the perspective of domestic demand, there was consensus in that uncertainty about the pace of economic recovery increased.
The consumer and mortgage loan portfolios, in turn, saw growth rates that were 24.8% and 17.3% respectively.
However, despite the negative annual rates, direct external borrowing was up compared to the level in July.
This was explained primarily by the downturn in building construction and works, and to a lesser extent by low growth in coal and by less favorable performance than was expected for coffee.
This would raise intermediate and long-term interest rates, which would have a negative effect on economic activity and government bond prices.
Considering the magnitude of the external shock, a 3.0% GDP growth would represent a positive result for the economy, as long as it comes with a reduction of external vulnerabilities.Other Board members consider that GDP growth in 2015 will be closer to 3.5%, or even above.
Annual inflation in the price of highly-indexed items remained in the vicinity of 7%.
In the last quarter, the greater pace of increase in the prices of foods and regulated goods explained a great percentage of the acceleration of inflation.
Several Board members said they prefer to hold the intervention interest rate at its current level, based on the following considerations.
Nevertheless, the GDP growth for the set of Colombia’s commercial partners was maintained because price increases in some countries like Ecuador were revised, given the recent trends.
Food inflation went from 13% in November to 13.2% in December.
In May, the international price of oil continued rising and risk premia remained stable at last month's levels.
Between November 30 and December 16, 2010, the rates for public debt securities jumped 56 bp and 31 bp for the one and five year securities.
Inflation expectations also go down: 3.1% is expected for December 2012 and about 3.3% for July 2013, while those deriving from the treasury „TES‟ bonds at horizons between two and five years are around 2.5%.
The conditions that supported the momentum observed in consumption and investment in machinery and equipment are expected to continue during 2013.
Internal demand in Venezuela declined at an annual rate of 0.9% during the same period, primarily because of the drop in household consumption (-2.5% annual) Financial Variables In August, the nominal rates on consumer and ordinary lending averaged 17.6% and 9.8% respectively, having dropped by 32 bp and 6 bp, in that order, compared to the month before.
However, some upward pressures on inflation in the first part of 2019 are not ruled out, associated with the transitory effects of a weakEl Niñoand the estimated impact of the increase in the minimum wage.
One exception is Venezuela where the growth was -4.5% compared to -2.4% in the second quarter.
In response, the policy discussion centered on whether to delay or to proceed immediately with a decision to partially withdraw monetary stimulus that the economy has been receiving since the start of the pandemic.Five board members advocated in favor of holding the policy interest rate.
Downward pressure was exerted by the annual change in regulated prices, with 6.4% inflation in April compared to 6.9% in March.
This takes place within an environment of deterioration of the terms of trade and a growing uncertainty regarding the recovery of the economic activity worldwide and the cost of external financing, which are factors that may impact aggregate demand and the exchange rate AND OPTIONSThe Board of Directors unanimously decided to keep the benchmark interest rate at 4.5%.The Board Members highlighted that the economy is showing a strong dynamic, but that there are risks of negative clashes in the traditional policy horizon which may result in a slowdown.
The former is consistent with the 20% annual plunge in exports to Venezuela.
During the period, the rate of unemployment continued to fall and for the 13 areas it was at 11.5%.
All of this would adversely affect the Colombian economy.
The interbank rates (IBR and BRI) in January and early February were close to the policy rate.
For emerging economies the situation is less homogenous inasmuch as countries such as Brazil, India and Indonesia continue to experience high inflation while economies such as Chile, Colombia, and Peru have seen a moderate rise in their inflation although the level is still low.It should be noted that the economies with strong inflationary and exchange rate pressures such as India and Indonesia raised their benchmark interest rates in the last few weeks.
During the same month, exports to Venezuela fell 71.5% in annual terms.
In this context, the recent slowdown of aggregate demand and the better prospects for inflation allow for a reduction of the benchmark interest rate.
To July, the information from DANE on foreign trade suggests that the trade deficit would continue to adjust.In July, the terms of trade (foreign trade methodology) were close to the average of 2015.
The risk premia of Latin American countries also increased, and for Brazil and Colombia reached their highest levels since 2009In addition to oil, international prices of other commodities exported by the region, particularly by Colombia, continue being low.
On the supply side, the sectors that grew the most were industry and financial services, while mining was the only one that is contracted.The figures available for retail and industry to April show a better performance of the economy.
On average, 972 MBD were produced in the fourth quarter, which is more than during the previous three months (934 MBD).
The local component increased as well.Inflation expectations rose slightly in June, but remained at levels in harmony with meeting the inflation target.
China's GDP slowed down again, while the figures for economic activity of the major countries in the region suggest that their product will expand at low or negative rates.
Future movements of the benchmark interest rate must be subject to the evolution of expectations and to the speed of the convergence of expectations and observed inflation towards the target.Other members highlighted that, despite the fact that the economy has been adjusting quickly, risks persist that indexation mechanisms generate inefficiencies in the convergence of inflation to its target.
The first quarter of 2009 saw no change in this respect, as suggested by the additional decline in consumer confidence indicators.
Those embedded in public debt bonds rose slightly in January and are currently around 3.5%.In all, inflation is expected to continue lowering in the first quarter of the year, partly as a result of the reversal of the transitory shocks that have diverted it from its target.
The DTF rate was 5.04% on August 14, 2008, which is 28 bp less than a month earlier and 515 bp less than on December 19, 2008.
This is being confirmed by the momentum of consumption imports (annual growth as of April 30.5%), the growth of consumer credit (22.4% as of May) and the perception of businessmen about their current sales.
Inflation expectations in the quarterly and monthly surveys done by the Banco de la República at the beginning of June continue to show declines and are within the long term target range fixed by the Board of Directors.
For example interest rates for consumers are still historically low, and consumer lending is growing at high rates (20.5% average nominal rate for April), with a tendency to accelerate.
However, the outlook is less favorable for other commodities and minerals such as copper, silver and gold, and for some foods as well, which have seen recent price declines.
The conjunction of the above-mentioned factors along with improved expectations favored a recovery in consumer confidence at the end of 2011.
This has prompted the central banks of many countries to interrupt the interest rate hikes witnessed in past months.
This sharp drop was due, in part, to fewer working days in April 2009 compared to the year before, because of Easter Week.
These include specifically the iron and steel, textile, clothing, shoe, leather manufacturing, processed food sectors, etc.
In the eurozone, although production came to a halt in the first quarter of the year, it nevertheless was higher than expected by the analysts and the Bank’s technical team.
The core inflation indicators also showed no major changes in February.
They emphasized that recent inflation data has been at historic lows and anticipated a lower inflation path on the forecast horizon, which would open additional space to support economic recovery through a more expansive policy stance.
(iii) The deterioration in external conditions and the moderating of some domestic indicators do not seem to be enough to offset a domestic performance characterized by excesses of demand that possibly could threaten the inflation target and output stability even in the medium term due to financial imbalances.
The annual variation in food prices dropped from 5.5% in May to 2.8% in June, largely due to perishable foods and, to a lesser extent, because of the price of grains, oils and other imported foodstuffs.
As for the commercial channel, exports were still growing at a good pace by January, especially those of mining origin.
This is similar to the rate observed at the start of the year and more than the increase during 2007.
This is indicated by the performance of production variables, such as retail sales and cement shipments, the results of surveys of consumer and business expectations, and the key job market indicators.
It is noteworthy that these figures may be affected by the severe winter season early in the year and, therefore, the activity could be expected to spike in the coming months.
In contrast, the industrial sector (including coffee bean threshing) would be the one that contributed the least to the growth of output.The above makes it possible to maintain a forecast range of 3.8% to 5.2% for the growth of the GDP in the third quarter.
Last of all, the annual change in the area of eating away from home declined 20 bp in the last month and was at 5.1%.In the CPI excluding food, the bulk of the drop in the annual change in prices in November was concentrated in the basket of regulated items.
Finally, one of them mentioned that with shocks such as those suffered by the Colombian economy, it is difficult to assess the excess of installed capacity, with the risk of changing the monetary policy stance prematurely.Two members of the Board voted for a 25 bp reduction of the benchmark interest rate.
This number was in line with what was projected by the Bank’s technical team and similar to what the market expected on average.
In Colombia, with an average real rate of exchange for 2012 at 8% below the equilibrium rate, the momentum in exports drops.
This was possible because of the fact that, at the beginning of this year, there were no readjustments in the Transmilenio fares in Bogota unlike what happened last year.
In July-August, total imports fell 14.4% on a yearly basis, and so far this year to August they accumulate an 11.8% declineWith the above, it is likely that in the third quarter deficits in the trade balance and current account related to GDP would have accelerated.
The measurements of core inflation not show significant changes.
The annual increase in prices for regulated goods went from 3.9% in April to 4.6% in May.
In the United States, the latest information suggests its economy could grow at a somewhat slower pace than was estimated for 2012.
The main points of discussion among the Board members centered on: (i) the effect of monetary-policy measures, given the time it takes them to work through to the economy; (ii) the elements that influence the inflation forecasts for 2008 and 2009; (iii) the advisability of adopting monetary policy measures in a scenario of high international prices for food and fuel; (iv) the behavior of non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices, which was down in July compared to the month before; (v) the lower forecasts for the current account deficit; (vi) the effects of accumulated appreciation in the exchange rate and the devaluation observed during the last few weeks; (vii) the possibility that changes on the international scene, in a situation with a current account deficit, might lead to future exchange rate adjustments; (viii) the uncertainty created by highly volatile international markets and how that volatility might affect the Colombian economy; (ix) the difficulty in assessing available data in a situation marked by a break in the cycle of sustained growth; (x) the risk balance with respect to growth and inflation in a context of rising inflation expectations and economic slowdown; and (xi) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility and to anchor inflation expectations, given the risk of the side-effects of international food and fuel prices.
In view of the foregoing, the Board of Directors agreed unanimously to hold Banco de la República’s intervention interest rates steady, and believes it is important to continue to monitor the effect the international situation might have on growth, as well as the inflationary pressures associated with international food and fuel prices.
The above might increase capital flows to the emerging economies, thus generating currency appreciation pressures.
This behavior continues to be explained by appreciation in the exchange rate (which came to an annual rate of 4.4% in January for the monthly average) and by scant pressure from international prices.The non-tradable CPI excluding food and regulated items rose marginally during the past month (by 2 bp) and stood at 3.94%.
As a result of the above, domestic demand grew at and annual rate of 6.1% in the first quarter.
The most important drop in total purchases was in intermediate goods and raw materials acquired in the United States, especially mining and pharmaceutical products.
The group of regulated items was the only one that posted within the inflation target range.
Vehicle sales confirm that perception, having continued to rise at an important pace during July.
Within this aggregate, the fall (8.1%) registered in works stood up, as explained to a great extent by a drop corresponding to the oil and mining sector.
The Board members’ main points of analysis centered around the following aspects: (i) the inflation projections for 2010 and 2011; (ii) the reduced variation in prices for tradable goods due to the appreciation of the peso compared to the dollar; (iii) the lagged effect of monetary policy measures on production and prices; (iv) the projections for economic growth for 2010 which suggest a more rapid recovery than predicted and which led the technical team to raise their forecast for the year; (v) the recent movement in the financial system portfolio and in the high level of prices for assets; (vi) the drop in inflation expectations; (vii) the recent trend in capital flows; (viii) the balance of risk between growth and inflation in a context of a recovering economy and inflation that is at the long term target range and (ix) the need to maintain the monetary authority’s credibility and anchor inflation expectations to the long term target.
The quarterly survey of economic expectations suggests an inflation expectation of 5.35% and 4.85% to December 2016 and 2017, respectively.
Mention was made of the fact that the intervention interest rate has been cut by 500 bp in nearly five months and its current level is clearly expansive.
(vi) The real repo interest rate in Colombia is below its historical average but the same thing is happening in the majority of the countries around the world.
The economic recovery of the United States would be slower than estimated, while the euro zone and Japan continue exhibiting low growth rates.
Added to this complex panorama for the developed countries is the build-up in inflationary pressures, particularly within the Euro zone.
During this same period, the decline has been: -188 bp for mortgage loans, -203 bp for consumer loans, and -193 bp for construction loans.The levels of real interest rates for consumer loans, mortgages, preferential loans, ordinary commercial ones and commercial lines of credit as well as loans for construction in September were below their historical averages as calculated since 2000.
Mr. Óscar Iván Zuluaga, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Juan Mario Laserna Mr. Leonardo Villar Inflation, economic growth and their outlook for the future were discussed and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
This is explained mainly by the performance of consumption and investment in advanced economies.
Real average DTF and lending rates (according to the method used by the Central Bank) declined by 305bp and 362bp, respectively, between December 2008 and May 2009.
Conversely, the groups of tradables (excluding food and regulated items), regulated, processed foods, and meals outside the home pushed annual inflation down.
The conditions of international liquidity have relaxed, pushing away devaluation pressures, and, in any event, consumer prices of tradable products do not seem to be picking up the depreciation from the end of 2018.
Domestic demand and its main components (consumption and investment) lost some momentum, but continued to register higher increases than those in total GDP.
Hence, the expansion rhythm of the third quarter is likely to be higher than the second quarter’s.
– The imports of capital goods are falling in dollars and in real pesos (-21% annually as of February) which suggests that this expenditure will continue to show a contraction in annual terms during the first quarter.
The question is to what point this growth can be sustained if the markets in the advanced economies –which absorb most of the exports of emerging countries– continue to weaken AND The board members focused on the following points: i) the growth of uncertainty in international financial markets, ii) the growth of the GDP in the second quarter, iii) the strong performance of domestic demand which is reflected both in the increase in consumption and in private investment, iv) the better indicators of quality employment in the labor market, v) the upsurge in loans to households and businesses in a context of real interest rates that have risen but that are at levels that are lower than their historical averages, vi) the historically low level of the Bank’s benchmark interest rate and of most of the real interest rates and their possible future effect on risk-taking in the economy if they are maintained for an excessively prolonged period, vii) the high level of the terms of trade and their contribution to the growth of national revenue, viii) annual inflation iin July rose for the third consecutive month (3.42%) especially due to the performance of food prices.
The annual change in the CPI for meals outside the home (3.5%) was up by 20 bp in June with respect to the month before.In June, the average of the four core inflation indicators monitored by Banco de la República rose slightly to 2.52%.
The tax reform helped to reduce some of these prices, a fact that has a temporary impact on the annual change in the CPI.
Once more, the evidence of stronger pass-through mechanisms of the monetary policy that might impact the future evolution of the benchmark interest rate was noted.
The average of the various measurements of core inflation began to converge towards the target, once again,  and was 2.7%Analysts’ expectations for inflation one year ahead and the expectations derived from government bonds at two, three and five years, remain near or slightly above the long-term target (3%).In short, aggregate demand continues to exhibit strong growth in a context of nearly full use of productive capacity.
However, the rest of the sub-baskets (regulated, tradables, and non-tradables) showed greater stability this month in comparison to what was seen in previous months.The decline in the annual change in the CPI for food – from 1.7% in January to 1.2% in February – again covered a substantial number of products including perishables (from -5.0% in January to -5.6% in February), processed (from 2.2% in January to 1.6% in February), and eating away from home (from 3.9% in January to 3.6% in February).
They felt that this reduction is consistent with the new information regarding the lower growth of the economy, the reduction in inflation expectations, and the expected path of decline in inflation to reach the 3.0% target in 2018.Other Board Members voted for a 25 bp reduction.
Bogotá , October 14 2011.
In addition, a migration from national production to sales of imported goods can be seen, especially clothing, shoes, and manufactured leather products.
The positive impact of lower food inflation was partially offset by higher annual inflation in regulated items, reaching 16.9% in November, attributed to increases in fuel and energy prices.
In attendance were Alberto Carrasquilla Barrera, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, Carolina Soto Losada, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Further detail on the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank will be presented in theMonetary Policy Report for December 2018and in thestatistical annex (Only Available in Spanish) CONTEXTUntil the third quarter, external conditions favored the performance of the Colombian economy.
During the fourth quarter, a million four thousand barrels were pumped daily on average.
This increase is explained by the variation in the prices of food (14.28%), regulated items (6.71%) and, to a lesser extent, non-tradable inflation (excluding food and regulated items) (4.97%).
As was expected, inflation increased, a fact explained by the greater pace of increase in the prices of food, which is expected to be transitory.
The surge was seen in the three groups: consumption, raw materials and capital goods Foreign context The latest information available regarding the panorama abroad suggests a worldwide economic recovery that could occur more slowly and unequally than what the market has expected.
An extension from two to three weeks in the reserve calculation for the end of the year.
Imports of capital goods continued declining in the fourth quarter in constant pesos.
On the demand side, the fall in car sales suggests a slowdown in the consumption of durables for that monthIn January, annual growth of corporate credit slowed down again, due to the slower pace of increase of direct external credit.
These minutes contain a summary of inflation, economic growth and their prospects for the future, which was prepared by the Bank’s technical staff (Section 1), in addition to a review of the key deliberations and policy options considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2)    AND GROWTHa.
Furthermore, the expected negative impact of the El Niño phenomenon on price appears to be waning.
Total imports rose 8.1% in the amount accumulated between January and July; this is two percentage points more than during the first half of the year.The aforementioned trends in foreign trade increased the likelihood of a negative trade balance throughout 2014 and a larger current account deficit than in 2013.
As of April, the information on exports, industrial activity, and retail sales show an annual growth that is lower than it was in past years.
Consequently, the growth in base money rose as well (to 14.7% in June).
The information on retail trade, consumer confidence, and the survey of economic expectations by Banco de la República suggest a slowdown of consumption and private investment.
The annual change in the CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated items (1.6% annually), in turn, rose 4 bp with respect to the previous month.
Full-time Directors: Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Juan Mario Laserna Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Leonardo Villar Circumstances surrounding inflation and economic growth, and their prospects for the future were discussed, and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
The annual change in prices for this basket rose by 31 basis points over the previous figure on record.
In the first quarter, a sharp annual growth reduction was registered in exports and imports, where the growth rate for the latter shifted from 21.3% in the fourth quarter of the previous year to 13% in the first quarter of 2012, and from 16.2% to 6.3% in the case of external sales.
(vi) In July, the annual inflation rate (2.2%) was somewhat lower than the Bank’s technical staff had estimated, and average core inflation remained relatively stable at 2.5%.
– The retail sales reported by DANE grew in real terms at an annual rate of 8% and 13.1% for the months of April and May respectively.
This is due to the high prices for petroleum and the lower rate of price adjustment for imported goods.The low inflationary pressures and negative output gaps continue to allow the developed countries to maintain an expansionary monetary policy.
The core inflation measurements continued to average around 3%.
The Board has considered that, on the external front, the following must be taken into account: (i) In Europe, the public debt crises of some countries in the region and doubts arising on the solvency of certain banks continue to affect household and entrepreneur confidence.
– In May, the annual change for the industrial production index (IPI) excluding coffee threshing was 7.5% which is lower than for the month of April (7.9%).
The recovery in the consumer confidence index in September not offset the declines registered during the two previous months.
The general financial conditions, however, may have adjusted to the rising price of foreign financing.
It is important to point out that there have been considerable discrepancies between DANE’s series and those released by ANDI, specifically with respect to year-to-date growth rates and trends.
The consumption credit behavior suggests that households are increasing their degree of indebtedness in a significant manner.
On the one hand, there are the developed countries with moderate growth, although the results for the US economy showed better than expected performance.
This fall is mainly explained by mining exports, especially by the lower level in the price of oil in comparison to a year ago.
However, they consider it possible to speed up the pace of interest rate cuts without risking the progress achieved towards lowering inflation.
For the whole year, GDP growth is expected to be 2.0%, within a range of 1.5% and 2.5% (versus 2.3%, within a range between 1.5% and 3.0% in the June report).
The drop was due, in large part, to the -7.4% change in the exports of mining products (mainly coal and gold).
While these growth rates represent a substantial deceleration relative to previous years, economic activity levels remain high, and unemployment has reached historic lows amidst robust labor participation rates.
Our main trading partner, the United States in particular, is showing more marked signs of slowdown than was expected by the market.
The causes and consequences of this phenomenon were discussed by the members of the Board to determine their position regarding the monetary policy stance.The majority of Co-directors voted in favor of increasing the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp.
This is especially the case in the Euro Zone, where inflationary pressures have begun to pass through to core inflation.
It was also higher than the data from October last year and than the average calculated since 2001.
Others that may have contributed significantly to the growth are financial services, commerce, and mining.
Likewise, with the information from the Fedesarrollo survey, the signals on industrial performance are not positive.
Finally, it reiterated that monetary policy will depend on new information as it becomes available.Bogotá,
The latter one is above the long range goal announced by the Board (2% - 4%).
The inflation expectations from the quarterly and monthly surveys done by the Banco de la Republica at the beginning of October continue to show declines and are within the long term target range fixed by the Board of Directors.
By type of expenditure, growth continues to be propelled by household consumption; this can be inferred from the dynamic behavior of commerce sales (annual variation of 3.7% on average as of November) and imports of consumer goods in dollars in October and November (annual 17% on average), as well as from portfolio and interest rate data addressed to this item (in the fourth quarter, the annual growth in the consumer credit balance was nearly 22%).
Although the foreseeable reduction in the growth rate of food prices in the coming months must contribute to attenuate the increase of total inflation, it is very unlikely that with the current monetary policy stance the speed of its reduction be enough to face this challenge successfully.
This plan was well-received by the markets, boosting agents’ confidence.
With respect to the international trading accounts, exports slowed down in annual terms in comparison to the second quarter (1.9% vs8%) due to several supply shocks in mining production that substantially affected foreign sales.
According to its statement, this decision was reached due to the increased uncertainty in the international outlook and lower-than-expected inflationary pressures.
During the month, international organizations such as the IMF and the World Bank forecast negative global economic growth in 2009.
Thus, the Colombian economy would receive an additional boost next year generated by a stronger external demand Consistent with a greater global demand and a lower growth of global production of crude oil, the price of oil is expected to remain at current levels, which would continue driving the recovery in the country’s terms of trade for the rest of the year.
This was favored by the low interest rates and wide availability of credit.
International prices for food, raw materials and oil continue to falling and could have a significant impact on total inflation, depending on the performance of the exchange rate and on the country’s trade policy.
This is corroborated by expectations within the business community, which are still relatively high.
The risks of the international crisis over the financing of the balance of payments constitute an additional argument to be cautious in the adoption of the monetary policy.
However, the rise in raw material prices, the increase in domestic demand and the improvement in economic performance worldwide suggest this trend will not intensify.
This situation makes it possible to foresee lower pressures on inflation for the next few months.With respect to inflation expectations, according to the monthly survey done of analysts in financial entities, the inflation expected for December of this year is 3.0% and, in twelve months, 3.2%.
Compared to the month before, those derived from 2 and 3 year paper declined while the 5-year ones rose GrowthThe latest information available indicates that some areas of domestic demand were expanding at a moderately positive rate in the third quarter.
The annual growth rate for this variable went from 15.12% to 15.10% between October 2012 and January 2013.
The loan portfolio in national currency climbed from 12.90% in August to 13.18% in September and that in foreign currency went from 30.91% to 27.25% during the same period.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households registered an annual growth in September of 12.80%, which is lower than the growth in the previous month (13.19%).
It had been 3.4% in December of the previous year and, since February 2011 (at 3.0%), has continued to rise interruptedly.
The slowdown in the mortgage portfolio, in turn, has been less accentuated with variation rates of 16.4% and 15.6% in the same period.The real interest rates (discounting the CPI excluding food) for the October disbursements for consumer, mortgage, and ordinary and preferential commercial loans were at 15.6%, 9.9%, 9.0%, and 5.6% respectively.
With respect to the indicators for core inflation, the average went from 2.34% in October to 2.41% in November.
This fact, coupled with weak economic growth, has allowed central banks, especially those in the developed economies, to maintain a highly expansive monetary policy.
As the discussion developed the following points stood out: i) the fall in the pace of price growth over the month which was more than what the market and the Bank’s technical work expected; ii) the continuous decline in core inflation indicators and in inflation expectations that are in the target range fixed by the Board of Directors for the upcoming year; iii) the reduction in price growth was generalized again; iv) the transitory effect the “El Niño” phenomenon could have on price growth; v) the improvement in the growth of producer and consumer confidence indicators; vi) the recovery of M3 and especially, liabilities subject to reserve requirement; vii) the financial system portfolio in legal currency which, although it continues to fall, is growing more than the nominal GDP; viii) the issuing of bonds that has complemented the productive sector’s financing; ix) the behavior of the market interest rates in response to the lowering of the Bank’s benchmark rate; x) the slowdown in the growth of the Venezuelan economy this year and the outlook for 2010; xi) the effect of the exchange rate on inflation and the growth of the product of the tradable sectors; xii) the performance of the interest rates for public debt securities.
Others believe any further increase in the benchmark rate is unnecessary, considering the time it takes monetary policy to have an effect.
(viii) The performance of loans and growth of asset value could be due to structural factors and not only to a low interest rate.
The first is the slow but steady recovery in imports of capital goods, particularly for industry.
As long as this does not happen, the greater financing needs of the industrialized economies could generate a rise in world interest rates.
The decline in demand that began in the United States and in several European economies spread to other regions of the globe.
This trend persists because essential items like rents, education, and personal services, among others, tend to adjust in line with observed inflation and wage increments.The different metrics used to gauge inflation expectations continued to drop, indicating an overall downward trajectory for inflation.
In spite of the above, the international markets continue to show a high aversion to risk due to the situation in Europe.
Commercial credit is showing signs of more momentum, as confirmed by larger disbursements.
Household consumption will have grown at rates that are similar to its historical average.
Added to this is the emergence of new inflation pressure originating with high oil and food prices and uncertainty about the future of Colombian exports to Venezuela.
The slowdown in the basket for regulated prices (a fall of 48 bp compared to October) was due to a correction in the fees for electricity in Cali after a sharp rise that was registered two months ago.
Conversely, services such as health, transportation, and recreation, among others, have continued to push inflation upwards, which was reflected in the 47 bps increase in core inflation excluding food and regulated items seen in March.
For developed economies as well as for many countries which are importers of raw materials, these lower prices must result in a decrease in their inflation in the short term.
All these rates are below their respective historical averages calculated since 2000.
Particularly, annual growth for consumption goods imports was 21%, for intermediate goods was 29%, and for capital goods was 46%.
The annual variation in prices for non-tradable goods excluding food and regulated goods rose from 4.7% in July to 4.9% in August.
By June, the annual increase in total exports was 11.7%, as opposed to 30% the month before.
This could suggest growth in the sector would have contracted less during July than in previous months.Oil production surpassed one million barrels per day (1.002 Mbd) in July, up from 974,000 in June.
They outlined their support for the eventual normalization of monetary policy but suggested that continued uncertainty on a variety of economic fronts created a need for more information prior to modifying the current monetary policy stance.Among the arguments supporting their position, this group of board members highlighted that the output gap remains in negative territory and that gross domestic product has not yet returned to 2019 levels.
The same survey shows the willingness to purchase housing and durable goods remains higher than at the start of the year.
Most of the downward pressure originated with the COP200 cut in the price of gasoline when tax reform took effect.
They highlighted the importance of continuing to adjust monetary policy to moderate the increase in inflation expectations and prevent second-order effects.
No growth in industry is anticipated, partly because of a temporary supply shock in the petroleum derivatives sector and fewer business days in April (due to Easter Week)Bank deposits increased at less of an annual rate during the second quarter of 2014.
This revision is explained, in part, by the actual behavior of the world economy and private spending, which have been weaker than expected    Financial VariablesIn June, bank lending (/ and F/C) posted an annual increase of 14.06%, which is similar to the growth observed in recent months.
The variation in the producer price index (PPI) increased at an annual 6.6% rate against 5.2% in August.
The component for current economic conditions, as well as that for expectations, fell.
This comes from the indicators such as retail sales published by DANE that show that it grew at an annual rate of 6.6% in October and at 4.5% excluding vehicle sales.
However, in the aggregate, economic activity continues at higher levels than those that would have been observed had the pre-pandemic growth trend continued.
It is estimated that in 2015 the deficit and its financing be lower, partly as a result of an expected reduction in direct foreign investment (especially in oil), and by a less dynamic portfolio investment.As for the domestic context, the new data for the fourth quarter of 2014 suggest that domestic demand continued to be dynamic, and that the net exports would have subtracted more than was expected to the output.
Total exports in dollars (CIIU classification) declined 18.5% during the year to date at September 2009 with respect to the same period in 2008.
This was due to the upsurge in the national currency component (from 12.76% in December to 12.92% in January) and the slowdown in the foreign currency component (from 1.30% to -0.04%).The interest rates for the loans disbursed by credit establishments since the beginning of the cuts in the benchmark rate in July 2012 have accumulated reductions of -213 bp for mortgages, -144 bp for consumer loans, and -236 bp for construction loans.The size of the decline in the real interest rates has been lower due to the effect of the lower inflation rate.
The reduced figures for growth in industry, commerce and works during the first quarter would have been offset, in part, by better performance in the agricultural, mining and financial sectors.
Less of an annual variation in items with “low indexing,” particularly personal services, was a highlight.
Although the increase in inflation expectations has moderated, the levels remain high.
(i) The global economy is expanding at a moderate rate and its short term strength has changed a little with respect to what has been seen in previous quarters.
Non-traditional exports to the rest of the world rose by 0.4%.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on August 21, 2015.
Specifically, those related to the demand pointed to private consumption continuing to have the favorable momentum that has been seen for the last two quarters.
In the case of China, the reduction in growth was accentuated by monetary policy measures intended to lessen internal demand as a way to prevent inflationary pressures.
The FED reduced their purchases of financial assets again.
The available information suggests that, as happened last month, part of the observed increase in consumer prices was due to the impact of the tax reform (by the change in the VAT, the green tax, and the Liquor Act).Measures of inflation expectations by economic analysts to December 2017 and to 12 and 24 months lowered, as those embedded in public debt bonds to 2, 3, and 5 years.Regarding the external context, the most recent indicators for the advanced economies suggest improvement of their activity.
In this regard, the most significant risks derive from the existence of several indexation mechanisms for prices and salaries, and the probable effects of the changes in the US and Europe's monetary policy on the exchange rate and the conditions for external financing of the economy.
(iii) The past three months saw an increase in inflation expectations, which continued during February, even though the outcome for inflation the month before was what the market expected.
The prices of other commodities have also fallen.
With the current information, the Board believes that this increase is consistent with the convergence of inflation to the 3.0% target DECISIONThe Board of Directors of Banco de la República unanimously decided to increase the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp to 4.75%.Updated: 14/10/2015 14:28
The possibly transitory character of the performance of public works projects as well as the limited information available for the second quarter does not permit the consideration of any important change in the growth forecast for 2011.
Prices for coffee and nickel rose again last month.
2 and 3-year expectations remained below this figure in a slowdown trend.
iii) Keep the benchmark rate as it is while waiting for information that confirms the new projections and announcing that the Board will not be making increases in the benchmark interest rate in the near future.
Furthermore, international prices for oil, food and other commodities are at record highs and have led to prices increases for consumers in many countries.
Nevertheless, although it is probable that the risks from advanced economies are now lower than before, those from some of the emerging economies may be rising.
Different measures of the trends of debt portfolio suggest that by the end of the year its growth will be around 18%.
Inflation excluding food remained stable (2.9%).
Interest on the 10-year bond was 8.9%, which is 42 bp more than the rate posted on January 28.
In this group, the main contribution to the slowdown originated with perishable foods, reversing part of the upward shock caused by the first wave of winter weather.
The annual variation in the prices for non-tradable goods excluding food and regulated prices rose 33 bp and came to 3.83% in June.
The growth of the large emerging economies in Asia and Latin America was varied with rates that were close to or lower than their potential.
In the case of imported food, recoveries in the prices for soybeans, corn, and wheat have been seen in the last few weeks.Inflation in the main developed economies, in turn, remained at a relatively low level.
Exchange rate depreciation has been greater in the emerging economies that have large current account deficits financed with short-term foreign borrowing and high inflation rates.
Several members of the Board stated that inflationary pressure could be emerging from the upsurge in demand.
The directors reiterated their view that the current account deficit continues to reflect Colombia's reduced financing needs and emphasized the International Monetary Fund's decision to expand its flexible credit line for the country, strengthening the availability of external liquidity amid a high degree of uncertainty in the global economy.The directors expressed their concern over an upsurge in -19 cases in numerous countries, most notably in Europe, and suggested that recent pandemic dynamics had added an additional degree of uncertainty to economic policy in general and monetary policy in particular.In considering the balance of risks, the BDBR unanimously decided to maintain its benchmark interest rate at 1.75%.The board emphasized that future decisions will depend on the evolution of macroeconomic variables and of the risk factors mentioned above.
This is in line with what was registered in the second quarter (-1.9%) and a recovery for 2011 that is barely starting.
These levels are still higher than the historical average registered in the country.The reduction in the current account deficit and the slowdown of the Colombian economy reflect the adjustment required in the economy due to the negative shock to national income that the country has been facing since 2014.
In the specific case of the euro zone, total and core inflation have been declining for several quarters and, in December, they were below 1%.
(v) The measurements of core inflation continue to rise and the majority are surpassing 3%.
Another item that presented a decline during the month was that of meals away from home (from 3.7% to 3.3% annually).
This indicator rose at annual rates of -16.5% and signals to a poor start to the year for consumer durables.The favorable news during the first month of 2013 includes an increase in oil production to 1,012,000 barrels per day (BD).
A healthy financial system, household confidence and a dynamic job market will continue to support the rise in consumption.
In the first place, imports of capital goods in dollars grew 40.5% on average in October and November and, secondly, because cement production in November maintained a dynamic behavior with annual growths higher than 10%.
As a consequence, the risks of lower growth in the world economy have risen, and ii) the problems of sovereign debt in Europe and the debate about the debt ceiling in the United States sharply increased uncertainty and volatility in the international financial markets.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicatook place in the city of Bogotá on Tuesday, March 20, 2018.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Enrique Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.
For 2011, macroeconomic conditions continue to support an important economic growth.
(viii) The different interest rate levels, except those for credit cards, stand at values below the past 15 years’ averages.
(ii) The rising trend witnessed in terms of trade up to 2011 was interrupted in 2012, the year when terms of trade remained stable.
(viii) The difference between the benchmark rates in Colombia and the United States has increased by 200 b since September 2007.
Therefore, this might suggest that this tendency may continue in the second quarter.
In contrast, increases were observed in the inflation of regulated items resulting from heightened gasoline prices, as well as the inflation rate of services.
However, in the last few days there has been a slight uptick due to some law and order problems in Lybia.
As per basic product prices, industrial activity deceleration worldwide has slowed down the demand for these goods in such a way, that in the past few weeks a decrease has been seen in the international quotation of prices for some, particularly oil, copper and coal.
Expectations within the business community have improved, and there is more growth in private consumption.
This behavior was determined by the commercial loan portfolio, the growth of which stood at 15.9%, this rate being 160 bp less than in the previous month, and adding a 745 bp deceleration in the past nine months.
In attendance were Alberto Carrasquilla Barrera, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, and Carolina Soto.The main monetary policy discussions considered by the Board are summarized as follows:1.
(vii) Annual inflation rose in February for the third consecutive month and was at 2.32% which is within the target range.
In this context and without inflationary pressures, one can expect the external interest rate to remain low for a prolonged period of time.
They are of the opinion that monetary policy effectiveness lies on the authorities’ anticipation ability; therefore, in this scenario, a stance relaxation phase must be undertaken in order to prevent drastic adjustments in the future.
Energy related mining showed positive growth in petroleum production while coal production was affected by labor problems and environmental penalties.
In public works, there were large reductions in investment in mining and in highway and other road construction.
This slight drop may be associated with the exchange-rate appreciation witnessed since the start of the year.At the same time, non-tradables excluding food and regulated items stayed at 3.7%.
These board members also expect loose financial conditions to persist for some time, in line with recent Fed and ECB announcements.One of these board members further underlined that a significant cause of the observed increase in inflation has been in higher costs due to readjustments in production chains and domestic and international transportation, and that an increase in the interest rate would not be very effective in addressing these issues.
As expected, both the default portfolio and liability provisions have increased as certain debt relief measures have been withdrawn, though this has come without risk to the stability of the financial system.Despite improvement on several counts, significant economic uncertainty persists.
The figures available up to the first quarter of 2011 suggest growth will continue throughout the year, but at a more moderate pace.
The situation with respect to inflation, economic growth and prospects for the future was discussed, and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
(v) The reduction in the use of installed industrial capacity is obvious, as is the drop in the industrial confidence index, the slowdown in the demand for energy, consumer durables and housing, the downturn in the demand for household loans and the decline in the loan portfolio, especially retail credit.
This is 13 basis points (bp) more than in December.
According to the Coffee Federation, coffee production will probably have grown in the third quarter at a rate that is slightly above 20% annually.
In the last few months, household credit has slowed, but keeps increasing at rates that exceed inflation and growth of nominal GDP.
As a result of the increase in arrears of mortgage credit and seizure of housing, the prices of housing continued to reduce in April and could continue doing so in the following trimesters.
By contrast, coffee and oil production continued to fall.Thus, given the slowdown that the Colombian economy has been experiencing and the negative effects of the trucking strike (which would not be fully offset in some sectors in the following months), economic growth in the third quarter is likely to be lower than in the second.On the other hand, according to the figures of the balance of payments for the first half of the year, the current account deficit relative to GDP was 4.8%, , 1.5 percentage points less than the one observed in the same period of 2015.
Given the high correlation between this indicator and total household consumption, the figure for January suggests this demand still continues to grow at a rate below the historic average.
On the other hand, expected total consumption is 15% higher than that observed for 2019.According to the most recent data, employment levels are significantly higher than those that preceded the pandemic and have been on the rise for all sectors, especially the formal sector.
The annual variation in food prices went from -0.3% in December to - 0.5% in January.
The decisions on wages and other prices at the beginning of 2012 will be made in the context of a supply shock with inflation below but close to 4% and a tight labor market.
Meanwhile, the emerging economies are still the engine of worldwide growth although they are not free from risk.
This average has been fluctuating between 3.00% and 3.15% since November last year.
Consequently, they pointed out that, despite the recent reduction in inflation, the latter continues to register a significantly high level, in contrast with the substantial inflation reductions recently experienced in advanced countries and comparable Latin American economies.
Likewise, the rise in construction permits and the strength of mortgage loans also support better performance in construction.
It was noted that the sharp devaluation in Latin American currencies at the start of 209 has been corrected.
The growth in some emerging economies, in turn, slowed down with respect to what was registered in 2012.In the United States, preliminary data for the fourth quarter of 2013 show positive growth led by private consumption and exports.
Loan portfolio quality indicators declined, particularly for consumer loans.
The sectors that contributed the most to annual GDP growth in the second quarter were the financial (4.3%), mining (10.2%) and public works construction (40.5%).
Compared to the first quarter, the second posted an increase of 0.7%.
In a context of low inflationary pressures, weak demand and the perception of risk in view of the European situation, monetary authorities in the United States announced they would keep interest rates low until at least 2015.
The negative behavior of the industry and commerce, the increase of its stock, and the reduction in the level of its orders, as well as the deterioration of the confidence indexes, the wilting of investment expectations and the feeling of consumers confirm the aforesaid.
The slowdown in external borrowing continued during March and April.
The long-term rates on bonds of the advanced and emerging economies have risen, starting from a low level.
Accordingly, the tensions on government bond markets for Spanish and Italian debt have very much subsided.
Just like in the previous month, what contributed the most to this drop was price variation in perishable foods, with potatoes and fruits exhibiting absolute price falls.
However, decisions on spending cuts in social security and defense, as well as the definition of certain federal budget items, were postponed until March.
(ii) The interest rates for American Treasury bonds have been relatively stable but at levels that are higher than the ones seen before May, the month when a possible reduction in the monetary stimulus on the part of the Fed was announced.
In the case of the emerging economies, pressures upon prices may lessen more slowly, thus making it harder to predict falls in the interest rates.
On the other hand, the mortgage portfolio exhibited an annual 16.9% growth in May.
With preliminary data for April, the inflation expectations derived from public debt negotiations for 1, 5 and 10 years declined and stood at 2.61%, 3.91% and 4.18% with drops of 105 bp, 78 bp and 29 bp respectively.
Conversely, if the global environment deteriorates further, central banks in this group of countries could implement better encouragement measures.
Lending to households (consumer and mortgage loans) also grew less, but at rates superior to those of nominal GDP.
At the same time, economic growth has slowed.
The majority of the nominal interest rates for loans declined over the month.
Going forward, no rise in these terms is expected in a scenario of dilatory recovery of the global economy and better conditions expected in the global supply of petroleum.
Regulated price inflation went from 8.8% in June to 9.5% in July, mainly because of fuel and transportation.
Mr. Óscar Iván Zuluaga, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Inflation, economic growth and their prospects for the future were discussed and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
The annual increase in the price of tradables, excluding food and regulated goods and services, dropped from 1.9% in November to 1.4% in December.
On the supply side, the problems with weather since -2010 and recent political events have contributed to the increase in these prices.
It also was emphasized that the outlook for the world economy remains negative.
However, should the depreciation persist, this could be transmitted to a greater extent to internal prices, generating greater inflation expectations.In summary, aggregate demand continues to show a strong growth in a context close to the full use of the productive capacity.
Likewise, there are signs of persistence of inflation and the activation of indexation mechanisms, and the risk of an additional pass-through of depreciation to domestic prices cannot be disregarded, particularly considering the Fed's monetary policy stance.
They emphasize domestic risks stemming from the rising likelihood of a strongEl Niñophenomenon, which could impact agricultural and energy markets.
Industry’s demand for non-regulated energy continued growing quite dynamically in March (22.1% compared to 15.2% in February).
In the United States, the indicators showed stability.
A number of indicators confirm the slowdown in the U economy.
The gross loan portfolio in domestic currency continued to slow, registering an annual increase of 5.1% by November 6 compared to 7.3% the month before.
(iii) The international price for petroleum remains at high levels and the price for Colombian coffee has surpassed the average registered for 2013.
The measurements done through surveys show less pronounced increases.
Moreover, expectations within the business community (industrialists and merchants) regarding the performance of the economy in the coming months remained relatively high.
This shows an upsurge in comparison to 5.2% for the second quarter and 4.3% for the first semester.
The annual variation in eating was down again, although slightly, reaching 4.9%Within the non-food CPI, the regulated sub-basket posted an annual variation of 1.9% (88 bp less than in November).
With respect to investment, the poor result from public works projects implies a significant slowdown in the investment in fixed capital.
The indicators for orders and inventory show deterioration in the sector, as expectations for production three months out.Several of the figures for commerce and construction suggest slowdowns in these sectors as well.
Although wage adjustments had tended to be compatible with the inflation target up until December, the 5.8% raise in the minimum wage for 2012 increased the risk that pressure from the cost of wages would arise.
On its side, the GDP without foods stood at 3.13%, which means 10 bp more than in November and 31 bp above December’s GDP in the previous year.
For 2013, growth similar to that of 2012 is projected Financial Variables Total credit in national and foreign currencies (“MN” and “ME” credit) recorded in June an annual increase of 17.15%, this percentage being lower by 53 bp in the previous month and 254 bp in the previous quarter.
Given the recent decline in inflation expectations, they emphasize that a 25-bps reduction in the policy rate maintains the real interest rate largely unchanged.
Recent Developments in Inflation:Consumer inflation in April was 2.02% which is 10 basis points (bp) above what was seen in March.
This has generated a degree of calm in the financial markets, which has been reflected in stability in the risk perception of the emerging economies.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target  AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed that the information published since the previous meeting of the Board of Directors shows that deterioration of the productive activity has been more pronounced than had been anticipated.
The average of core inflation indicators fell below the 3.0% target for the sixth consecutive month.
Recession in Europe is likely to be worse than anticipated months ago.
On the other hand, although some inflationary pressures have declined recently, there are still elements out there that add to the risk of higher increases in the general level of prices.
As a result, the pace of consumption observed in the second quarter is expected to continue.
This was the case when the industrial production index excluding coffee threshing fell 3.9% annually in August (in July, it had grown 0.2%) while there was significant growth in coffee threshing (it rose 12.7% annually in August and 15.1% in July).
Investment without works was the most dynamic component of internal demand, having risen substantially by almost 17% in the second quarter, which is very similar to the rate observed during the first quarter.
Sectoral performance has been irregular, with stagnation or decline in primary and secondary sectors and growth in the tertiary sector.
The entrepreneur and consumer confidence indices remain depressed, while sentiment indices in the manufacturing and service sectors have worsened.
The orders indicator, based on the same survey, has been at a standstill for several months.
In the Euro Zone, in turn, the differences between the countries with low levels of debt that are growing well, led by Germany, and the countries with high levels of debt that are virtually stagnant are becoming deeper.
Other supplies, perishable as well as processed, continue to present yearly adjustments of very high and increasing prices.
Regarding employment, DANE information as of August suggests that growth in labor demand was higher than labor supply.
The forecasts indicate domestic spending will keep growing at a good pace, accompanied by a slower than projected recovery in external demand.
According to estimations, in 2015 the economy would slow down, and the GDP would present a rate of increase of around 4.3%, within an interval between 3.0% and 5.3%.The new product gap estimations for 2014 indicate that this would be slightly positive and more closed that the forecast performed in the last quarter.
Mr. Juan Carlos Echeverry, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Full-time Board Members in Attendance: Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Cesar Vallejo The situation with respect to inflation and economic growth was discussed, as were their prospects for the future, and decisions on monetary policy were reached.
This, however, continues to reflect an accelerationvis-à-vis2017.
On the supply side, the indicators available for industry continue to reflect weak performance.
This dynamism responds to the strengthening of domestic demand driven by household consumption, which expanded by 12.0% annually for that period.
The board members’ main points of discussion and analysis focused on the following aspects: (i) the inflation projections for 2010 and 2011, (ii) the change in the prices for tradable goods, (iii) the lagged effect of the monetary policy measures on production and prices, (iv) the growth projections for the economy and employment for 2010 and 2011, (v) the rise in consumer confidence and the performance of investment, (vi) the recent momentum in the financial system portfolio, (vii) the upswing in the prices for financial assets and housing, (viii) the drop in inflation expectations, (ix) the recent trend for capital flows, (x) the performance of public debt securities, (xi) the balance of risks between growth and inflation in the context of an economy that is recovering and an inflation that is in the lower half of the long term target range, and (xii) the need to maintain the credibility of the monetary authority and anchor inflation expectations around the long term target, (xiii) the growth data and projections for the worldwide economy.
The generalized reduction in price increases compared to other months when reductions were due fundamentally to lower food and regulated prices.
This increase was above the expectations of the technical staff and the market.
For example, in Latin America, the annual decline in Mexico’s GDP was 8.2%.
The percentage derived from the monthly survey of the expectations of financial market analysts was 2.85% and 2.90% for the end of the year and for a horizon of 12 months from now respectively.
On those same dates, the annual increase in consumer lending went from 0.6% to 1.5% and from 9.3% to 4% for commercial loans.
Viewed at the margin, the sample median drawn from Banco de la República’s monthly survey of economic analysts between March and April maintained their one- and two-year inflation expectations stable at 4.6% and 3.5%, respectively.
There are some symptoms of a recovery in some of the economies on the periphery although it is still at a very slow pace.
Although other industry indicators showed slight deteriorations with respect to the previous month, when an analysis of the trends is done, one sees that its long term components could be stabilizing.
A reduction in the loan portfolio in foreign currency explains this trend, since direct borrowing by the private sector increased 5% (in March) with respect to the same month in 2008.
In their opinion, the figures of economic activity were still very weak, with no evidence of recovery.
For all of 2014, the growth range for output remains between 3.3% and 5.3% with 4.3% being the most probable figure Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) registered an annual growth rate of 12.8% in March, which is slightly higher than the level seen in the previous month (12.4%).
These groups represent 54.2% of the consumer basketAccording to the survey applied to financial analysts, inflation expectations are at 4.50% to twelve months and 3.68% to twenty-four months, figures slightly lower than the data from the previous month (4.63% and 3.83%, respectively).
On January 28, Banco de la República's board of directors (BDBR) voted 5-2 to approve a 100-basis point increase to the benchmark interest rate, bringing it to 4.0%; two dissenting members voted for a 75-point increase.The decision took into account the following considerations:Both headline and core inflation closed the year above expectations and on upward trajectories.Inflation expectations are high and also ended the year on an upward trajectory.
The rise in inflation, primarily due to higher food prices as a result of the weather, will be temporary.
This has taken place together with interest rates (for trade and consumption), which in real terms continue at levels below their historic averages (excepting credit cards).13.Regarding prices, inflation decreased in May, reaching 4.41%, a figure lower than had been forecast by the market average and the technical staff at the Central Bank.
With respect to the emerging market economies, most of the central banks have not changed their intervention rates.The risk premiums of the Latin American countries have remained relatively stable due to currently good conditions in the region.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target  AND OPTIONSThe Board Members emphasized that inflation has continued to fall.
By components, the increase in the current account deficit (USD $127 m) was explained by higher net outflows of factor income (USD $1,248 m) and, to a lesser extent, by non-factor services (USD $125 m).
However, this trend was reversed in the last few days, despite the increase in the Fed’s interest rate.
(vi) Annual inflation in June (2.16%) and average core inflation (2.5%) were slightly higher than in May.
However, it is important to bear in mind that the supply shock caused by temporary closure of the Cartagena refinery could explain part of the growth in this deficit.On the domestic front, new information at the close of June suggests second-quarter growth would be in line with the forecast presented in the last quarterly report on inflation.
The commercial loan portfolio, in turn, presented a slight recovery in its annual growth during April (13.5% compared to 13.2% in March).
For 2015, the most likely outcome remains at 2.8%, within a range from 1.8% to 3.4%.10.In July, annual inflation increased slightly and stood at 4.46%, somewhat higher than estimated by the technical staff and by the market average.
The monthly slowdown was led by the commercial portfolio, the annual increase of which declined 132 bp by shifting from 15.56% to 14.24% between July and August.
The average of core inflation completed one semester increasing, reaching 3.65%.14.Inflation expectations by market analysts and those derived from public debt bonds to 2, 3, and 5 years are within a range of 3.1% and 3.6%.In all, the slowdown that started by the end of 2014 from an output level that was close to the full use of productive capacity is expected to continue in 2015.
This is US$737 million (m) less than the deficit posted during the same period in 2008.
Recent economic forces at work may have led to an increase in the output gap.
In line with the abovementioned, the balance of sales in the Banco de la Republica’s Monthly Survey of Economic Expectations (EMEE in Spanish) shows that the merchants saw a slightly better demand in October and November than was seen in the third quarter.
Overall, net exports contributed negatively (-2.2%) to GDP growth.
Recent announcements helped to partially reduce these surges.
With the recent increases in the benchmark interest rate, the market rates are expected to approach their historical averages more rapidly and inflation expectations to converge towards the -point of the target range.
If this tendency continues it will be especially damaging for commodity exporting countries, as it will affect their terms of trade and, in doing so, their GDP Financial Variables There were no changes during May in the tendencies of the major monetary aggregates.
In both cases, the latest data shows levels that are lower than what their potential is estimated to be.
This posture is justified by the negative effects of external productive and financial shocks on aggregate demand and somewhat by the precarious recovery in some of the confidence and expectation indicators.
On the other hand, international commodity prices have increased in recent months because of supply and demand factors.
For 2012, the forecast interval remained between 4% and 6%.
Consequently, they concur on the desirability of commencing a process to gradually lower the intervention interest rate as soon as it is prudent.In this particular context, five Directors voted to keep the intervention rate steady at its current level of 13.25%, and two Directors voted in favor of a 25 basis points reduction that would bring the rate to 13%.
The cumulative 12- month increase in total exports is 21.1%.
The inflation expectations detected in the quarterly and monthly surveys conducted by the Central Bank at the beginning of July continue to show declines and are situated within the long-term target range set by the Board of Directors.
The policy rate has been lowered 200 bp since December of 2016, and it is possibly in a position close to neutral.
This better- than-expected performance is largely the result of the indicator for works and coffee production.
As for demand, household consumption continues to increase and confidence has recovered.
In contrast, non-salary costs saw a reduction in January when the significant decline in the annual change in the PPI to 3.7% in comparison to the 5.5% in December is taken into account.
Overall, this group of Directors holds to the expectation of accommodating greater policy rate reductions in the coming months as current uncertainty sources dissipate.The Board members who voted for a 50-bps reduction noted that the contractionary monetary policy stance implemented since September 2021 has been generating the necessary macroeconomic adjustment, as evidenced by the slowdown of aggregate demand to levels compatible with productive capacity, resulting from the deceleration of consumption and the sharp decline in investment.
The annual increase in prices for tradable goods, excluding food and regulated prices, went from 2.78% in June to 3.0% in July.
For the year elapsed as of August, the CPI accumulated a 2.64% increase, this being a little higher than the one recorded in the same period of the previous year.
Nominal growth in the commercial loan portfolio was 18.5% by July 15, having declined with respect to the increase in May and June.
(iii) Interpretation of the shocks that investment suffered in the second half of 2012 is complex and could be due to multiple factors as can be seen from the fact that all of the components of this aggregate showed a slowdown in the second half of the year.
As a matter of fact, the price rise for food was 6.63% in contrast with 1.69% and 1.64% during the same period in 2009 and 2010 respectively.
Interest rates are staying at levels that stimulate the economy’s aggregate expenditures.The members of the Board agreed that it would be appropriate to keep the benchmark interest rate unchanged.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook of the technical staff of the Central Bank on the macroeconomic situation (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).A moredetailed description of the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff will be presented in the Inflation Report for the second quarter of 2015 and in the statistical annex CONTEXT1.The new data for global economic activity suggest that the average growth of Colombia's trade partners for 2015 could be somewhat lower than estimated in the previous quarterly report (1.3%).
All of this translates into less international trade.
Venezuela, the most important market for Colombian industrial exports, surely will experience serious devaluation this year due to its fiscal and exchange imbalances, and a drop in growth from 5.5% in 2012 to 2.5% in 2013.
There have been reductions during this same period of: -182 bp for mortgage loans,  -171 bp for consumer loans, and -188 bp for construction loans.The levels of real interest rates for consumer loans, mortgages, preferential loans, ordinary commercial ones and commercial lines of credit as well as loans for construction in September were below their historical averages as calculated since 2000.
Investment in construction, both buildings and works, also is expected to grow considerably, as indicated by cement sales and building permits for March.
In line with this, the sales balance from the Banco de la Republica’s Monthly Survey of Economic Expectations (EMEE in Spanish) shows that the merchants saw a slightly higher demand in January and February than what was seen in the fourth quarter of 2013.
Processed-food inflation was at about the same level registered in January.
The above mentioned indicators with information up to the third quarter confirmed the forecast given in the last Report on Inflation when an annual expansion of the economy was projected to be between 6% and 7% for that period.
Real interest rates (deflated by the CPI without food) also exhibited a generalized reduction in January and particularly in February.
The growth of Germany to the end of 2014 turned out better than had been forecast, and in January the confidence and industry indicators of the euro zone showed positive trends.
In May, the annual variation of the PPI declined from 1.56% to 0.80%, and kept on declining since the fall commencing last October.
Vis-à-vis the previous report, the forecast suggests a more dynamic domestic demand with a faster closing of the output gap.
The drop in this variable is particularly dramatic in Japan, where the annual decline was around 48% in February.
If these forecasts take place, in 2015 external demand for Colombia would grow at a lower rate, somewhat below the one for 2014The lower international prices of oil and other commodities have pressured world inflation downward.
In spite of this, the expansion rate across the region remains very low (-0.7% annually in the second quarter of 2013) and the weakness persists since the labor markets are still vulnerable and credit has not shown signs of recovery yet.In the United States, the economic expansion continues at a modest rate.
The latter were 3.4% for different horizons.
This could have an important effect on total inflation in the next few months, depending on how the exchange rate performs.
The information at hand confirms there is every indication at the beginning of 2013 that the recession in Europe would be more prolonged.
In a context where there is a high current account deficit in the balance of payments which reflects an excess of expenditure over revenue, the additional effects of the supply shocks reinforce the need to act now with a 50 bp increase in the interest rate.
In this context, the long-term interest rates in said countries have lowered and continue at low levelsAppreciation of the US dollar vis-à-vis the majority of currencies has partially reversed.
Thus, the interest rates for loans to households and businesses are at historically low levels.
By February, it annual rate of industrial production was down by more than 45% and the level that month was lower than any other registered during the last two decades.
If the most likely growth forecasts take place, the output gap could be positive in 2014 and may become slightly negative in the present year (which had previously been estimated as positive).Regarding prices, inflation posted at 3.66% in December 2014, a number similar to the forecast by Banco de la República's technical staff, and which is 80 basic points (bp) above that of September.
Therefore, it is still reasonable to expect good growth in private consumption during the first quarter of 2011.
Moreover, the export and import levels accumulated in the first half of 2009 are less than those registered during the same period in 2008, but more than the levels reported between January and June 2007.
Medium and long-term government bonds valuated -22bp and -36 bp, respectively, during the four- week period ended March 16 AND The following points were emphasized by the Board of Directors during its deliberations: The February figure for inflation, which was less than the rate forecast by the Central Bank’s technical team and by the market concerning many of the sub-baskets in the consumer price index The drop in core inflation indicators, following the increase in January The temporary effect El Niño weather might have on price hikes The outcome for growth in 2009 as a whole and during the final quarter, which exceeded the technical team’s forecast Available indicators of economic activity in January and February 2010, particularly those concerning retail sales and the demand for energy, which suggest faster first-quarter recovery than anticipated The expectations of industrialists and merchants with respect to economic performance in the coming months, which remain high The increase in monetary aggregates at rates between 7% and 8% The peso loan portfolio in the financial system, which continues to grow more than nominal GDP The performance of market interest rates in response to the decline in the Central Bank’s benchmark rate The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and on output growth in the tradable sectors Interest rates on government bonds, which dropped in the case of medium and long-term bonds.
As for investment in building construction and works, lower growth rates are anticipated compared to those observed during the first quarter.There was some recovery in the amount of total exports in dollars during April and May, but annual growth in this respect remains negative (-2.5% in May).
The adjustment in the prices for processed foods, in turn, (-0.2% annually) stayed in negative territory with no significant changes while the meals away from home component remained stable (3.3% annually).The main upward pressures in the CPI excluding food came from the groups of regulated items and tradables.
This upside adjustment, driven by enduring global inflation pressures, tightens financing conditions for the Colombian economy.
The annual reduction in consumer goods was 6.3% by March 2009, in contrast to 15.7% annual growth in 2008.
With respect to emerging economies, the effects of the European crisis have already begun to affect the major economies in Emerging Asia.
This economy had a growth rate of 7.7% in 2013 (the same as the rate in 2012).
On the other hand, construction of works and buildings is still an item surrounded by a great deal of uncertainty in terms of how it will perform, particularly with respect to spending on works, construction and buildings.Total exports in 2012 (excluding re-exports of airplanes) came to US$ 60,235 million, which represents 5.8% growth compared to 2011.
On the other hand, rises were originated in the processed foods sub-baskets (rice among others) and out-of-home meals.
Similarly, oil prices and workers' remittances have exhibited a recovery trend.
In 2014, the average growth for Colombia's trading partners will be above that recorded in 2013 AND OPTIONSThe board of directors took the following relevant aspects into consideration:(i) There are no major changes in the outlook for worldwide growth in 2014 with respect to the ones described in the recently published Inflation Report.
This is 44 basis points (bp) less than the figure on record for December, a month that also witnessed a significant drop.
Considerable volatility and strong losses in the equity markets have been associated, in large part, with high uncertainty about the fiscal situation of some developed economies; markets are more and more skeptic with respect to the abilities of those affected by fiscal problems to stabilize their public debt.
Public debt securities with maturities of more than one year also rose in price.
The reported annual increase in GDP during the third quarter of 2007 was 6.6%.
On the other hand, inflation expectations derived from the TES yield curve exhibited less change and stayed within a range of 2.3% to 3.1% for different horizons    GrowthThe economic indicators for the second quarter suggest GDP growth will exceed the rate on record for the first three months of the year.
The temporary effect El Niño weather could have on price hikes The rise in consumer and business confidence indicators, which have improved The situation with M3 and liabilities subject to reserve requirements The financial system’s peso loan portfolio, which continues to grow more than nominal GDP Bond issues that have supplemented financing for the productive sector How market interest rates have performed in response to the decline in the Central Bank’s benchmark rate The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and on growth in output in the tradable sectors The performance of interest rates on government bonds The main points analyzed by the Board members centered on: i) the elements that affect the inflation forecasts for 2010, particularly an eventual temporary rebound in food and regulated prices due to El Niño weather; ii) the time it takes monetary policy measures to affect production and prices; iii) economic growth forecasts for 2010; iv) the sharp drop in exports to Venezuela during recent months and the decline in that country’s output; v) the performance of monetary aggregates and how it might affect economic recovery; vii) the recent momentum in the commercial loan portfolio held by the financial system; viii) the risk balance between growth and inflation in a context of economic slowdown and falling inflation; and x) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility and to anchor expectations for inflation to the long-term target.
In April, the annual variation of the PPI remained at 1.6, in this manner consolidating the fall experienced in the previous months.
An interest rate cut that is not credible can affect the exchange market, the government bond market and future expectations of inflation, all of which could make it difficult for the Board to continue to pursue an anti-cyclical monetary policy.
Production and sales of cement, in turn, grew 6.2% and 11.5% respectively in July.In the case of industry, the annual growth of production was slightly positive (0.2%) in July.
Inflation of food in October increased by 38 bp as compared to the previous month, reaching 13.2%.
Despite the expected deceleration, the GDP forecast sets values 12% higher than those observed in 2019, prior to the pandemic.
According to the most recent information from DANE, industry grew at an annual rate of 2.8% in September.
The Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicaraised the policy rate by 50 basis points (bp) thus putting it at 3.0% in a 4-3 majority decision at its December 17 session.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Wednesday, August 31, 2016.
Growth for the year up to July is still in negative territory (it went from -3.4% in June to -2.9% in July).
Finally, inflation expectations derived from the TES curve for 2-, 3-, and 5-year maturities have risen slightly since January to converge at 3.0% GrowthThe indicators available for the last quarter of 2013 suggest that the GDP expanded at a rate that was below the rate registered for the third quarter.
Also, the improvement in the risk indicators of the financial system was also noted.The members of the Board highlighted the consolidation of a broader environment of international liquidity, with which the Colombian economy is not expected to face external funding restrictions, nor increases in risk premia.
This acceleration is explained by the behavior of food, particularly perishable goods.
The same was true of M3, given less growth in liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR), which was related to an increase in government funds on deposit at the Central Bank at the end of April and the beginning of May to cover TES maturities.
In support of this, they expressed doubts about the sustainability of the pace at which domestic demand is picking up due to the reduction in household savings, the sluggishness of investment, the employment recovery lag, and the limits to consumption of durable and semi-durable goods.
Likewise, there was a moderate surge in meals away from home (from 3.08% to 3.26%) in December while in processed foods there was a slight slowdown with respect to the previous month (from -0.10% to -0.24%).The annual change in the CPI excluding food was at 2.36% in December, 15 bp more than it had been the previous month.
On the supply side, the industrial sector excluding coffee processing fell again in October (-0.1%) although at a slower rate than that recorded a month before.
This is the case, for example, for some investment projects in the mining-energy sector which suffered delays this year.
In August, the peso loan portfolio in the financial system maintained a growth rate of 19%, which is similar to what it was in July.
In the United States, real activity indicators have continued to expand, though the last information available evidences some slowdown signs.
In March and the beginning of April, the mortgage portfolio continued growing at a suitable rate (18.6% nominal) and the consumer portfolio maintained a slow recovery with an annual increase of 4.6%.
In June, exports in dollars grew 54% annually, a figure that is higher than the one registered in May (34%).
Several countries in Latin America, such as Brazil and Chile, showed clear signs of recovery and, during the third quarter, a number of countries in the region achieved the GDP levels registered in 2008.
In addition, the steadfast position of core inflation (excluding food and regulated items) persists, which stood at an annual 10.5% in June, a level similar to that observed in the preceding months.
In the case of goods of mining origin, the only item having y p ( p ) p for increased exports of agricultural products lies in the augmented exported values of banana (104%) and flowers (58%) serving to offset the 1.4% reduction in coffee exports Financial Variables In August, total credit in national and foreign currencies (“MN” and “ME” credits) exhibited an annual growth rate of 16.35%, therefore lower by 83 bp and 334 bp than the levels respectively observed in the previous month and in March.
Also, available information shows the productive sector in Colombia is feeling the negative effects of high costs and less demand.
The mortgage loan portfolio is growing at a good pace along with another increase in the new-house price index in March which remains at historically high levels.
Also imports would have exhibited a high growth rate (22.1%) and offset foreign sale dynamics.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the figures in dollars for imports of consumer goods showed an annual growth of 19.9% in January.Total exports, in contrast saw a change of -1.1% in January in comparison to the same month in 2012.
(iv) Accordingly, the Bank’s technical staff kept its forecast for second-quarter growth within a range of 2.5% to 4.0%, with 3.4% being the most likely figure.
The Board of Directors expects interest rates on commercial and household loans to continue to fall.
With the preliminary data available at October 20, inflation expectations based on government bonds negotiated at one, five and 10 years showed variations of 88 bp, 1 bp and -50 bp compared to the average figures for September, and were 3.71%, 4.55% and 4.58%, respectively.
This was due to Easter Week in March and one day less in February.
The most recent information for Europe continues to show a slow recovery, despite the build-up in Germany and England.
(ix) The risks to inflation that come from expectations have eased somewhat.
In this sub-basket, reductions or rare rises in the prices of imported goods such as cars, electrical appliances, electronic and communication devices, as well as airline tickets, etc.
Credit continues to contract and financial fragmentation is still affecting the most vulnerable economies in the region.In the case of Japan, the strong stimulus provided by the monetary policy is beginning to manifest itself in the positive indicators of economic activity in that country.
In this they were partly influenced by the good terms of trade, (iii) the information available so far, including the data on GDP growth (5.1%), suggests that the output gap will close in the second half of the year, (iv) the growth of credit continues to climb.
The decline in export value for traditional items (US$2.690b) was due mainly to coffee (-22.5%), crude oil and petroleum derivatives (-40.0%) and ferronickel (-39.4%).
Another member of the Board also considered it appropriate to raise the Bank’s benchmark rate by 25 basis points in order to ensure a positive level in real terms.
This increases the risk of inducing indexation processes at higher inflation levels.All the Board Members agreed that the increases in inflation and inflation expectations and the high rate of economic activity, which has been reducing spare capacity, warranted the continued withdrawal of monetary stimulus.
This will ensure the monetary authority can continue to use the policy tools at its disposal in a countercyclical way.
On the positive side, the unemployment rate declined again in November and the housing market continues to show signs of recovery though still at a very low level.In the case of the emerging economies in Asia, economic growth declined in the majority of the countries during the third quarter.
There were also few adjustments in the prices of products like oil and this could be due more to the appreciation of the peso than to movements in international prices which have not declined.
The annual increase in M3 was 15.2%, cash 9.8% and liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR) 16.05%.
In Asia, China has some signs of recovery but India and South Korea, etc.
However, the reduction in growth was offset, in part, by an increase in non- traditional exports to the United States.
This is high, but less than the figure for the third quarter (8.5%).
(iii) The momentum in the Colombian economy during 2008 and 2009 will be affected by the slowdown in US and world economic growth, and by possible future problems affecting Venezuela.
As for construction, cement production posted an annual drop of 4.8%.
This is well below the rate witnessed last year for the same period (6.9%).
This forecast assumes that household consumption in the second half of the year will grow at rates close to those seen in the first half of the year while investment in construction will surge significantly.
It is worth noting that, due to the basis of statistical comparison and to the normal agricultural cycle, the downward trend in annual food inflation could revert in the following months Inflation expectations to December 2017 obtained from the monthly survey to financial analysts lowered, posting at 4.16%.
The employment rate for household heads remains at levels above 74%.
However, the tendency in the broadest measure of the money supply (M3) experienced no major changes, and annual growth in M3 by the end of the first six months of the year came to 16%.
(iv) Something similar is happening with respect to the terms of trade (fed to a large degree by the price of petroleum), which have also reached unprecedented heights.
The annual variation of the CPI for non-tradable goods excluding regulated prices has been climbing slowly since March even after discounting for the effect of amusement, cultural, and vacation activities in June.
El Niño has intensified, increasing the risk of further increases in food and energy prices.
Exports and imports continue to contract in yearly terms.
With data to July, energy demand and production of coffee and oil exhibited annual falls.
In the United States, which is Colombia’s major trading partner, GDP during the second quarter of 2010 was revised downward from 2.4% (a/q) to 1.6% (a/q), primarily because of slower growth in investments and exports.
These rates were 4 bp, 15 bp and 2 bp less than those in December, in that order.
For this group, the possibility of leading monetary policy to an expansionary stance will depend on the above-mentioned factors.The remaining two Board Members considered that the weakness of economic activity deserves an immediate counter-cyclical response, since the output gap is increasing, and the results in terms of inflation have been good and according to the forecasts.
For example, the regional survey done by the Banco de la Republica (businessmen from various sectors are included in this) showed a very favorable perception of sales growth in December.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank; and co-directors Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, Cesar Vallejo Mejia, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook by the technical staff of the Central Bank on the macroeconomic situation (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Furtherdetail on the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff from Banco de la República will be presented in the Monetary Policy Report of May and in the statistical annexMACROECONOMIC CONTEXTIn its meeting of June, the Federal Open Market Committee of the FED decided not to increase its benchmark interest rate.
The different inflation indicators are within the target range of 3% +/- 1 percentage point, GDP growth is close to its historical level, and the confidence surveys on consumers, manufacturers and merchants show important reductions.
However, information available throughout the year points out to more moderation in household consumption and investment in line with the growth forecast for the full year; (vi) The increase in the commercial loan portfolio has slowed down, as explained by lower dynamic in loans in foreign currency.
Those embedded in public debt bonds lowered in January, and are currently around 3.6%.In summary, observed inflation has been lower than expected, and it maintains its convergence to the target.