The declining trend for the commercial loan portfolio halted and the mortgage and consumer portfolios strengthened their surge.
The directors agree that the restrictive monetary policy stance has fulfilled its objective of reducing excess spending in the economy, which, exacerbated by the multiple and persistent supply shocks that occurred since the pandemic, unleashed the strongest inflationary spiral the country has undergone since the adoption of the target inflation policy at the end of 1999.
Economic conditions in Europe continue to deteriorate.
Available indicators for the third quarter show that performance not live up to expectations and tended to decline.
Moreover, the deterioration of the economic and financial situation in Europe, and the effects this may have on world demand, may continue to be a limiting factor to their exports.
(ii) The current real rate is below its probable long term balance and is inconsistent with the growth that is expected to be close to its potential in 2011 and 2012 and a projected inflation that is close to the midpoint of the long term target range.
Others mentioned that the transmission of the reduction in the benchmark interest rate has not yet ended, therefore the assessment of the evolution of all credit variables should continue.The possible effects of narrower international financial conditions on the long-term real interest rate and on the assessment of the monetary policy stance were also discussed.Within this context, despite a negative output gap, with stable inflation (albeit above the target), and a highly uncertain external context, there is an evident economic recovery.
This revision is due, in part, to the performance of the world economy and private spending, which have been weaker than anticipated.
In Europe, positive performance of consumer confidence indicators and of perception by industrialists continues.Colombia's terms of trade to March increased thanks to the increase in the prices of its main export products.
Price indices for new and used housing are at their maximums.
Meanwhile, the slowdown in lending to households continued.
In the Euro zone, in turn, the weakening of productive activity was generalized and, with the exception of France, the largest economies contracted in the last quarter of 2011.
Retail sales reported by DANE for the month of January fell to an annual rate of 4.5%, continuing the downward tendency begun in - 2008.
In the first case, the annual change was 0.77%.
This was mainly due to the performance of regulated and food prices.
(vi) Annual inflation (2.27%) in September remained stable with respect to the month before and the same was true of the average of the core inflation measurements.
According to the same source, food supply in the central markets remains high.The annual variation of the PPI exhibited a significant reduction (from 8.38% in July to 4.89% in August).
Sales to Venezuela during September were down 49.5% with respect to the same month in 2008.
The production of cement and shipments, in turn, surged between the second and third quarters.
The rate on mortgage loans was 12.1%, which is 11bp less than what is was in December.
And those that were the most affected by the weather grew 15% or, in other words, three times more than the imported food items and other national ones.
Exports bolstered by a weak dollar could explain part of this outcome.
However, for the countries which are exporters of raw materials such as those in the region, the inflationary situation is more complex since the fall in the prices will tend to be accompanied by a depreciation of their currencies.
Generally speaking, the macroeconomic conditions continue to signal an important amount of economic growth in 2011.
This clash in prices, which took place in all world economies, produced a substantial increase in inflation and led to the non-fulfillment of the targets.
Contrary to what was observed in 2007, during the first semester of 2008 the economy has fully received the impact of the clash of prices for food products, fuels, and metals which has been affecting world economy, in addition to the impact of local climatic factors.
Also, certain indicators of business confidence and expectations for the region have improved somewhat in recent months (December and January).In the United States, the first estimate of 2012 growth was lower than the central forecast in the previous edition of Banco de la República’s Inflation Report.
They also stated that they do not consider the adjustment of domestic demand and growth to be excessive, considering that the current account deficit is still high, for which they believe the behavior of theses variables is part of the adjustment process.
Some emerging market economies are benefitting from the recovery in commodity prices, and countries such as China and Korea are showing signs of recovery.
In this context, given the accumulated depreciation until January of 2015, there is a risk that consumer inflation continues to increase this year.
Likewise, in June a reduction of 3.74% to 3.2%) was seen in the annual variation in the CPI for the non-tradables without foods and regulated items; it can be attributed in good part to a high comparison basis.
These prospects, together with trade tensions between the US and China in the context of very low inflationary pressures, have determined that major central banks continue to pursue a broadly expansionary monetary policy.
The drop in total inflation during the month was mainly due to the slowdown in the variation of food prices.
The Bank's technical staff continues to forecast GDP growth for 2013 at 3.0% to 5.0%, with 4.3% being the most likely figure.
The average of the four core inflation indicators (5.74%) also continues to fall.
Acceleration of inflation was explained mainly by the greater pace of increase in the prices of food and those of tradables excepting food and regulated goods.
Information on other activities such as oil, coffee and cement production suggests good behaviors.As for the labor market, the figures to March 2015 show that the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate continues at historically low levels, with a dynamic occupation rate which is explained mainly by salaried employment.In April, total corporate and household debt grew at a lower pace than the one registered in the first quarter, but greater than the nominal GDP increase estimated for the present year.
With this information, we calculate that the Colombian economy grew between 3.7% and 4.3% in 2013 with 4.1% as the most probable percentage.Information for 2014 is still very scarce and preliminary.
On the other hand, that reform implied a reduction in VAT from 10% to 5% on pre-paid medical care and other health expenses, which translated into price reductions for these items.
Inflation and the economic situation were discussed with respect to growth and prospects for the future, and monetary-policy decisions were reached    BACKGROUDa.
The total demand for energy for consumption and production was up by only 1% in January compared to the same month in 2008.
In May, annual producer price inflation (PPI) was 1.3%, as opposed to an annual variation of 0.3% in April.
The latter percent is due to the imports of intermediate goods (-27%).
This slowdown would continue to contribute to the reduction of the current account deficit.
The following is a summary of the principal issues addressed during the meeting Background Annual inflation was 6.35% at the end of February, which represents an increase for the fifth month in a row.
The monetary policy rate is in a contractionary stance, with which a path of convergence towards the target inflation rate of 3% is expected to be guaranteed.
In November, total exports in dollars grew 42.5% per year, this fact mainly explained by an increase of 52.1% in the foreign sales of the main products of mining origin (oil, coal, gold, ferronickel).
The Colombian peso has continued to appreciate, returning to levels not seen since -2022.
However, these factors may be partially offset by the recent depreciation of the exchange rate External Sector and the Balance of PaymentsThe members of the Board discussed the effects of the external and the domestic situations on the forecast for the balance of payments.
In the case of Latin America, inflation in Brazil and Peru continues to rise.
These board members highlighted that significant gaps in employment and investment remain, compared to pre-pandemic levels, and suggested that cash flow problems still being faced by many Colombian companies could be accentuated by an accelerated increase in the interest rate.
As a result, the external boost to aggregate spending would be less than in previous years.
Below is a summary of the main topics dealt with in this meeting Annual consumer inflation in July was 3.42% (monthly was 0.14%), which was 19 basis points (bp) higher than in June.
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR) performed similarly.
The areas of transportation and financial GDP also presented slowdowns.
The other three measures of basic inflation also decreased, and the average of the four indicators was 2.63%.Along the year and until September, an inflation of 3.08% has stockpiled, a figure that already surpasses the long-term goal of 3.0%.
Therefore, they ratify that decisions will depend on the information available at a given moment in time.
The annual variation of this basket went up to 5.7%, this being the strongest monthly increase (110 bp) in the course of the year.
China continues slowing down moderately; as for Latin America, GDP growth in Chile, Mexico and Peru was low and similar to that observed in recent quarters.
They emphasized that the demand in the economy entered contractionary territory in November and December, as can be deduced from various indicators such as retail sales, fuel consumption, automobile sales, and the behavior of imports.
They noted that the concern of a significant impact on food or power costs by the El Niño phenomenon has been waning.
Price hikes for several regulated items were offset by lower prices for processed foods and reductions in the non-tradable CPI excluding food and regulated items.Within the non-food CPI, one of the most notable aspects in May was the increase in the annual change in regulated prices (1.25% as opposed to 0.9% in April).
On the other side, the annual growth of the aggregated demand to March was 6.7%, facing 11.1% of the fourth trimester of 2007 and 10.3% in all of last year.
Factors such as the greater growth of the world economy, the improvements in agents’ confidence and the momentum of various leading indicators show the strength of the growth.
This was the result of a rise in tradable and non-tradable basket prices after the exclusion of foods and regulated items.
This suggests that the conceptual basis of the models usually employed by analysts and by the Board itself, usually assuming a process of convergence towards the 3.0% target, could be evolving adversely and could threaten the nature of the target as a nominal anchor as it has been over the years.
On the other hand, the active average rate calculated by Central Bank of Colombia reduced in 26pb as compared to the previous month, reaching 17.1%.
Total exports in dollars were down in August at an annual rate of 9% (not including re-exports of aircraft; when these are included, the annual variation is -7.6%).
The Board anticipates a gradual recovery of employment as the economic activity recovers.The members of the Board discussed the inflation figure in June (2.19%, below the target), and, particularly, inflation excluding food and regulated items, which reduced to 1.6%.
In the latter case, this is the result of the inflow of capital related to the changes in the JP Morgan benchmark portfolios.
This range width is due to uncertainty around the size of global slowdown and its impact on the Colombian economy, as well as with respect to the recovery of works and the overcoming of some negative supply shocks currently affecting the industrial and mining sectors.
Also, the effect of El Niño on food supply and the prices of some regulated services will further increase inflation, and could additionally affect inflation expectations.Finally, one of the members from the group that proposed a 50 bp increase stressed that annual inflation to October (-5.9%) doubles the target, is the highest in six-and-a-half years, and has remained above the upper limit of the target range over nine consecutive months.
Within this basket, the increases in gas, fuel and urban transport service rates continued to exceed the average for the CPI.With respect to the annual change in tradables excluding food and regulated prices, the figure in March was 0.68%, or five (5) bp less than in February.
Between that date and March 11, the inter-bank interest rate (TIB in Spanish) and the Bank Reference Indicator (IBR in Spanish) had accumulated a drop of 130 b and were in line with the policy rate, which was 8%.
They highlighted that this greater deficit takes place in an environment of lower external demand, wide international liquidity, and higher growth of the economy.In this context, the Board unanimously decided to maintain the current level of the benchmark interest rate for monetary policy intervention, which it considers as moderately expansionary DECISIONThe Board of Directors unanimously decided to maintain the benchmark interest rate unaltered at 4.25%.
Yet, the Board emphasized that the technical staff’s projection for the end of the year was affected by the expected increase in food inflation and by inflation of regulated items, the latter due to the upward pressures of the international price of oil.Vis-à-visthe previous meeting, the risk that persists on this front is due to the external context, in which the level of uncertainty is high.
Similarly, the merchants surveyed by Fenalco maintained the positive trend in current sales, although sales expectations at six months showed some deterioration.
Food inflation went from 13.2% in December to 12.
In the same period, other commodities exported and imported by Colombia descended.
Thus, even though the terms of trade for November are lower than those seen at the beginning of the year, they are still historically high and contribute to the support of Colombia’s income.
The following is a summary of the principal topics addressed during the meeting Annual consumer inflation in July was 2.24%, which is 1 bp less than in June.
With respect to the way inflation performed during the month, the Board of Directors emphasized the following: i) annual consumer inflation ended the year at 2%.
Something similar occurred with the corresponding 24-month expectation that went from 4.5% to 4.0%.
On the job market, salaried employment is falling, while so-called “self- employment” continues to grow at a good pace The External Context The international financial crisis worsened in September, predominantly in the United States.
According to the monthly survey of market operators, total inflation anticipated by December and February 2013 would be approximately 3.5%, which is 10 bp less than the rate expected a month earlier.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of how Banco de la República’s technical team views the macroeconomic situation (Section 1), followed by a review of the key policy discussion points considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2).Amore detailed description of the macroeconomic situation, prepared by Banco de la República’s technical team, is provided in the data section of the June 2014 edition of the Inflation Report and in the statistical appendixTHE CONTEXTThe technical team underscores the following aspects with respect to the macroeconomic context:The new information in this report suggests the average growth forecast for Colombia's trading partners in 2014 could be somewhat lower compared to the last report.
Foreign sales of the main agricultural products (coffee, bananas, and flowers) dropped 8.3% annually due to the poor coffee harvest.
(v) In the near future, there will be relevant information available on the international monetary conditions and their impact on emerging economies.
Favorable levels in the terms of trade are also expected although lower than the ones seen in 2013.
On the other hand, economies like Mexico, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela go on growing at a good pace, although some of them with increases below their true potential.
However, there is an increase in global uncertainty that could be transmitted to these projections.The risk premia in Latin America increased after the results of the elections in the United States.
Expectations drawn from the financial markets for 1, 5, and 8 years forward, adjusted for the inflation risk premium, were revised upward and stood at 5.2%, 4.6%, and 4.2% respectively.
For instance, in the emerging economies, the Central Banks of Brazil, China and South Korea have recently lowered their interest rates in an attempt to counteract the effects of a deceleration in demand.
Recent Developments in InflationThere was a substantial decline in the annual consumer inflation in October and one that was significantly larger than expected.
In Ecuador, the figure for the first quarters suggests a deepening of the recession.In recent weeks, the international financial markets maintained a low volatility.
Likewise, based on the figures as of August, retail sales completed several months of monthly growth and are slowing down their annual decline.
Economic growth is also expected to continue becoming stronger partly driven by the investment in construction of buildings and public works.
(ii) In contrast, the strength of private (4%) and public (4.8%) consumption in the third quarter was similar to what had been seen in the second and a little better than had been expected.
The continuation of the tapering off of the monetary stimulus on the part of the FED at a time when the outlook for growth is evidently lower in some economies seems to be the cause for the rise in the risk perception.
However, additional -19 outbreaks of unknown intensity and duration, as well as uncertain fiscal conditions, make it necessary to consider alternative risk scenarios that, should they materialize, would instead point to growth between 3.6% and 5.2%.Total annual inflation and inflation excluding food and regulated items fell less than projected by the technical staff and market analysts, registering 1.51% and 0.94% through March, respectively.
The creation of employment was concentrated in wage-earning labor and the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate dropped in comparison to what had been seen in March and February.
There is a lot of uncertainty about the future of these variables and, therefore, maintaining the current level of the benchmark interest rate is considered appropriate.Another group of directors thought it was possible that the output gap could be more negative than previously stated if the fact that both core inflation and the -point of the inflation projections are remaining at around 2.5%, which is below the long term target, is considered.
In the discussion, there were different views on the existing margin to continue reducing it.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the intervention rate unchanged.
(Only available in Spanish)  CONTEXTWith figures to the first half of 2017, the country's current account of the balance of payments registered a deficit of USD $6,119 (4.1% of GDP), higher in US dollars than a year ago (USD $5,992 , 4.6% of GDP), but similar to that forecast by the technical staff at the Central Bank.
The reduced European dynamism has began to affect the behavior of the emerging economies in Asia as reflected in the weakening of both exports and industrial production, and accentuating the ongoing slowdown they had been exhibiting since -2011, generated by the withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimulus policies Except for Indonesia, the April 2012 figures of industrial production in the major emerging Asian economies show deceleration.
The Fenalco indicators, with February data, show a rise in sales for the sector, although they still are at low levels.
Additionally, they pointed to the recent decrease in inflation, excluding food and regulated items, driven by favorable trends in goods prices.
S/he also pointed out that the tripartite minimum wage increase reflects the increase in inflation for low-income households plus the increase in productivity, and these together add up to 15.6%.
In this regard, he expressed concern about the behavior of non-food inflation expectations for the end of 2023.
The new information available suggests that the global economy is deteriorating at a higher rate than expected.
A look at the different types of loans shows mortgage lending was the most dynamic, having gone from 14.6% annual growth in September to an annual rate of 18.3% for the year to date in January.
While some countries such as Colombia, Taiwan, and Korea have low declining inflation, others such as Brazil, India, and Indonesia are showing higher upswings in their price levels.The terms of trade declined in October but remain at high levels.
(viii) By December, the price indexes for new and existing homes continued to rise at elevated rates, reaching historic highs.In short, the Colombian economy currently is growing below its potential and inflation is under 3%.
This is the result of no growth in the euro area during the second quarter and a sharper slowdown than expected in several countries of the region.
Recent data from the labor market indicate that the recovery taking place in the first months of the year might cease to make satisfactory progress in the second semester.
Moreover, given the significant weight of external factors in the explanation for the slowdown in the country’s economic growth, lower interest rates probably would not have a major positive impact on productive activity.
This figure was lower than the projection of the Bank’s technical team and what was expected for the market’s average.
It also agreed to supply a larger portion of permanent liquidity to meet the liquidity needs that usually increase at year’s end.
The preceding was more than offset by the rise in the employment rate and because of that the unemployment rate dropped.
The total demand for energy rose 4.4% during May, in annual terms, posting increases compared to the fourth quarter of 2009 and the early months of 2010.
There has been no growth in the balance of the loan portfolio in domestic currency during the last eight (8) weeks (15.8% annual growth at the end of February compared to 18.5% in December).
In the financial system, loan portfolio growth continued to slow.
In addition, the countries on the periphery of the Euro Zone –Greece, Portugal and Spain– remained stagnant or were shrinking.
Most of the core inflation indicators dropped faster than at the beginning of the year or at the end of 2008.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed that the new information confirms a slowdown of the output higher than forecast by the Central Bank's technical staff.
Imports rose 0.9% annually, a figure that is lower than what was registered the month before (1.6%).With respect to inflation expectations, according to the Bank’s monthly survey of financial market analysts, inflation expected for December of this year is 2.2% while the expectations for the coming 12 months are at 2.9%.
(iii) The government announced a budget cut for 2008 of Col$1.5 trillion, which is equivalent to 0.4% of the GNP and one of whose fundamental objectives is to alleviate the pressure over the monetary policy derived from the increase of inflation.
In the case of Venezuela, annual growth during the first quarter (-5.8%) and the forecast for 2010 as a whole reflect an economy in recession that has cut back drastically on its imports.
The region’s stock markets have dropped, but not as much as those in the developed countries.
Meanwhile, the real interest rate on preferential commercial loans was 6.2%, as opposed to 27.4%, for credit card lending, and 5.8% for treasury loans.
In Germany, the country in the Euro Zone that has grown the most, the indicator of economic sentiment among analysts (ZEW) entered negative terrain in September, (-4.3 points; 14 points were expected) and reached its lowest level in 19 months.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Friday, September 30, 2016.
Downward pressure came from the annual variation in food prices, which was 3.9% in March versus 4.4% in February.
Given the possible implications that less growth in the world economy could have for Colombia’s economic growth, they advised waiting for new information before making a decision on benchmark interest rates.
On the other hand, in most emerging economies, interest rate stability or reductions are expected.
With respect to the labor market, the unemployment rate rose slightly over the last few months, however, the rate of job creation increased.Economic activity in the euro zone, in turn, continues to recover at a modest rate.
The Directors noted that annual headline inflation, after stabilizing at a figure slightly above 13% during the first quarter, registered successive decreases in April and May due to the decrease in food inflation; downward adjustments in the international price of some food and transportation costs; the revaluation of the country’s exchange rate; and the decline in producer price inflation, among other factors.
However, the quality of the latter has deteriorated; (vii) In April, annual inflation (3.43%) was slightly less than estimated and similar to the previous month’s record.
In the case of mortgages, the growth rate registered an uptick as it went from growing at a rate of 15.37% to 15.59% during the same period.
(iv) China will continue to grow at high rates but the news has not been exceptionally encouraging in the last few months.
Some of the indicators on the supply side point to good momentum at the start of 2012.
At the same time, the recent events in Europe have raised the perception of risk in the international markets.
However, this indicator has tightened less than it in the first and second quarters (17.4% and 14.2% respectively).
On the other hand, the increase in value-added tax and other indirect taxes would pressure inflation upwards.
So far this year, among the main countries of the region with an inflation targeting scheme, the Brazilian real and the Colombian peso have been the most depreciated currencies vis-à-vis the US dollarSo far in June, the prices of oil exhibited levels higher than the projections for all of 2015, but they are still far lower than the average observed in the last five years.
Performance figures for its productive sector show a new decline in gross domestic product during the first quarter of 2013.
External demand would exhibit a slight recovery resulting from growth of the main trading partners, somewhat better than in 2016.The current account deficit for 2017 would stand between 3.0% and 4.4% of GDP, with 3.7% in the baseline scenario.
As for the core inflation indicators, their average went from 2.4% in November to 2.5% in December.
The Board of Directors is mindful of the risks associated with peso appreciation in an atmosphere of weak external demand, and will continue to monitor the exchange market carefully.
The annual growth of the portfolio in national currency went from 12.45% to 12.91% between July and August while the foreign currency portfolio dropped from 37.07% to 30.66% during the same period.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households saw an annual growth rate of 13.21% which is 6 bp lower than the previous month.
As has been the case for several months, the minor adjustments in food prices are largely responsible for this result.
With respect to exports, the new results showed an upsurge in foreign sales in dollars.
As of June the annual variation for food was 4.1%.
The fact that part of this fall was because of one less working day in February this year (the year before was a leap year) should be kept in mind.With regards to the area of mining, production of coal was affected in February and March by labor strikes in Cerrejon and the environmental problem Drummond had which caused a stop in production due to the restrictions on transportation of the product to the port (temporary suspension of the freight license).
With this information, the technical staff kept its growth forecast for Colombia’s trading partners unchanged Oil prices have fallen to levels lower than forecast in the previous quarter.
If the international situation does not deteriorate further, it can be predicted that this behavior may remain unchanged in the course of 2012.
For Colombia, this should bring about a lower path for risk premia, with a slower convergence to its historical average.The price of oil has exceeded the forecasts made a month ago, largely as a result from the observed and expected supply constraints in the crude oil market.
Although over the course of the year (January-July) they have plunged 19.2% annually, the levels are above those for the same period in 2007.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on May 23, 2008.
(iii) The increased weight Colombian public debt securities have in the benchmark portfolios of some international investors could offset to some degree the effects that the adjustment in global liquidity has on the exchange rate and market interest rates in Colombia.
The two (2) remaining Board Members voted for a 25 bp reduction.Bogotá, DUpdated: 13:57 technical issues.
(v) Bank loans are growing at stable rates that were above the nominal GDP.
The consumer and mortgage loan portfolios remain the most dynamic, posting respective annual variations of 20.9% and 17.5%.
This would make the convergence of inflation to the target slower and more difficult and require increases in the interest rate in the future that could coincide with a pronounced slowdown in expenditure and output DECISIONThe Board of Directors ofBanco de la República, by majority, decided to increase the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp to 5.75%.
The average of core inflation indicators monitored by the Central Bank stood at 5.73% on a yearly basis.16.The annual CPI variation in January is the highest since December 2008.17.According to the monthly survey applied to financial analysts in February, a yearly inflation rate of 5.49% is expected for December 2016, a figure higher than expected in the January survey.
Added to that, there was a slump in car sales on the order of 16.4% in February according to the Colombian Automobile Committee and the figures published by Econometria.
The lower percentage registered with respect to August was due to the downward pressure from perishables, non-tradable excluding food and regulated prices and from regulated prices.
Given the high degree of uncertainty, the members of the Board highlighted that it is difficult to determine the amount of spare capacity.Additionally, the Board Members expressed their concern regarding the marked deterioration of the labor market.
Coupled with the expectation of weak global growth, this indicates monetary policy in the developed economies and in several emerging markets would remain expansive.
Thus, special care needs to be taken regarding the extent of monetary policy rate cuts.The director who opted for a 75-bps decrease mostly agreed with the majority group's diagnosis regarding the favorable conditions that support continuing the interest rate cuts initiated in December.
A path of increases strengthens the signal of the Board's commitment to inflation targets, allows to better calibrate an optimal response to new external shocks, and makes the movements of the Board of Directors more predictable for the market, thereby improving the pass-though of monetary policy.The credibility of the monetary authority must be sustained by a consistent and weighted action looking towards the policy horizon.
The new most probable outcome for 2015 (5.3%) would be similar to the deficit observed in 2014 (5.2%).
Tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, were the only group to experience less inflation, which went from 2.4% in April to 2.2% in May.
In this projection, both consumption (public and private) as well as investment continue slowing down, partly as a response to the slower dynamics of national income.For 2017, growth of the economy is estimated within a range between 1.5% and 3.5%.In June, yearly consumer inflation increased, reaching 8.60%.
The rise in inflation during December was due essentially to the behavior of food and regulated prices.
This, among its multiple benefits, would contribute to increasing tax revenues and strengthening the country's public finances.With today's decision, the Board continues with growth-enhancing policy rate cuts while maintaining a policy stance in line with the objective of driving inflation to its target by -2025.
On the supply side, the indicators available for the second quarter of 2016 show that the industry and trade recorded favorable dynamics, while mining, agriculture, and energy had a less-dynamic performance.The seasonally adjusted labor market series show that, to May, the unemployment rate remains low, given that the labor supply (measured as the global participation rate) has fallen, which has offset the deterioration in employment creation.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Friday, July 29, 2016.
The outlook at six months, in turn, not show significant changes and stayed at levels similar to those from the last two months.
Public spending surged and household consumption grew steadily.
Annual inflation in non-tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, stayed at 4.7% in June.
The performance described is in line with what is contemplated in the September Inflation Report where there is a range of output growth for the entire year that is between 5% and 6% Financial Variables Total loans in national (NC) and foreign (FC) currency are maintaining high rates of growth.
The downward trend in international prices for food, raw materials and oil continues and could have a major impact on total inflation.
The increase in employment and the reduction of unemployment, together with the observed increase in vacancy rates (which show a significant recovery in demand for new jobs), point to a tighter labor market.In an environment of a robust domestic demand and despite the improvement in the terms of trade, the current account registered a 6.4% deficit as a share of the quarterly GDP in the first quarter of the year, increasing from the 4.1% deficit as a share of GDP for the same period of last year.
The most dynamic sectors were agriculture (7.7%) and financial services (4.4%), while mining, construction, retail, and transport fell (-9.4% -1.4%, -0.5%, and -0.3%, respectively).
If the series is adjusted by working days, the indicator would be up by 2.4%.
In this period, the growth of the United States was low and below expectations, while the expansion of the euro zone was weak, although somewhat greater than had been forecast.
Hikes in external interest rates, higher risk premia and the volatility in international financial markets also influenced this decision.
The annual change in the IPI excluding coffee threshing was 2.8% for the month of February.
Nevertheless, the positive economic performance, the risk premiums that are still low and the favorable level of prices for some commodities should continue to contribute to the capital flows into emerging economies.
For the next year, the most recent predictions of the major international agencies continue to point to a worldwide growth recovering as compared to 2012, although at a slower pace than estimated in previous months.
As to deposits, the shift towards certificates of deposit continued throughout the month.
Respecting the former, demand grew 6.4% annually and the level it reached surpassed the records for the last six months.
The last few months also saw fewer liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR).
(iii) Extremely low interest rates for too long a period of time ultimately can pose a risk to financial stability, the sustainability of growth and future inflation.
Furthermore, the agreements and measures directed towards solving the public debt and financial system problems have not had the expected impact so far.
The United States is growing at a slow rate, Europe continues to contract, and Japan seems to be starting to react to the strong monetary stimulus measures.
Specifically, while Germany is expanding at a favorable rate, some weakening of productive activity can be seen in France.
The figures released by DANE show retail sales rose 1.2% in April.
Eventually, this temporarily will make the Central Bank a net debtor.
These premiums could be affected by the particularly vulnerable situation in several countries of the Eastern Europe.
April witnessed a continued increase in price for some of Colombia’s major exports.
Under these circumstances and with the information that is available, one cannot expect higher inflation to result in more growth.
The indicators on hand with respect to economic activity during the year to date, particularly in terms of retail sales and the demand for energy, also point to added momentum in the economy.
In fact, the rest of investment spending - largely private investment - was what declined the most.
The drop in this item is primarily due to the -50.5% change in rolling stock.With respect to supply, the few indicators available for the third quarter of 2013 suggest improvements in commerce, construction, and industry.
The monthly survey conducted by Banco de la República indicates inflation is expected to be 2.6% by December of this year (7 bp higher than the expectation a month ago) and 3.1% at twelve months (an increase of 8 bp compared to April).
Investment, especially investment in buildings, should grow at high rates while consumption will probably grow at about the same rate as it in the first half of the year.
With respect to tradables without foods and regulated items, their result in June was 1.0%, similar to that in May though higher than the percentage observed in the first quarter of the year (about 0.7%).
The members of the Board emphasized the goodness and efficacy of the decisions on monetary policy adopted since April 2006, addressed to eliminating the excess of demand and the growth of credit, controlling the entrance of foreign speculative capital, strengthening the position of international reserves, and mitigating the effects over the inflation expectations of the highest international prices of basic products.
In contrast, the growth of total imports in dollars showed a minor rise in September with an annual change of 43% compared to the 41.9% registered in August.
Finally, the consumer confidence index (CCI) published by shows higher levels in April and May than those observed in the first three months of 2013, and is above the historical average for the series (since 2001).As for the indicators associated with supply, the signals were mixed.
The decrease was concentrated in perishables where significant drops were seen in the prices for potatoes and a large variety of other products (tubers, vegetables, and fruit).
In January 2009, the annual decline in total imports was 5.2%.
In the same month, external sales of the main agricultural products and other sectors also descended.
The forecasts show that it will begin to converge towards its target in the second semester of 2016.Meanwhile, the adjustment of domestic demand facing the impact in the terms of trade has been lower than expected, exhibiting reinforcement in the last quarters of the year.
Based on the available information, five Directors voted to reduce the policy rate by 50 basis points, while two Directors voted for a 75 basis point cut.The majority group reiterated several factors supporting the shift towards a less contractionary monetary policy stance but cautioned that a policy interest rate reduction exceeding 50 basis points might not be sustainable over time and could jeopardize the continuity of the process.
The increases have been particularly significant in the case of agricultural products, including coffee, and in goods exported by Colombia, such as coal and gold Financial Variables M3 is up by about 18% since September.
Compared to the second quarter of that year, thirdquarter GDP rose 0.2%, thereby completing three consecutive periods of slow quarterly GDP growth.
This projection, which also incorporates the best scenario of commodity prices and growth of the major trading partners, suggests an additional adjustment of the trade balance.
However, recent weeks have seen a significant reduction in interest rates on home mortgages.
The average of the four indicators monitored by the Bank was at 2.44% in comparison to 2.51% for the previous month.
Although some improvement was observed in the financial conditions in the USA during the second trimester, this trend was not maintained in the last few weeks.
In July the rise in rent prices (6 bp with respect to the level in June) was offset by the decline in the prices for other items that this basket is made up of.
However, other market-basket components have declined, thanks to (i) lower meat prices as a result of weak internal demand and closure of exports to the Venezuelan market, (ii) moderate adjustments in the price of food outside the home, also due to weak internal demand and the moderate minimum wage hike, and (iii) stability in the price of imported foods.
This, together with the absence of inflationary pressures, would be postponing the increase in the Fed's benchmark interest rate.On the other hand, sovereign risk premia in the region have declined in recent months.
The rise in exports of industrial goods is attributed to added sales to Venezuela (52%), the United States (1.8%), Ecuador (1.7%) and the rest of Latin America (7.1%).
The reductions were concentrated in the imported component of the indicator.
Nevertheless, recent information makes it evident that the economy is expanding at a favorable rate.
As for exports of coffee, banana, and flowers, they experienced reductions of 57%, 10.9% and 18.7% respectively.
Signs of economic slowdown in Latin America were more evident during the last month and a half.
Based on this, it is probable that the terms of trade will stay at favorable levels.
In the view of these members, in this environment, with a widening of the excesses of installed capacity and good anchorage of the forecasts and inflation expectations, a reduction in the intervention interest rates is suitable.Some members from the majoritarian group pointed out that external risks persist that limit the possibilities of carrying out a more expansionary monetary policy.
In the domestic economic activity, it is highlighted that inflation, as well as the expectations, have continued to converge to the midpoint of the target range.
There has been a change in the monetary policy stance of the Fed towards a more moderate pace of increase of its interest rates, the price of oil has partially recovered, and the reactivation of the Latin American economy will boost demand for manufacturing exports and tourist activity in the country.
The group of foods presented smaller rhythms of increase, and upon excluding them from the CPI, their complement also slowed down in the latest month.
Colombia and Mexico are a case in point, with around 4% appreciation, while Brazil and Chile have seen their currencies appreciate by about 2.5%.
Expectations regarding the slow liquidity adjustment in the United States remain the same.Likewise, the expansionary monetary posture in other advanced economies is expected to persist for a lengthy period AND OPTIONSThe Board of Directors took the following relevant aspects into consideration:(i) Inflation and the average for the four measurements of core inflation continued to converge towards 3% in March.
International prices for food, raw materials and oil continue to decline.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on August 30, 2013.
The dramatic deterioration in the international situation during the past month was emphasized.
Although this fall is due to comparing the current record with past year’s high levels, also some stagnation in the indicator can be seen.
The most recent information from Europe, in turn, continues to show a slow recovery in spite of the surge seen in Germany and France in the first and second quarters.
The sectors that grew the most were agriculture (7.6%) and construction (6.4%).
Particularly, it is expected that in 2016 Venezuela and Brazil register contractions in their product again, while countries such as Ecuador, Chile, Mexico and Peru would continue exhibiting lower growth ratesWith all the aforesaid, growth for Colombia's major trading partners in 2015 would be lower than had been forecast a quarter ago.
According to information from the Colombian Motor Vehicle Committee, the rate at which those sales rose in February was high as well (10%).
In spite of that, the current values are relatively high compared to the historical average for the series.Other indicators with information as of January available are: i) the total demand for electricity, which rose 2.9% annually, expanded at every level and its trend shows a positive slope; ii) petroleum production was one million fourteen thousand barrels daily on average which, although it shows a low growth of 0.3%, implies an increase compared to the last four months.Thus, for all of 2014 the growth forecast remains within a range of 3.3% to 5.3% with 4.3% being the most probable figure Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) registered an annual growth rate of 12.2% in January, which is similar to the level seen the previous month.
The average for all of them was at 2.48%, 4 bp below the datum for the previous month and the lowest level since October 2010.The annual change in the PPI remained in negative territory in April (-2.4%) due to the decline in the local component (produced and consumed) since the imported component rose.
The available information suggests that in the year, domestic demand would have stalled versus 2015 as a result of the slowdown in consumption (households and Government) and a fall in investment.
The reading of the latest data is positive, particularly observing the evolution of the different core inflation indicators, which have stood around 3.0%.
The slowdown and low level of growth in household consumption (3.1% in the second quarter) were particularly conspicuous.
Given medium-term inflation expectations that remain close to the target and information related to economic activity that points to recovery, they considered a deepening of the current expansionary policy stance unnecessary.One of the directors in the majority, by contrast, considered it possible that inflation could settle at a lower trajectory and that market expectations could account for this view.
(vii) The risks to inflation stemming from expectations have become more moderate.
This reduction in the productive dynamics continues to be reflected in the increase of the national unemployment rate and the fall of hired employment.
Consumer confidence levels during the third quarter were less than in the second.
Analysts’ average inflation expectations and those calculated based on government bond rates are similar to the inflation target, which is 3%.In short, the economic indicators and economic projections show less output than can be generated with the country’s installed capacity.
However, the increase in labor supply (global participation rate) was greater, probably because of deteriorating household income.
The momentum in private demand will continue to be the primary source of that growth, in terms of both household consumption and investment.
Mortgage rates declined to a lesser extent (-94 bp), as those on credit card lending (-73 bp), ordinary commercial loans (-104 bp) and lending for home construction (-124 bp).In March, the real interest rate on consumer loans was 15.6% as opposed to 9.8% on mortgages, 5.6% on preferential loans and 8.9% on regular commercial lending.
So far this year, up to July, terms of trade have shown a better average than in past years.
In fact, there was a major increase in traditional exports (21.2%).
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of how Banco de la República’s technical team views the macroeconomic situation (Section 1), followed by a review of the key policy discussion points considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2).A moredetailed description of the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank is provided in the data section of the September 2014 edition of the Inflation Report, as well as in the statistical appendix CONTEXTRegarding the macroeconomic context, the technical staff highlights the following elements:In the present report, the growth forecast for external demand was reduced for this and the following year, as compared to the estimations from the previous quarter.
Acting without the necessary precaution would reduce the capacity of the monetary policy to operate in an anti-cyclic manner in the future.
Consumer lending continued to grow at a very low annual rate (0.2%) and mortgage lending tended to accelerate (from 11.9% in August to 12.9% on October 9).
Furthermore, the CPI excluding food has been at the -point of the target range (3.05%, 2.57%, and 3.03% in 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively).
In April and May, according to the DANE (the National Administrative Department of Statistics), retail sales contracted down to an average annual rate of 1,0% (the first annual fall registered in almost three years).
Supply problems associated with the heavy rain in the first half of the year as well as the normal price and production cycle would explain these registers.
Investment in construction would also have continued growing based on the developments in building licenses.
The second-quarter average for the Consumer Confidence Index shows household consumption was still growing at a good pace.
The average for the four indicators that are monitored by the Banco de la República was 2.49% compared to 2.59% in January.The annual change in the PPI remained in negative territory at -2.47% in February, which is 4 bp more that what was registered in January.
When the effect of the sales of vehicles (cars and motorcycles) is discounted, sales grew 3.2% in the same period and their growth trend is continuing.
Industrial production in the United States showed a sharp contraction in August and slowed down as seen in the annual comparison; this situation might be repeated in the next months as anticipated by the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) in the manufacturing sector.
Growth in the Colombian economy during the second half of 2010 was less than what was forecast several months back.
In the emerging market economies, the signals are mixed.
By February, a sharp contraction in economic activity in Japan, the European Union and a number of Eastern European and Asian countries was patently obvious, while emerging economies such as China and India reflected a sharp slowdown.
(v) Growth in lending continues to slow, and the new and used housing price indexes are at historically high levels.
Other members voiced their preference for a 50 bp cut in the intervention interest rate and an announcement to the effect that, with the data at hand, no further changes in that rate are anticipated in the near future.
Under these conditions, household consumption has continued to show strong performance, especially in relationship to the purchases of durable goods.
This is the lowest level since -2006.
The commercial portfolio keeps growing at rates close to 20% per year.
The CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated prices, in turn, was at 0.6% (annual variation) compared to 0.4% the previous month.
In real terms, they are staying below their historical averages (except for credit card rates) and are driving economic growth.
These shocks, which are transitorily increasing inflation, may affect inflation expectations, causing several mechanisms of indexation of prices and wages to operate with greater intensity than in earlier periods, and generate a slower convergence of inflation to the target.In summary, inflation expectations have increased and the risk of a slowdown in domestic demand, beyond that which is consistent with the decline registered in national income, has moderated AND OPTIONSAll Board Members agree that the Colombian economy has experienced a strong impact on income derived from the fall in the international price of oil, generating a substantial depreciation of the peso, which is necessary to achieve a sectoral re-orientation of spending and production, leading to the adjustment of the country’s external accounts.Due to its magnitude, devaluation has increased inflation of consumer prices.
Those derived from the TES at different maturities remained close to 4%.
Both these situations are associated with favorable performance in the sector.
This was due to the stability in consumer loans (12.90% in both July and August) and the slight dip in the portfolio for housing purchases which went from 14.28% in July to 14.06% in August.
(iii) The consecutive, early increase in the Bank’s interest rates contributes to keeping inflation within the target range and reduces the risk of financial imbalances that later lead to an unnecessary volatility in the interest rates, output and employment.
With respect to the economic situation for the second quarter, most part of information available shows a slowdown in the economic activity.
Both the average of those measurements and the inflation expectations are at or below the target (3%).In summary, the growth of the Colombian economy was below 3% in the first quarter, but the monetary policy and fiscal actions that have been taken so far are expected to contribute to getting the output to go to its potential level over the course of the year.
On the one hand, the central banks of major economies (USA, Euro Zone, China) have reduced their rates upon perceiving lower inflationary risks and due to the existing preoccupation regarding growth.
However, uncertainty about the external and internal conditions and on the volatility of oil prices remains high, all of which could affect the dynamics of prices and economic activity AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board noted the reduction in the inflation rate that has been taking place throughout 2018 as positive, although it has slowed down its downward trend in recent months.
However, available activity and perception indicators for the fourth quarter continue to show a low dynamism in the economy and reveal that several of the downside risks in growth would be materializing.The credit slowdown continued in the last month, explained mainly by the moderation in household indebtedness, particularly in the consumer modality.The commercial credit also slowed down in November and registered an annual growth of 5.1%.In November, annual consumer inflation increased for the fourth consecutive month and stood at 4.12%, above that expected by the technical staff and by the market.
This indicator continues to be affected, for the most part, by the sharp drop in automobile sales.
The slowdown occurred in both the group of imported goods and the one of locally produced and consumed goods Growth The latest indicators of economic activity for the third quarter of 2011 confirmed that the annual growth rate for the economy surged in comparison to what had been seen in the first half of the year.
The reduction in vehicle prices (-4.6% annual inflation) was a high point in this respect.
Up to March, the principal reaction was in the rates on consumer lending (-165 bp), preferential loans (-152 bp) and micro-credit (-182 bp).
(v)  For 2013, the technical team forecasts between 2.5% and 4.5% economic growth, with 4% being the most likely figure.
According to indicators for the third quarter, there is an incipient recovery in the euro zone.
In investment in buildings, the lower outlays occurred in both housing and non-residential construction.In contrast, the strength of private (4%) and public (4.8%) consumption in the third quarter was similar to what had been seen in the second and better than expected even when the growth of durable goods presented an annual contraction of 5.9% in the third quarter of 2012.
They emphasize that the creation of 21,000 jobs last July is the lowest job creation figure seen post-pandemic.
At the same time, inflation of non-tradables excluding food and regulated prices, which more faithfully reflects possible demand pressures, has been declining: 4.57%, 3.53%, and 3.49% for October of 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively.
Those embedded in public debt bonds to more than two years were reduced.
The surge was concentrated in the prices of perishable food (from -0.2% to 2.1% annually).
This performance was due to the combined fall in the imports of capital goods (-6.1%), raw materials (-3.9%), and consumer goods (-5.4%).
As to third quarter, the various available indicators suggest the economy continued to slow, as illustrated by industrial growth figures for the month of August (-8.8%) compared to the same month in 2007 (-0.8% for the year to August).
Accumulated inflation in the first five months of the year was 5.1%.
In these circumstances, they prefer to wait for the full impact that the 11.25 percentage point increase in the aggregate policy rate since September 2021 will have on the economy.
This takes place in an environment of economic activity that would recover, but still with an excess of installed capacity.
The core inflation indicators continued to decline.
As for the emerging market economies, the growth rates witnessed in the final quarter of 2011 were close to those for the long term, and 2012 should see this performance continue.
In the case of the United States Federal Reserve, the cutbacks in monthly purchases of assets remained in line with what was expected by the market and the first increase in the benchmark rate is expected to occur towards -2015.
Specifically, the weak job market and the restrictions on bank loans could tone down the recovery in consumption and investment during the coming quarters.
The local component rose with respect to the month before (57 bp).
The annual difference in prices for non-tradable goods and services, excluding food and regulated items, rose slightly and was 3.42% in February, having been 3.37% in January.
Those embedded in public debt bonds are between 3.3% and 3.6% In all, for 2017, the strong transitory shocks that diverted inflation from its target are expected to continue fading in an environment of a weaker economic activity.
TheLey de financiamientowill contribute to the reactivation by means of higher levels of investment.
Something similar happened with expectations for production three months out.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Greater detail of the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff atBanco de la Repúblicawill be presented in theMonetary Policy Report for June 2018and in thestatistical annex (Only Available in Spanish) CONTEXTIn this report, the projection of the 2018 average growth of some of the country's main trading partners was maintained, which implies an acceleration compared to 2017.
Thus, the estimates suggest that the output gap in 2014 will be negative but close to zero and that, in 2015, it will be above this value With respect to prices, inflation was 0.46% in April.
Generally, all the inflation indicators have remained within the target range; (vii) Credit dynamics and the increasing value of assets may be due to structural factors, and not only to a low interest rate; (viii) In any ways, imagining prudential regulation measures additional to the interest rate is justified; (ix) Market interest rates have increased recently; this suggests that there is no excess liquidity level in the economy The Board of Directors has unanimously agreed to keep the intervention interest rate unaltered at 4.5%.
In contrast, Asia and Latin America are showing a better pace and outlook for growth.
This would continue driving the recovery in the country's terms of trade and the positive effects on national income.This report assumes three additional increases in the FED's benchmark interest rate during 2018; consequently, the rate would move within the range of 2.25% to 2.50% at the end of the year.
Given the aforesaid, the panorama of the monetary policy is very diverse.
Mortgage lending rates remained stable at 12.9%.
Up to the third quarter, imports of capital goods showed high expansion rates which implied the favorable performance of the investment in transportation equipment, machinery and equipment.
However, the Board considers that this shock is temporary, given that an additional, strong and continuous depreciation is not expected; also, they expect the phenomena affecting food prices to disappear in the policy horizon.Although there have been different perceptions concerning the risks of a fall in the rate of growth that could lead to the possibility that a larger-than-necessary adjustment may take place (particularly in a context of weak external demand), such perceptions have diminished.On the contrary, the risks of inflation expectations becoming “unanchored” in the presence of a continuous and higher-than-expected increase of inflation and core inflation indicators have augmented.
The fall in quantity came from the lower foreign sales of coffee (-21%) and flowers (-19%).
In the same period, external sales of the main agricultural products increased 22.5%, while those of the remaining sectors descended 11%So far this year, total imports accumulate a fall of 3.8%, due to the lower external purchases of intermediate goods (-18.4%).
The highlights in terms of the response by May include the prime lending rate (-238 bp), the mortgage rate (-203 bp) (partly due to government backing for home purchases), the ordinary commercial rate (-201 bp) and the rate for home construction (-190 bp), following by reductions in the consumer loan rate (-177 bp), microcredit (-174 bp) and the rate on credit card lending (-134 bp).Interest rates also declined in real terms, but to a lesser extent, due to the effect of the slump in inflation.
This includes an annual reduction of 12.7%, primarily as a result of fewer sales to the United States (-8.2%) and Venezuela (-33.5%).
At the same time, businessmen still had real interest rates that were lower than the averages since 1998 in spite of the rise last month (40 bp).
Compared to that from the quarter immediately before it, the GDP for the first quarter rose 1.5%, a figure that corresponds to an annualized rate of 6.2%.
Future decisions by the Board will be determined according to new information available.
Between the same dates, the growth rate of commercial loans tumbled from 21.2% to 12.4%.
Moreover, the increase in local demand has decline, but continues to exceed the growth in national production.
In turn, the manufacturing industry and exploitation of mines and quarries were the only sectors that presented a downturn in their activity.10.The new data for the second quarter of 2015 regarding retail trade, consumer confidence, and the survey of economic expectations by Banco de la República suggest that private consumption grows at a somewhat lower rate than the one registered at the beginning of the year.
The final domestic demand grew at an annual rhythm of 5.4% during the first trimester, which implied a slowdown against what was observed in 2007, yet still over the historic average.
Retail sales posted an annual increase of 2.0% during November.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá, , on January 30, 2015.
Non-tradable inflation, without food and regulated prices, was 5.36%.
In a globalized economy, there are multiple channels for contagion as the experience from the crisis in 2009 demonstrated.
As occurred throughout the year, the slowdown in inflation was explained, yet again, by less of an increase in the CPI for regulated items and food.
In contrast, the credit card loans are above their average Foreign ContextIn the last few months, global activity has continued recovering mainly in the developed economies and to a lesser degree in some emerging countries in Asia.
(iv) It must be stressed that the monetary policy adopted by the Board since April 2006 has proved on account of its results that it has moved in the right direction.
This is the best figure on record for annual growth in one month since April 2008.
The average for the three indicators monitored by the Banco de la Republica was at 3.34%, which is 7 bp more than the month before.
While the contraction in Europe persists, a rapid recovery in productive activity is ongoing in Japan.
The most recent measures passed by the European authorities, such as the possibility of direct capitalization for the Spanish banking system through the use of resources from the region‟s rescue funds, and the 120.000 billion euros (equal to 1% of the region‟s GDP) to foster economic growth have temporarily reduced uncertainty; but they have not yet managed to persuade markets of the likelihood of a fast regional recovery.
The Venezuelan economy contracted 5.8% during the fourth quarter and 3.3% during the year as a whole.
Annual inflation in non-tradables, excluding food and regulated prices, declined from 4.5% in November to 4.4% in December.
The overall demand for energy (regulated and non-regulated) increased at an annual rate of 3.4% in December and 2.6% during the entire last quarter, which was the largest expansion witnessed since the end of 2007.
The annual increase of the “FBKF” was 20%, and it displaced household consumption as the main engine of growth.
(v) In Latin America, industry has lost momentum and several of the economies have cooled down.
This was mainly due to fewer sales of transport equipment.
With respect to foreign trade, Colombian exports grew at an annual rate of 36% in dollars from the beginning of the year to May.
In terms of origin, all of them declined: industrial exports -21.7%, mining exports -16.2% and agricultural exports -7.2%.
The monetary and fiscal policy actions taken so far are expected to contribute to strengthening this trend    Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) in August registered an annual growth rate of 13.9%, which is slightly higher than what was seen the month before (13.8%).
They pointed out that the positive behavior of goods prices has contributed to a noticeable decrease in inflation excluding food and regulated items.
The widening of this imbalance is partly due to the impact of domestic demand on imports, which has only been partially offset by the rebound in exports.
As a result, their currencies have depreciated and their stock markets underwent devaluations.
The Colombia peso, in particular, has appreciated around 8% so far this year.
The exports from these sectors also rose in terms of volume (18.0% and 43.7%, respectively).
Bogota , December 30, 2010
Annual appreciation, the stability or decline in international prices, and a good agricultural supply explain this behavior.Inflation expectations continued to fall in December and early January.
The loan portfolio in national currency showed a growth rate of 13.2%, which is up slightly from that of last month, while the one in foreign currency surged as it went from an annual growth rate of 0.4% to one of 1.9%.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households had an annual growth of 13.2% in February, which is slightly lower than the growth the previous month (13.5%).
Some members from this group highlighted that Core inflation is still above the target, and that inflation expectations increased slightly in the last month.
The strong trend in building permits from the beginning of the year to May also indicates a positive performance in construction activity in the coming months.
This policy option encompasses the fact that both the output gap and inflation will be closing over the course of the year and counteracts the downward pressure that the rise in inflation will generate on the real interest rates.
Although these increments appear small, they align with historically high product levels that reflect marginal variations of significant GDP expansions that occurred in 2021 and 2022.
In the first weeks of the year, there have been significant capital inflows to emerging economies.For 2017, it is expected that the strong transitory shocks that diverted inflation from its target continue to fade, in an environment of a weak economic activity.
However, earlier this year, several indicators of economic activity and expectations in large economies such as Germany, the United States and China, showed signs of recovery and may suggest a moderation in the global slowdown.
This was due to all the sub-groups and particularly public utilities.
The international price for petroleum remains at high levels, in turn, and the prices for coal, nickel, and coffee stopped falling.
As a result, the interest rates for loans to households and to businesses are at historically low levels.
The government in Venezuela decreed a sharp devaluation of the bolívar.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and the full-time co-directors Messrs. Fernando Tenjo Galarza, Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Juan José Echavarría Soto, Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo and César Vallejo Mejía.
Note that the performance of investment in public works, housing construction, and public consumption is a source of high uncertainty for these forecasts Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) in November registered an annual growth rate of 13.30%, a level which is lower than the one seen the previous month (14.03%).
(iv) Private consumption grew at a rate close to its historic average, and it is feasible to expect it will slow somewhat this year, but not significantly.
Moreover, despite less global growth, international prices for oil and other commodities remain high.
This could be related to depreciation of the peso in recent months.
They also highlighted that gas price subsidies, which have provided relief to consumers, are unlikely to be sustainable.
This figure is 42 b less than the one in February and comes after five months of consecutive increases.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República was held in the city of Bogotá on March 22, 2013.
Nevertheless, conditions on the financial markets and with respect to government debt have improved compared to the previous quarter, thanks partly to the announcements by the European Central Bank on unlimited purchases of sovereign bonds (OMT).
José Darío Uribe, Governor of the Central Bank of ColombiaFull-time Board Members in Attendance:Mr. Carlos Gustavo CanoMr.
For what is left of the year and for 2011, substantial changes in their levels are not expected, as a result of which, the terms of trade for countries that are exporters of raw materials like Colombia will continue to be favored.
The poor results for this latter branch contrast with its significant rate of expansion seen in the first half of this year (10.8%) and is the result of supply shocks in the production of oil and coal.
Likewise, other categories relating to house cleaning, hygiene and wardrobe have started showing some rises.
Food products, beverages and clothing were the items that registered the largest reduction in volume.
All inflation expectations also declined.
Cumulative inflation was 1.98% for the year-to-date at October.
In real terms, all average interest rates increased during February, with the exception of those on treasury and consumer loans.
In the area of supply, the construction sector will have been the main source of growth, followed by agriculture, mining and commerce.
(vii) The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and growth projections.
Despite these improvements, inflation levels and expectations continue to surpass the target, as seen in the inflation expectation for 2024, which stands at 5.0%.
This behavior has been much more accentuated in oil-producing countries such as Colombia.This has taken place within a context of weak global economic activity, driven mainly by the economy of the USA.
In view of that fact and the weak forecast for growth, no major inflationary pressure is anticipated for the coming quarters.
With the exception of Venezuela, our major trading partners in Latin America experienced high growth rates during the second quarter of 2010, although those rates are expected to be more moderate during the remainder of the year.
The Board of Directors believes its expansive monetary policy contributes to economic growth in an environment characterized by a healthy financial system The Board of Directors agreed to make no change in the Central Bank’s intervention rate, which will remain at 3%.
This widening implies a smaller current surplus in the mining sector and supposes that the wide use of the external savings by the remaining sectors would have continued in the second half of the year.As for Colombia’s economic growth, the most recent indicators of supply and demand suggest that in the second half of 2014 the GDP would grow at a good pace, although less than the one registered in the first half of the year.
Some directors add that the labor market shows signs of weakening by registering in July 2024 a national unemployment rate of 9.9%, higher by 0.3 pp than the 9.6% level seen in July 2023.
Should this risk materialize, world economy would grow considerably less than expected, the international prices of basic goods may fall, and global risk aversion may be exacerbated, all of which would have adverse effects on the Colombian economy.
The trend in business and consumer confidence indicators has been favorable so far during the third quarter, as has the trend in indicators of sentiment in the manufacturing and service sectors.
However, this will also depend on what happens with inflation expectations.One Co-Director noted that: (a) Yearly inflation continued to increase and reached 9.0% in July, the highest in 16 years, having remained for a year and a half above the upper limit of the target range, exceeding it by 125%.
The main points of discussion among the Board members centered on: (i) the effect of monetary-policy measures, given the time it takes them to work through to the economy; (ii) the elements that influence inflation forecasts for 2008 and 2009; (iii) the advisability of adopting monetary policy measures in a scenario of rising international prices for food and fuel; (iv) the continued upward trend in non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices; (v) a current account deficit that reflect more growth in local demand compared to the increase in national production; (vi) the effects of appreciation in the exchange rate; (vii) the possibility that developments on the international scene, in a situation with a current account deficit, might lead to future exchange rate adjustments; (viii) the uncertainty created by highly volatile international markets and how that volatility might affect the Colombian economy; (ix) the difficulty in assessing available data in a situation where there is a break in the cycle of sustained growth; (x) the risk balance between growth and inflation in a context of rising inflation expectations and a slowdown in the economy; and (xi) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility as a way to anchor inflation expectations, given the possible side-effects of international food and fuel prices; The Board underscored the persistence of inflationary pressures worldwide, and stressed the importance of anchoring inflation and expectations of inflation to the targets, given the inflation forecasts for the coming months.
The inflation expectations revealed in the Central Bank’s monthly survey at the beginning of February were up slightly, but remained within the long-term target range defined by the Board of Directors.
However, some of the factors that have generated oversupply of oil continue, and inventories remain high.
Production of coffee continues to expand at favorable rates.
(iii) The international prices of basic products remain at high levels and encourage the national income of the producing countries.
Recent announcements by the central banks of the major advanced economies suggest that high liquidity and low international interest rates will remain on the policy horizon.
Exports to the United States have maintained their momentum, registering an increase of 54%, largely due to sales of petroleum and derivatives.
For all of 2015, the most probable growth figure was revised downward, from 3.6% to 3.2%, within a range of 2.0% and 4.0%.
The price index for used housing is at historically high levels.
The annual change in the prices of regulated goods and services, driven by utilities and fuel, went from 5.62% in September to 5.94% in October.
The sharpest decline was in lending rates, primarily those for retail (92 b), preferred (72 b) and ordinary credit (49 b).
S/He said that, despite the fact that there are signs of recovery, the figures for economic activity are still weak and could be bolstered by a further reduction of the intervention rate, considering that inflation forecasts continue exhibiting convergence to the 3.0% inflation target in 2018     DECISIONThe Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicadecided by majority to maintain the benchmark interest rate unaltered at 4.5 %.The decision to maintain the intervention rate at 4.5% was approved by six Board Members.
As for non-tradables, the annual variation was 3.70% as opposed to 3.64% the month before.
Generally, in 2011, significant household consumption growth would have been possible (by duplicating its growth average in the past decade), and a strong acceleration in investment growth.
Sales of vehicles continued to rise per unit in November.
The evolution of the agenda over better fiscal and financial integration would determine the way risk perception will behave in the next few months.
According to the Comprehensive Household Survey (GEIH), employment between January and June 2009 rose at an average rate of 2.1% for the nationwide total and 1.5% in the 13 metropolitan areas.
Exports were again driven by the positive performance of products like coffee, coal, nickel-iron, gold, petroleum and its derivatives in the international market.
(v) In March, annual inflation (3.40%) slowed faster than Bank’s technical team and the market expected.
They consider inflation will continue converging to its target, as it has done up to now, and what is relevant at this time is to provide a greater stimulus to the recovery of growth.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the intervention rate unchanged.
They note that these adjustments bring the economy closer to a more sustainable future growth path and thus improve Colombia's international financial conditions.
In this context, Colombia's sovereign risk premium fell in 2023, and the peso appreciated at a higher rate than the currency of comparable countries in the region.The increase in the minimum wage for 2024 exceeded expectations, which influences the price path projected by the technical staff, especially in the services basket.
Cement production is down by 15.1% during the course of the year to May.
A slowdown is expected this year, the extent of which will depend on the international situation.
The unemployment rate declined during the first three months of the year.
Given this scenario, long-term interest rates on United States treasuries ceased to decline in recent weeks and were situated above the average observed in 2013.A number of countries in the region have seen their risk premiums increase in the last few weeks; nevertheless, they are still low and below the average for 2013. International oil prices declined, as prices for some of the commodities exported by Colombia.
The first-quarter average for the consumer confidence index remained high and growth rates for merchandise exports during the early months of the year were higher than at the end of 2007.
According to the figures released by DANE, industrial production in August of this year was 3.3% less than in August 2008.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, Carolina Soto Losada, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Further detail on the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank will be presented in the monthlyMonetary Policy Report for July 2018and in the statistical annex (Only Available in Spanish)  CONTEXTThe average growth forecast for Colombia’s main trading partners for 2018 was revised downwards in this report (2.4%).
Annual producer price inflation (PPI) in July was 1.8% as opposed to 2.1% in June Growth The indicators at hand show the momentum in local demand witnessed at the start of the year continued during the second quarter and, although less evident, in the third.
With respect to the United States, the 2.0% growth (a/q) for the third quarter of 2010 was slightly above that registered for the second quarter of the same year, 1.7% (a/q).
The favorable performance of household consumption in the fourth quarter of last year was confirmed by the changes in imports and employment in December.
Added to this is the major downward adjustment in perishable food and non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices, and the possible adverse effects the US recession and the world crisis might have on Colombia’s economic growth, apart from the uncertainty surrounding the fate and sustainability of developments in the Venezuelan economy.
In tradables (excluding food and regulated items), the annual variation rose to 1.1%; that is, four (4) bp more than the rate in May, as has been the case since April.
As a result, the number of licenses remained at levels that are similar to those of five years ago.
The sector’s -term trends are also favorable as indicated by the area being approved for construction pursuant to licenses granted.
The annual variation of producer prices (PPI) was 4.8% in May compared to 4.7% in April.
Changes in inflation are likely to continue to be affected by ample excess productive capacity, which should progressively reduce over time.
In February, industrial production and the confidence index in the manufacturing sector rose surprisingly.Asia’s other emerging market economies have experienced several surges in industrial activity and in exports associated with normalization of the supply chain in Thailand and increased purchases from China.The Latin American economies continued to grow at a pace slightly below their potential.
On the contrary, most Latin American currencies appreciated last month.
The registers for retail trade, consumer confidence, and sales expectations suggest so.
(iii) The industrial confidence index is still at high levels while consumer confidence has remained on a rising trend for several months and is at one of the highest historical levels.
With respect to the predictions for growth and the unemployment rate, some improvements were presented for 2013 and 2014.So far, the reaction of some market indicators has not been very strong in view of the announcement.
(vii) In November, there was a pause in the moderate growth bank loans (N/ and F/C) have seen.
FOB imports between January and April totaled USD 10,058 and experienced an annual reduction of 12.5%.
Recent developments in inflationIn February, annual consumer inflation (2.32%) registered a surge of 19 basis points (bp) compared to what was registered in January.
Exports to Asia rose 233% and to the European Union, 55.6%.
The real lending rate approached its historic average (12.3% actual vs. 12.5% average), while the real fixed-term deposit rate (DTF) has reached it already (4.8%) Discussion and Policy Options The Board emphasized the following points in its deliberations: Continued price increases at a rate that exceeds the targets set by the Board of Directors; The considerable weight food brings to bear on prices in an international scenario marked by upward pressures; Uncertainty about how regulated prices will behave in the future, given the indexation mechanisms used to determine those rates; The major increase in production costs for companies in terms of raw materials and labor; Uncertainty about what is in store for the world economy and Colombia’s main export markets, particularly Venezuela; How recent peso revaluation has affected inflation and the outlook for growth in the tradable sectors; The course of inflation expectations, which are still above the targets set by the Board of Directors.
As to the different types of lending, most of the momentum centered on commercial loans, which posted an annual increase of 19.6% during the first week of May, as opposed to 17% in March.
Building permits for the month of August, for both housing and other purposes, continued to show annual downswings of more than 25%.
With this, on the demand side, growth in 2017 would be more balanced than the one observed in 2016.As for inflation, it stood at 4.69% on a yearly basis in March, while core inflation, measured as the average of the four indicators monitored by the Central Bank, continued with no significant changes.While most of the deceleration in the month is explained by the behavior of food, the decline in inflation of tradables (excluding food and regulated items) suggests that the upward effect of the tax reform and the Liquor Act would have taken place, for the most part, in the first months of the year.
To April, oil production remained at levels similar to those of the past 6 months, and coffee reduced substantially compared to the first quarter.
With respect to the CPI without foods, its annual variation remained virtually stable at 2.75% resulting from a rise in the non-tradable component and a fall in tradable and regulated items.
As was the case throughout the year, this item was bolstered considerably by purchases of transport equipment and machinery and equipment.
In Germany and France, the two growth engines in the region, a deceleration of exports has been witnessed.
(vi) The reductions in the Banco de la Republica’s interest rates have been transmitted to the interest rates for deposits and loans in the financial system.
Additionally, salaried and formal employment have slowed down in recent months.Real interest rates continue at a level below their historical averages calculated since 2000 (except for credit cards).
In attendance were Mr. Juan Carlos Echeverry, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and full-time co-directors Messrs. Carlos Gustavo Cano, Juan José Echavarría, Fernando Tenjo, Juan Pablo Zárate and César Vallejo.
In this scenario, fears of a global recession have generated large volatility in financial markets and a decrease in some commodity prices such as oil and copper.Based on these considerations, all members of the BDBR agreed on the need to continue the monetary policy adjustment process that ensures a return to the 3% annual inflation target within a setting of an economy that continues to grow at a good pace amid the intensifying inflationary pressures.
In addition, households in January continued to have a real interest rate for consumption that is lower than the average has been since 1998.
(vii) Annual inflation in May (2%) was similar to what it was in April.
As of May the annual variation for food was 3.6%, a percentage that corrects an unexpected slowdown for this group in the month of April.
Nevertheless, on average, the market analysts and some multilateral entities are still predicting a slowdown in the world economy in 2011.
However, Colombia’s trading partners in the region continue to exhibit low performance of their economic activity.
This decision also incorporates the possibility of detecting a substantial change in foreign economic conditions on time and reacting to them rapidly.
In January, total exports in dollars fell again at a rate similar to the fall in the prices of oil.
According to the Bank’s monthly survey of financial market analysts, expected inflation for December of this year remained at 2.6% while the inflation expectations for the coming 12 months were at 3.0%, 7 bp lower than the previous month.
Less of an adjustment in banking services and stability in annual rental inflation were important factors in this respect.
Likewise, if the trend that has been seen in prices for the main export products continues, the average terms of trade in 2013 will be lower than those seen last year AND OPTIONSThe board of directors took the following relevant aspects under consideration:(i) The growth of our trading partners will probably be lower than expected and, as a result, the contribution of foreign demand to the growth of the country will remain low.
According to the survey, manufacturers believe the major problems they faced in 2012 were the exchange rate, access to raw materials and low demand, in that order.
Reverse-repo auctions through remunerated deposits not subject to reserve requirements will be closed temporarily as of Monday, October 27.
Some inflation basket items continue to show lower price increases.
In the case of commerce, the information from Fedesarrollo and Fenalco shows a weakening in the outlook the merchants have of the future.
These rates are below the respective averages calculated since 2000 The External Context The latest figures show Europe continues to contract and the United States is experiencing moderate growth.
The Board expects annual inflation to end the year below the floor of the target range (4.5%).
Thus, they considered that economic growth in 2019 will be very close to 3.5%.Vis-à-visthe previous Board meeting, international liquidity has tended to improve.
This largely reflects the effect of the global slowdown on Colombia’s foreign trade as well as the drops seen in the production of petroleum and coal in the third quarter due to supply shocks which will provisionally be transitory.
During the fourth quarter, exports in dollars fell by nearly 6% compared to the same period in 2008.
In their opinion, the risks of excessive deceleration and persistence of inflation have risen simultaneously, increasing the uncertainty about the pace at which further reductions to the interest rates should take place.One member of the Board voted in favor of maintaining the benchmark interest rate unaltered.
So far this year, there has been a slowdown in commercial loans denominated in pesos but a rise in financing through the issuance of bonds by firms together with greater foreign indebtedness.
Finally one board member proposed that macro-prudential measures be applied to speed up the transmission of monetary policy to demand Based on the present evaluation of the balance of these risks, the Board of Directors decided to raise the benchmark interest rate of the Banco de la Republica by 25 basis points.
As has been observed so far, the trade balance (goods and non-factor services) would have contributed mostly to the adjustment of the external imbalance.
This has caused a drop in the terms of trade of exporting countries and has deteriorated their national income.
At the same time, the annual change in the CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated items stayed at 1.3% in October.
However, foreign sales of the country’s leading agricultural products declined at an annual rate of 19.2%, given the drop in exports of coffee and bananas.
However, these results contrast with the indicator for total retail sales, which declined 0.3% annually (excluding cars, the dip was 0.2%).
The dynamism of output has been weaker than projected, inflation has lowered, but inflation expectations exceed the target.
Perishable foods more generally affected by weather conditions were those having experienced the most noticeable decreases (from 1.1% to -2.0%), as explained in part by a recovery in the farming supply propelled by the relatively high prices of several of these food items until past year‟s third quarter.
The lower growth of the GDP and of domestic demand originated from the area of gross fixed capital formation, specifically from the poor performance of investments in public works projects, construction and buildings, and transportation equipment.
Other indicators of economic activity are compatible with the technical staff's growth forecast for 2016 (2.7% as the most likely figure, within a range between 1.5% and 3.2%) AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed on the need to continue increasing the benchmark interest rate in order to ensure convergence of inflation expectations to the goal and an increase of domestic demand consistent with a lower growth of national income.
The commercial loan portfolio is the one least subject to supply constraints.
They emphasized that the lower growth of credit and monetary aggregates reinforce the downward adjustment in the excess aggregate demand.
This expansion rate, together with that registered in the forth quarter of 2006, is the highest seen since 1979.
They noted the slowdown in the rise of core inflation and the reduction seen in inflation expectations as the peso appreciated, despite increases in gasoline prices that exert upward pressure on the regulated items component of the consumer basket.
Business opinion surveys confirm the economic slowdown that is reflected in the sector indicators.
Once again, electrical power rates dropped sharply.There were no significant changes in the core inflation indicators during March.
Other factors such as devaluation of the “strong bolívar” and the loss of confidence in the Venezuela market among Colombian exporters make it difficult to be optimistic about an increase in exports should trade relations be reestablished fully.
Respectively, these variations were 3.45% and -0.06% in April compared to 3.4% and -0.17% in March.
On the monthly level, the trade balance in October (FOB) showed a surplus of US$134 From January to October, it still showed a positive balance of US$1.188 , a level that is similar to that from the same period last year.
According to the Comprehensive Household Survey (GEIH), employment rose during the June-August 2009 moving quarter at an annual rate of 6.6% nationwide and 3.6% in the 13 major areas.
This represents a better-than-expected behavior of national income during this period, and means that there was a decline in the external vulnerability of the economy.
In this scenario, it is essential for the monetary authority to continue monitoring the external conditions and the domestic effects of likely shocks.From the perspective of domestic demand, there was consensus in that uncertainty about the pace of economic recovery increased.
The consumer and mortgage loan portfolios, in turn, saw growth rates that were 24.8% and 17.3% respectively.
However, despite the negative annual rates, direct external borrowing was up compared to the level in July.
This was explained primarily by the downturn in building construction and works, and to a lesser extent by low growth in coal and by less favorable performance than was expected for coffee.
This would raise intermediate and long-term interest rates, which would have a negative effect on economic activity and government bond prices.
Considering the magnitude of the external shock, a 3.0% GDP growth would represent a positive result for the economy, as long as it comes with a reduction of external vulnerabilities.Other Board members consider that GDP growth in 2015 will be closer to 3.5%, or even above.
Annual inflation in the price of highly-indexed items remained in the vicinity of 7%.
In the last quarter, the greater pace of increase in the prices of foods and regulated goods explained a great percentage of the acceleration of inflation.
Several Board members said they prefer to hold the intervention interest rate at its current level, based on the following considerations.
Nevertheless, the GDP growth for the set of Colombia’s commercial partners was maintained because price increases in some countries like Ecuador were revised, given the recent trends.
Food inflation went from 13% in November to 13.2% in December.
In May, the international price of oil continued rising and risk premia remained stable at last month's levels.
Between November 30 and December 16, 2010, the rates for public debt securities jumped 56 bp and 31 bp for the one and five year securities.
Inflation expectations also go down: 3.1% is expected for December 2012 and about 3.3% for July 2013, while those deriving from the treasury „TES‟ bonds at horizons between two and five years are around 2.5%.
The conditions that supported the momentum observed in consumption and investment in machinery and equipment are expected to continue during 2013.
Internal demand in Venezuela declined at an annual rate of 0.9% during the same period, primarily because of the drop in household consumption (-2.5% annual) Financial Variables In August, the nominal rates on consumer and ordinary lending averaged 17.6% and 9.8% respectively, having dropped by 32 bp and 6 bp, in that order, compared to the month before.
However, some upward pressures on inflation in the first part of 2019 are not ruled out, associated with the transitory effects of a weakEl Niñoand the estimated impact of the increase in the minimum wage.
One exception is Venezuela where the growth was -4.5% compared to -2.4% in the second quarter.
In response, the policy discussion centered on whether to delay or to proceed immediately with a decision to partially withdraw monetary stimulus that the economy has been receiving since the start of the pandemic.Five board members advocated in favor of holding the policy interest rate.
Downward pressure was exerted by the annual change in regulated prices, with 6.4% inflation in April compared to 6.9% in March.
This takes place within an environment of deterioration of the terms of trade and a growing uncertainty regarding the recovery of the economic activity worldwide and the cost of external financing, which are factors that may impact aggregate demand and the exchange rate AND OPTIONSThe Board of Directors unanimously decided to keep the benchmark interest rate at 4.5%.The Board Members highlighted that the economy is showing a strong dynamic, but that there are risks of negative clashes in the traditional policy horizon which may result in a slowdown.
The former is consistent with the 20% annual plunge in exports to Venezuela.
During the period, the rate of unemployment continued to fall and for the 13 areas it was at 11.5%.
All of this would adversely affect the Colombian economy.
The interbank rates (IBR and BRI) in January and early February were close to the policy rate.
For emerging economies the situation is less homogenous inasmuch as countries such as Brazil, India and Indonesia continue to experience high inflation while economies such as Chile, Colombia, and Peru have seen a moderate rise in their inflation although the level is still low.It should be noted that the economies with strong inflationary and exchange rate pressures such as India and Indonesia raised their benchmark interest rates in the last few weeks.
During the same month, exports to Venezuela fell 71.5% in annual terms.
In this context, the recent slowdown of aggregate demand and the better prospects for inflation allow for a reduction of the benchmark interest rate.
To July, the information from DANE on foreign trade suggests that the trade deficit would continue to adjust.In July, the terms of trade (foreign trade methodology) were close to the average of 2015.
The risk premia of Latin American countries also increased, and for Brazil and Colombia reached their highest levels since 2009In addition to oil, international prices of other commodities exported by the region, particularly by Colombia, continue being low.
On the supply side, the sectors that grew the most were industry and financial services, while mining was the only one that is contracted.The figures available for retail and industry to April show a better performance of the economy.
On average, 972 MBD were produced in the fourth quarter, which is more than during the previous three months (934 MBD).
The local component increased as well.Inflation expectations rose slightly in June, but remained at levels in harmony with meeting the inflation target.
China's GDP slowed down again, while the figures for economic activity of the major countries in the region suggest that their product will expand at low or negative rates.
Future movements of the benchmark interest rate must be subject to the evolution of expectations and to the speed of the convergence of expectations and observed inflation towards the target.Other members highlighted that, despite the fact that the economy has been adjusting quickly, risks persist that indexation mechanisms generate inefficiencies in the convergence of inflation to its target.
The first quarter of 2009 saw no change in this respect, as suggested by the additional decline in consumer confidence indicators.
Those embedded in public debt bonds rose slightly in January and are currently around 3.5%.In all, inflation is expected to continue lowering in the first quarter of the year, partly as a result of the reversal of the transitory shocks that have diverted it from its target.
The DTF rate was 5.04% on August 14, 2008, which is 28 bp less than a month earlier and 515 bp less than on December 19, 2008.
This is being confirmed by the momentum of consumption imports (annual growth as of April 30.5%), the growth of consumer credit (22.4% as of May) and the perception of businessmen about their current sales.
Inflation expectations in the quarterly and monthly surveys done by the Banco de la República at the beginning of June continue to show declines and are within the long term target range fixed by the Board of Directors.
For example interest rates for consumers are still historically low, and consumer lending is growing at high rates (20.5% average nominal rate for April), with a tendency to accelerate.
However, the outlook is less favorable for other commodities and minerals such as copper, silver and gold, and for some foods as well, which have seen recent price declines.
The conjunction of the above-mentioned factors along with improved expectations favored a recovery in consumer confidence at the end of 2011.
This has prompted the central banks of many countries to interrupt the interest rate hikes witnessed in past months.
This sharp drop was due, in part, to fewer working days in April 2009 compared to the year before, because of Easter Week.
These include specifically the iron and steel, textile, clothing, shoe, leather manufacturing, processed food sectors, etc.
In the eurozone, although production came to a halt in the first quarter of the year, it nevertheless was higher than expected by the analysts and the Bank’s technical team.
The core inflation indicators also showed no major changes in February.
They emphasized that recent inflation data has been at historic lows and anticipated a lower inflation path on the forecast horizon, which would open additional space to support economic recovery through a more expansive policy stance.
(iii) The deterioration in external conditions and the moderating of some domestic indicators do not seem to be enough to offset a domestic performance characterized by excesses of demand that possibly could threaten the inflation target and output stability even in the medium term due to financial imbalances.
The annual variation in food prices dropped from 5.5% in May to 2.8% in June, largely due to perishable foods and, to a lesser extent, because of the price of grains, oils and other imported foodstuffs.
As for the commercial channel, exports were still growing at a good pace by January, especially those of mining origin.
This is similar to the rate observed at the start of the year and more than the increase during 2007.
This is indicated by the performance of production variables, such as retail sales and cement shipments, the results of surveys of consumer and business expectations, and the key job market indicators.
It is noteworthy that these figures may be affected by the severe winter season early in the year and, therefore, the activity could be expected to spike in the coming months.
In contrast, the industrial sector (including coffee bean threshing) would be the one that contributed the least to the growth of output.The above makes it possible to maintain a forecast range of 3.8% to 5.2% for the growth of the GDP in the third quarter.
Last of all, the annual change in the area of eating away from home declined 20 bp in the last month and was at 5.1%.In the CPI excluding food, the bulk of the drop in the annual change in prices in November was concentrated in the basket of regulated items.
Finally, one of them mentioned that with shocks such as those suffered by the Colombian economy, it is difficult to assess the excess of installed capacity, with the risk of changing the monetary policy stance prematurely.Two members of the Board voted for a 25 bp reduction of the benchmark interest rate.
This number was in line with what was projected by the Bank’s technical team and similar to what the market expected on average.
In Colombia, with an average real rate of exchange for 2012 at 8% below the equilibrium rate, the momentum in exports drops.
This was possible because of the fact that, at the beginning of this year, there were no readjustments in the Transmilenio fares in Bogota unlike what happened last year.
In July-August, total imports fell 14.4% on a yearly basis, and so far this year to August they accumulate an 11.8% declineWith the above, it is likely that in the third quarter deficits in the trade balance and current account related to GDP would have accelerated.
The measurements of core inflation not show significant changes.
The annual increase in prices for regulated goods went from 3.9% in April to 4.6% in May.
In the United States, the latest information suggests its economy could grow at a somewhat slower pace than was estimated for 2012.
The main points of discussion among the Board members centered on: (i) the effect of monetary-policy measures, given the time it takes them to work through to the economy; (ii) the elements that influence the inflation forecasts for 2008 and 2009; (iii) the advisability of adopting monetary policy measures in a scenario of high international prices for food and fuel; (iv) the behavior of non-tradable inflation, excluding food and regulated prices, which was down in July compared to the month before; (v) the lower forecasts for the current account deficit; (vi) the effects of accumulated appreciation in the exchange rate and the devaluation observed during the last few weeks; (vii) the possibility that changes on the international scene, in a situation with a current account deficit, might lead to future exchange rate adjustments; (viii) the uncertainty created by highly volatile international markets and how that volatility might affect the Colombian economy; (ix) the difficulty in assessing available data in a situation marked by a break in the cycle of sustained growth; (x) the risk balance with respect to growth and inflation in a context of rising inflation expectations and economic slowdown; and (xi) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility and to anchor inflation expectations, given the risk of the side-effects of international food and fuel prices.
In view of the foregoing, the Board of Directors agreed unanimously to hold Banco de la República’s intervention interest rates steady, and believes it is important to continue to monitor the effect the international situation might have on growth, as well as the inflationary pressures associated with international food and fuel prices.
The above might increase capital flows to the emerging economies, thus generating currency appreciation pressures.
This behavior continues to be explained by appreciation in the exchange rate (which came to an annual rate of 4.4% in January for the monthly average) and by scant pressure from international prices.The non-tradable CPI excluding food and regulated items rose marginally during the past month (by 2 bp) and stood at 3.94%.
As a result of the above, domestic demand grew at and annual rate of 6.1% in the first quarter.
The most important drop in total purchases was in intermediate goods and raw materials acquired in the United States, especially mining and pharmaceutical products.
The group of regulated items was the only one that posted within the inflation target range.
Vehicle sales confirm that perception, having continued to rise at an important pace during July.
Within this aggregate, the fall (8.1%) registered in works stood up, as explained to a great extent by a drop corresponding to the oil and mining sector.
The Board members’ main points of analysis centered around the following aspects: (i) the inflation projections for 2010 and 2011; (ii) the reduced variation in prices for tradable goods due to the appreciation of the peso compared to the dollar; (iii) the lagged effect of monetary policy measures on production and prices; (iv) the projections for economic growth for 2010 which suggest a more rapid recovery than predicted and which led the technical team to raise their forecast for the year; (v) the recent movement in the financial system portfolio and in the high level of prices for assets; (vi) the drop in inflation expectations; (vii) the recent trend in capital flows; (viii) the balance of risk between growth and inflation in a context of a recovering economy and inflation that is at the long term target range and (ix) the need to maintain the monetary authority’s credibility and anchor inflation expectations to the long term target.
The quarterly survey of economic expectations suggests an inflation expectation of 5.35% and 4.85% to December 2016 and 2017, respectively.
Mention was made of the fact that the intervention interest rate has been cut by 500 bp in nearly five months and its current level is clearly expansive.
(vi) The real repo interest rate in Colombia is below its historical average but the same thing is happening in the majority of the countries around the world.
The economic recovery of the United States would be slower than estimated, while the euro zone and Japan continue exhibiting low growth rates.
Added to this complex panorama for the developed countries is the build-up in inflationary pressures, particularly within the Euro zone.
During this same period, the decline has been: -188 bp for mortgage loans, -203 bp for consumer loans, and -193 bp for construction loans.The levels of real interest rates for consumer loans, mortgages, preferential loans, ordinary commercial ones and commercial lines of credit as well as loans for construction in September were below their historical averages as calculated since 2000.
Mr. Óscar Iván Zuluaga, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Juan Mario Laserna Mr. Leonardo Villar Inflation, economic growth and their outlook for the future were discussed and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
This is explained mainly by the performance of consumption and investment in advanced economies.
Real average DTF and lending rates (according to the method used by the Central Bank) declined by 305bp and 362bp, respectively, between December 2008 and May 2009.
Conversely, the groups of tradables (excluding food and regulated items), regulated, processed foods, and meals outside the home pushed annual inflation down.
The conditions of international liquidity have relaxed, pushing away devaluation pressures, and, in any event, consumer prices of tradable products do not seem to be picking up the depreciation from the end of 2018.
Domestic demand and its main components (consumption and investment) lost some momentum, but continued to register higher increases than those in total GDP.
Hence, the expansion rhythm of the third quarter is likely to be higher than the second quarter’s.
– The imports of capital goods are falling in dollars and in real pesos (-21% annually as of February) which suggests that this expenditure will continue to show a contraction in annual terms during the first quarter.
The question is to what point this growth can be sustained if the markets in the advanced economies –which absorb most of the exports of emerging countries– continue to weaken AND The board members focused on the following points: i) the growth of uncertainty in international financial markets, ii) the growth of the GDP in the second quarter, iii) the strong performance of domestic demand which is reflected both in the increase in consumption and in private investment, iv) the better indicators of quality employment in the labor market, v) the upsurge in loans to households and businesses in a context of real interest rates that have risen but that are at levels that are lower than their historical averages, vi) the historically low level of the Bank’s benchmark interest rate and of most of the real interest rates and their possible future effect on risk-taking in the economy if they are maintained for an excessively prolonged period, vii) the high level of the terms of trade and their contribution to the growth of national revenue, viii) annual inflation iin July rose for the third consecutive month (3.42%) especially due to the performance of food prices.
The annual change in the CPI for meals outside the home (3.5%) was up by 20 bp in June with respect to the month before.In June, the average of the four core inflation indicators monitored by Banco de la República rose slightly to 2.52%.
The tax reform helped to reduce some of these prices, a fact that has a temporary impact on the annual change in the CPI.
Once more, the evidence of stronger pass-through mechanisms of the monetary policy that might impact the future evolution of the benchmark interest rate was noted.
The average of the various measurements of core inflation began to converge towards the target, once again,  and was 2.7%Analysts’ expectations for inflation one year ahead and the expectations derived from government bonds at two, three and five years, remain near or slightly above the long-term target (3%).In short, aggregate demand continues to exhibit strong growth in a context of nearly full use of productive capacity.
However, the rest of the sub-baskets (regulated, tradables, and non-tradables) showed greater stability this month in comparison to what was seen in previous months.The decline in the annual change in the CPI for food – from 1.7% in January to 1.2% in February – again covered a substantial number of products including perishables (from -5.0% in January to -5.6% in February), processed (from 2.2% in January to 1.6% in February), and eating away from home (from 3.9% in January to 3.6% in February).
They felt that this reduction is consistent with the new information regarding the lower growth of the economy, the reduction in inflation expectations, and the expected path of decline in inflation to reach the 3.0% target in 2018.Other Board Members voted for a 25 bp reduction.
Bogotá , October 14 2011.
In addition, a migration from national production to sales of imported goods can be seen, especially clothing, shoes, and manufactured leather products.
The positive impact of lower food inflation was partially offset by higher annual inflation in regulated items, reaching 16.9% in November, attributed to increases in fuel and energy prices.
In attendance were Alberto Carrasquilla Barrera, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, Carolina Soto Losada, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook on the macroeconomic situation by the technical staff of the Central Bank (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Further detail on the macroeconomic situation prepared by the technical staff from the Central Bank will be presented in theMonetary Policy Report for December 2018and in thestatistical annex (Only Available in Spanish) CONTEXTUntil the third quarter, external conditions favored the performance of the Colombian economy.
During the fourth quarter, a million four thousand barrels were pumped daily on average.
This increase is explained by the variation in the prices of food (14.28%), regulated items (6.71%) and, to a lesser extent, non-tradable inflation (excluding food and regulated items) (4.97%).
As was expected, inflation increased, a fact explained by the greater pace of increase in the prices of food, which is expected to be transitory.
The surge was seen in the three groups: consumption, raw materials and capital goods Foreign context The latest information available regarding the panorama abroad suggests a worldwide economic recovery that could occur more slowly and unequally than what the market has expected.
An extension from two to three weeks in the reserve calculation for the end of the year.
Imports of capital goods continued declining in the fourth quarter in constant pesos.
On the demand side, the fall in car sales suggests a slowdown in the consumption of durables for that monthIn January, annual growth of corporate credit slowed down again, due to the slower pace of increase of direct external credit.
These minutes contain a summary of inflation, economic growth and their prospects for the future, which was prepared by the Bank’s technical staff (Section 1), in addition to a review of the key deliberations and policy options considered by the Board of Directors (Section 2)    AND GROWTHa.
Furthermore, the expected negative impact of the El Niño phenomenon on price appears to be waning.
Total imports rose 8.1% in the amount accumulated between January and July; this is two percentage points more than during the first half of the year.The aforementioned trends in foreign trade increased the likelihood of a negative trade balance throughout 2014 and a larger current account deficit than in 2013.
As of April, the information on exports, industrial activity, and retail sales show an annual growth that is lower than it was in past years.
Consequently, the growth in base money rose as well (to 14.7% in June).
The information on retail trade, consumer confidence, and the survey of economic expectations by Banco de la República suggest a slowdown of consumption and private investment.
The annual change in the CPI for tradables excluding food and regulated items (1.6% annually), in turn, rose 4 bp with respect to the previous month.
Full-time Directors: Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Juan Mario Laserna Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Leonardo Villar Circumstances surrounding inflation and economic growth, and their prospects for the future were discussed, and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
The annual change in prices for this basket rose by 31 basis points over the previous figure on record.
In the first quarter, a sharp annual growth reduction was registered in exports and imports, where the growth rate for the latter shifted from 21.3% in the fourth quarter of the previous year to 13% in the first quarter of 2012, and from 16.2% to 6.3% in the case of external sales.
(vi) In July, the annual inflation rate (2.2%) was somewhat lower than the Bank’s technical staff had estimated, and average core inflation remained relatively stable at 2.5%.
– The retail sales reported by DANE grew in real terms at an annual rate of 8% and 13.1% for the months of April and May respectively.
This is due to the high prices for petroleum and the lower rate of price adjustment for imported goods.The low inflationary pressures and negative output gaps continue to allow the developed countries to maintain an expansionary monetary policy.
The core inflation measurements continued to average around 3%.
The Board has considered that, on the external front, the following must be taken into account: (i) In Europe, the public debt crises of some countries in the region and doubts arising on the solvency of certain banks continue to affect household and entrepreneur confidence.
– In May, the annual change for the industrial production index (IPI) excluding coffee threshing was 7.5% which is lower than for the month of April (7.9%).
The recovery in the consumer confidence index in September not offset the declines registered during the two previous months.
The general financial conditions, however, may have adjusted to the rising price of foreign financing.
It is important to point out that there have been considerable discrepancies between DANE’s series and those released by ANDI, specifically with respect to year-to-date growth rates and trends.
The consumption credit behavior suggests that households are increasing their degree of indebtedness in a significant manner.
On the one hand, there are the developed countries with moderate growth, although the results for the US economy showed better than expected performance.
This fall is mainly explained by mining exports, especially by the lower level in the price of oil in comparison to a year ago.
However, they consider it possible to speed up the pace of interest rate cuts without risking the progress achieved towards lowering inflation.
For the whole year, GDP growth is expected to be 2.0%, within a range of 1.5% and 2.5% (versus 2.3%, within a range between 1.5% and 3.0% in the June report).
The drop was due, in large part, to the -7.4% change in the exports of mining products (mainly coal and gold).
While these growth rates represent a substantial deceleration relative to previous years, economic activity levels remain high, and unemployment has reached historic lows amidst robust labor participation rates.
Our main trading partner, the United States in particular, is showing more marked signs of slowdown than was expected by the market.
The causes and consequences of this phenomenon were discussed by the members of the Board to determine their position regarding the monetary policy stance.The majority of Co-directors voted in favor of increasing the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp.
This is especially the case in the Euro Zone, where inflationary pressures have begun to pass through to core inflation.
It was also higher than the data from October last year and than the average calculated since 2001.
Others that may have contributed significantly to the growth are financial services, commerce, and mining.
Likewise, with the information from the Fedesarrollo survey, the signals on industrial performance are not positive.
Finally, it reiterated that monetary policy will depend on new information as it becomes available.Bogotá,
The latter one is above the long range goal announced by the Board (2% - 4%).
The inflation expectations from the quarterly and monthly surveys done by the Banco de la Republica at the beginning of October continue to show declines and are within the long term target range fixed by the Board of Directors.
By type of expenditure, growth continues to be propelled by household consumption; this can be inferred from the dynamic behavior of commerce sales (annual variation of 3.7% on average as of November) and imports of consumer goods in dollars in October and November (annual 17% on average), as well as from portfolio and interest rate data addressed to this item (in the fourth quarter, the annual growth in the consumer credit balance was nearly 22%).
Although the foreseeable reduction in the growth rate of food prices in the coming months must contribute to attenuate the increase of total inflation, it is very unlikely that with the current monetary policy stance the speed of its reduction be enough to face this challenge successfully.
This plan was well-received by the markets, boosting agents’ confidence.
With respect to the international trading accounts, exports slowed down in annual terms in comparison to the second quarter (1.9% vs8%) due to several supply shocks in mining production that substantially affected foreign sales.
According to its statement, this decision was reached due to the increased uncertainty in the international outlook and lower-than-expected inflationary pressures.
During the month, international organizations such as the IMF and the World Bank forecast negative global economic growth in 2009.
Thus, the Colombian economy would receive an additional boost next year generated by a stronger external demand Consistent with a greater global demand and a lower growth of global production of crude oil, the price of oil is expected to remain at current levels, which would continue driving the recovery in the country’s terms of trade for the rest of the year.
This was favored by the low interest rates and wide availability of credit.
International prices for food, raw materials and oil continue to falling and could have a significant impact on total inflation, depending on the performance of the exchange rate and on the country’s trade policy.
This is corroborated by expectations within the business community, which are still relatively high.
The risks of the international crisis over the financing of the balance of payments constitute an additional argument to be cautious in the adoption of the monetary policy.
However, the rise in raw material prices, the increase in domestic demand and the improvement in economic performance worldwide suggest this trend will not intensify.
This situation makes it possible to foresee lower pressures on inflation for the next few months.With respect to inflation expectations, according to the monthly survey done of analysts in financial entities, the inflation expected for December of this year is 3.0% and, in twelve months, 3.2%.
Compared to the month before, those derived from 2 and 3 year paper declined while the 5-year ones rose GrowthThe latest information available indicates that some areas of domestic demand were expanding at a moderately positive rate in the third quarter.
The annual growth rate for this variable went from 15.12% to 15.10% between October 2012 and January 2013.
The loan portfolio in national currency climbed from 12.90% in August to 13.18% in September and that in foreign currency went from 30.91% to 27.25% during the same period.Broken down by market, the portfolio of loans granted to households registered an annual growth in September of 12.80%, which is lower than the growth in the previous month (13.19%).
It had been 3.4% in December of the previous year and, since February 2011 (at 3.0%), has continued to rise interruptedly.
The slowdown in the mortgage portfolio, in turn, has been less accentuated with variation rates of 16.4% and 15.6% in the same period.The real interest rates (discounting the CPI excluding food) for the October disbursements for consumer, mortgage, and ordinary and preferential commercial loans were at 15.6%, 9.9%, 9.0%, and 5.6% respectively.
With respect to the indicators for core inflation, the average went from 2.34% in October to 2.41% in November.
This fact, coupled with weak economic growth, has allowed central banks, especially those in the developed economies, to maintain a highly expansive monetary policy.
As the discussion developed the following points stood out: i) the fall in the pace of price growth over the month which was more than what the market and the Bank’s technical work expected; ii) the continuous decline in core inflation indicators and in inflation expectations that are in the target range fixed by the Board of Directors for the upcoming year; iii) the reduction in price growth was generalized again; iv) the transitory effect the “El Niño” phenomenon could have on price growth; v) the improvement in the growth of producer and consumer confidence indicators; vi) the recovery of M3 and especially, liabilities subject to reserve requirement; vii) the financial system portfolio in legal currency which, although it continues to fall, is growing more than the nominal GDP; viii) the issuing of bonds that has complemented the productive sector’s financing; ix) the behavior of the market interest rates in response to the lowering of the Bank’s benchmark rate; x) the slowdown in the growth of the Venezuelan economy this year and the outlook for 2010; xi) the effect of the exchange rate on inflation and the growth of the product of the tradable sectors; xii) the performance of the interest rates for public debt securities.
Others believe any further increase in the benchmark rate is unnecessary, considering the time it takes monetary policy to have an effect.
(viii) The performance of loans and growth of asset value could be due to structural factors and not only to a low interest rate.
The first is the slow but steady recovery in imports of capital goods, particularly for industry.
As long as this does not happen, the greater financing needs of the industrialized economies could generate a rise in world interest rates.
The decline in demand that began in the United States and in several European economies spread to other regions of the globe.
This trend persists because essential items like rents, education, and personal services, among others, tend to adjust in line with observed inflation and wage increments.The different metrics used to gauge inflation expectations continued to drop, indicating an overall downward trajectory for inflation.
In spite of the above, the international markets continue to show a high aversion to risk due to the situation in Europe.
Commercial credit is showing signs of more momentum, as confirmed by larger disbursements.
Household consumption will have grown at rates that are similar to its historical average.
Added to this is the emergence of new inflation pressure originating with high oil and food prices and uncertainty about the future of Colombian exports to Venezuela.
The slowdown in the basket for regulated prices (a fall of 48 bp compared to October) was due to a correction in the fees for electricity in Cali after a sharp rise that was registered two months ago.
Conversely, services such as health, transportation, and recreation, among others, have continued to push inflation upwards, which was reflected in the 47 bps increase in core inflation excluding food and regulated items seen in March.
For developed economies as well as for many countries which are importers of raw materials, these lower prices must result in a decrease in their inflation in the short term.
All these rates are below their respective historical averages calculated since 2000.
Particularly, annual growth for consumption goods imports was 21%, for intermediate goods was 29%, and for capital goods was 46%.
The annual variation in prices for non-tradable goods excluding food and regulated goods rose from 4.7% in July to 4.9% in August.
By June, the annual increase in total exports was 11.7%, as opposed to 30% the month before.
This could suggest growth in the sector would have contracted less during July than in previous months.Oil production surpassed one million barrels per day (1.002 Mbd) in July, up from 974,000 in June.
They outlined their support for the eventual normalization of monetary policy but suggested that continued uncertainty on a variety of economic fronts created a need for more information prior to modifying the current monetary policy stance.Among the arguments supporting their position, this group of board members highlighted that the output gap remains in negative territory and that gross domestic product has not yet returned to 2019 levels.
The same survey shows the willingness to purchase housing and durable goods remains higher than at the start of the year.
Most of the downward pressure originated with the COP200 cut in the price of gasoline when tax reform took effect.
They highlighted the importance of continuing to adjust monetary policy to moderate the increase in inflation expectations and prevent second-order effects.
No growth in industry is anticipated, partly because of a temporary supply shock in the petroleum derivatives sector and fewer business days in April (due to Easter Week)Bank deposits increased at less of an annual rate during the second quarter of 2014.
This revision is explained, in part, by the actual behavior of the world economy and private spending, which have been weaker than expected    Financial VariablesIn June, bank lending (/ and F/C) posted an annual increase of 14.06%, which is similar to the growth observed in recent months.
The variation in the producer price index (PPI) increased at an annual 6.6% rate against 5.2% in August.
The component for current economic conditions, as well as that for expectations, fell.
This comes from the indicators such as retail sales published by DANE that show that it grew at an annual rate of 6.6% in October and at 4.5% excluding vehicle sales.
However, in the aggregate, economic activity continues at higher levels than those that would have been observed had the pre-pandemic growth trend continued.
It is estimated that in 2015 the deficit and its financing be lower, partly as a result of an expected reduction in direct foreign investment (especially in oil), and by a less dynamic portfolio investment.As for the domestic context, the new data for the fourth quarter of 2014 suggest that domestic demand continued to be dynamic, and that the net exports would have subtracted more than was expected to the output.
Total exports in dollars (CIIU classification) declined 18.5% during the year to date at September 2009 with respect to the same period in 2008.
This was due to the upsurge in the national currency component (from 12.76% in December to 12.92% in January) and the slowdown in the foreign currency component (from 1.30% to -0.04%).The interest rates for the loans disbursed by credit establishments since the beginning of the cuts in the benchmark rate in July 2012 have accumulated reductions of -213 bp for mortgages, -144 bp for consumer loans, and -236 bp for construction loans.The size of the decline in the real interest rates has been lower due to the effect of the lower inflation rate.
The reduced figures for growth in industry, commerce and works during the first quarter would have been offset, in part, by better performance in the agricultural, mining and financial sectors.
Less of an annual variation in items with “low indexing,” particularly personal services, was a highlight.
Although the increase in inflation expectations has moderated, the levels remain high.
(i) The global economy is expanding at a moderate rate and its short term strength has changed a little with respect to what has been seen in previous quarters.
Non-traditional exports to the rest of the world rose by 0.4%.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on August 21, 2015.
Specifically, those related to the demand pointed to private consumption continuing to have the favorable momentum that has been seen for the last two quarters.
In the case of China, the reduction in growth was accentuated by monetary policy measures intended to lessen internal demand as a way to prevent inflationary pressures.
The FED reduced their purchases of financial assets again.
The available information suggests that, as happened last month, part of the observed increase in consumer prices was due to the impact of the tax reform (by the change in the VAT, the green tax, and the Liquor Act).Measures of inflation expectations by economic analysts to December 2017 and to 12 and 24 months lowered, as those embedded in public debt bonds to 2, 3, and 5 years.Regarding the external context, the most recent indicators for the advanced economies suggest improvement of their activity.
In this regard, the most significant risks derive from the existence of several indexation mechanisms for prices and salaries, and the probable effects of the changes in the US and Europe's monetary policy on the exchange rate and the conditions for external financing of the economy.
(iii) The past three months saw an increase in inflation expectations, which continued during February, even though the outcome for inflation the month before was what the market expected.
The prices of other commodities have also fallen.
With the current information, the Board believes that this increase is consistent with the convergence of inflation to the 3.0% target DECISIONThe Board of Directors of Banco de la República unanimously decided to increase the benchmark interest rate by 25 bp to 4.75%.Updated: 14/10/2015 14:28
The possibly transitory character of the performance of public works projects as well as the limited information available for the second quarter does not permit the consideration of any important change in the growth forecast for 2011.
Prices for coffee and nickel rose again last month.
2 and 3-year expectations remained below this figure in a slowdown trend.
iii) Keep the benchmark rate as it is while waiting for information that confirms the new projections and announcing that the Board will not be making increases in the benchmark interest rate in the near future.
Furthermore, international prices for oil, food and other commodities are at record highs and have led to prices increases for consumers in many countries.
Nevertheless, although it is probable that the risks from advanced economies are now lower than before, those from some of the emerging economies may be rising.
Different measures of the trends of debt portfolio suggest that by the end of the year its growth will be around 18%.
Inflation excluding food remained stable (2.9%).
Interest on the 10-year bond was 8.9%, which is 42 bp more than the rate posted on January 28.
In this group, the main contribution to the slowdown originated with perishable foods, reversing part of the upward shock caused by the first wave of winter weather.
The annual variation in the prices for non-tradable goods excluding food and regulated prices rose 33 bp and came to 3.83% in June.
The growth of the large emerging economies in Asia and Latin America was varied with rates that were close to or lower than their potential.
In the case of imported food, recoveries in the prices for soybeans, corn, and wheat have been seen in the last few weeks.Inflation in the main developed economies, in turn, remained at a relatively low level.
Exchange rate depreciation has been greater in the emerging economies that have large current account deficits financed with short-term foreign borrowing and high inflation rates.
Several members of the Board stated that inflationary pressure could be emerging from the upsurge in demand.
The directors reiterated their view that the current account deficit continues to reflect Colombia's reduced financing needs and emphasized the International Monetary Fund's decision to expand its flexible credit line for the country, strengthening the availability of external liquidity amid a high degree of uncertainty in the global economy.The directors expressed their concern over an upsurge in -19 cases in numerous countries, most notably in Europe, and suggested that recent pandemic dynamics had added an additional degree of uncertainty to economic policy in general and monetary policy in particular.In considering the balance of risks, the BDBR unanimously decided to maintain its benchmark interest rate at 1.75%.The board emphasized that future decisions will depend on the evolution of macroeconomic variables and of the risk factors mentioned above.
This is in line with what was registered in the second quarter (-1.9%) and a recovery for 2011 that is barely starting.
These levels are still higher than the historical average registered in the country.The reduction in the current account deficit and the slowdown of the Colombian economy reflect the adjustment required in the economy due to the negative shock to national income that the country has been facing since 2014.
In the specific case of the euro zone, total and core inflation have been declining for several quarters and, in December, they were below 1%.
(v) The measurements of core inflation continue to rise and the majority are surpassing 3%.
Another item that presented a decline during the month was that of meals away from home (from 3.7% to 3.3% annually).
This indicator rose at annual rates of -16.5% and signals to a poor start to the year for consumer durables.The favorable news during the first month of 2013 includes an increase in oil production to 1,012,000 barrels per day (BD).
A healthy financial system, household confidence and a dynamic job market will continue to support the rise in consumption.
In the first place, imports of capital goods in dollars grew 40.5% on average in October and November and, secondly, because cement production in November maintained a dynamic behavior with annual growths higher than 10%.
As a consequence, the risks of lower growth in the world economy have risen, and ii) the problems of sovereign debt in Europe and the debate about the debt ceiling in the United States sharply increased uncertainty and volatility in the international financial markets.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicatook place in the city of Bogotá on Tuesday, March 20, 2018.
In attendance were Mr. Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor and Managing Director of Banco de la República, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Enrique Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.
For 2011, macroeconomic conditions continue to support an important economic growth.
(viii) The different interest rate levels, except those for credit cards, stand at values below the past 15 years’ averages.
(ii) The rising trend witnessed in terms of trade up to 2011 was interrupted in 2012, the year when terms of trade remained stable.
(viii) The difference between the benchmark rates in Colombia and the United States has increased by 200 b since September 2007.
Therefore, this might suggest that this tendency may continue in the second quarter.
In contrast, increases were observed in the inflation of regulated items resulting from heightened gasoline prices, as well as the inflation rate of services.
However, in the last few days there has been a slight uptick due to some law and order problems in Lybia.
As per basic product prices, industrial activity deceleration worldwide has slowed down the demand for these goods in such a way, that in the past few weeks a decrease has been seen in the international quotation of prices for some, particularly oil, copper and coal.
Expectations within the business community have improved, and there is more growth in private consumption.
This behavior was determined by the commercial loan portfolio, the growth of which stood at 15.9%, this rate being 160 bp less than in the previous month, and adding a 745 bp deceleration in the past nine months.
In attendance were Alberto Carrasquilla Barrera, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; Juan José Echavarría, Governor of the Central Bank; and Board Members Gerardo Hernández Correa, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, José Antonio Ocampo Gaviria, and Carolina Soto.The main monetary policy discussions considered by the Board are summarized as follows:1.
(vii) Annual inflation rose in February for the third consecutive month and was at 2.32% which is within the target range.
In this context and without inflationary pressures, one can expect the external interest rate to remain low for a prolonged period of time.
They are of the opinion that monetary policy effectiveness lies on the authorities’ anticipation ability; therefore, in this scenario, a stance relaxation phase must be undertaken in order to prevent drastic adjustments in the future.
Energy related mining showed positive growth in petroleum production while coal production was affected by labor problems and environmental penalties.
In public works, there were large reductions in investment in mining and in highway and other road construction.
This slight drop may be associated with the exchange-rate appreciation witnessed since the start of the year.At the same time, non-tradables excluding food and regulated items stayed at 3.7%.
These board members also expect loose financial conditions to persist for some time, in line with recent Fed and ECB announcements.One of these board members further underlined that a significant cause of the observed increase in inflation has been in higher costs due to readjustments in production chains and domestic and international transportation, and that an increase in the interest rate would not be very effective in addressing these issues.
As expected, both the default portfolio and liability provisions have increased as certain debt relief measures have been withdrawn, though this has come without risk to the stability of the financial system.Despite improvement on several counts, significant economic uncertainty persists.
The figures available up to the first quarter of 2011 suggest growth will continue throughout the year, but at a more moderate pace.
The situation with respect to inflation, economic growth and prospects for the future was discussed, and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
(v) The reduction in the use of installed industrial capacity is obvious, as is the drop in the industrial confidence index, the slowdown in the demand for energy, consumer durables and housing, the downturn in the demand for household loans and the decline in the loan portfolio, especially retail credit.
This is 13 basis points (bp) more than in December.
According to the Coffee Federation, coffee production will probably have grown in the third quarter at a rate that is slightly above 20% annually.
In the last few months, household credit has slowed, but keeps increasing at rates that exceed inflation and growth of nominal GDP.
As a result of the increase in arrears of mortgage credit and seizure of housing, the prices of housing continued to reduce in April and could continue doing so in the following trimesters.
By contrast, coffee and oil production continued to fall.Thus, given the slowdown that the Colombian economy has been experiencing and the negative effects of the trucking strike (which would not be fully offset in some sectors in the following months), economic growth in the third quarter is likely to be lower than in the second.On the other hand, according to the figures of the balance of payments for the first half of the year, the current account deficit relative to GDP was 4.8%, , 1.5 percentage points less than the one observed in the same period of 2015.
Given the high correlation between this indicator and total household consumption, the figure for January suggests this demand still continues to grow at a rate below the historic average.
On the other hand, expected total consumption is 15% higher than that observed for 2019.According to the most recent data, employment levels are significantly higher than those that preceded the pandemic and have been on the rise for all sectors, especially the formal sector.
The annual variation in food prices went from -0.3% in December to - 0.5% in January.
The decisions on wages and other prices at the beginning of 2012 will be made in the context of a supply shock with inflation below but close to 4% and a tight labor market.
Meanwhile, the emerging economies are still the engine of worldwide growth although they are not free from risk.
This average has been fluctuating between 3.00% and 3.15% since November last year.
Consequently, they pointed out that, despite the recent reduction in inflation, the latter continues to register a significantly high level, in contrast with the substantial inflation reductions recently experienced in advanced countries and comparable Latin American economies.
Likewise, the rise in construction permits and the strength of mortgage loans also support better performance in construction.
It was noted that the sharp devaluation in Latin American currencies at the start of 209 has been corrected.
The growth in some emerging economies, in turn, slowed down with respect to what was registered in 2012.In the United States, preliminary data for the fourth quarter of 2013 show positive growth led by private consumption and exports.
Loan portfolio quality indicators declined, particularly for consumer loans.
The sectors that contributed the most to annual GDP growth in the second quarter were the financial (4.3%), mining (10.2%) and public works construction (40.5%).
Compared to the first quarter, the second posted an increase of 0.7%.
In a context of low inflationary pressures, weak demand and the perception of risk in view of the European situation, monetary authorities in the United States announced they would keep interest rates low until at least 2015.
The negative behavior of the industry and commerce, the increase of its stock, and the reduction in the level of its orders, as well as the deterioration of the confidence indexes, the wilting of investment expectations and the feeling of consumers confirm the aforesaid.
The slowdown in external borrowing continued during March and April.
The long-term rates on bonds of the advanced and emerging economies have risen, starting from a low level.
Accordingly, the tensions on government bond markets for Spanish and Italian debt have very much subsided.
Just like in the previous month, what contributed the most to this drop was price variation in perishable foods, with potatoes and fruits exhibiting absolute price falls.
However, decisions on spending cuts in social security and defense, as well as the definition of certain federal budget items, were postponed until March.
(ii) The interest rates for American Treasury bonds have been relatively stable but at levels that are higher than the ones seen before May, the month when a possible reduction in the monetary stimulus on the part of the Fed was announced.
In the case of the emerging economies, pressures upon prices may lessen more slowly, thus making it harder to predict falls in the interest rates.
On the other hand, the mortgage portfolio exhibited an annual 16.9% growth in May.
With preliminary data for April, the inflation expectations derived from public debt negotiations for 1, 5 and 10 years declined and stood at 2.61%, 3.91% and 4.18% with drops of 105 bp, 78 bp and 29 bp respectively.
Conversely, if the global environment deteriorates further, central banks in this group of countries could implement better encouragement measures.
Lending to households (consumer and mortgage loans) also grew less, but at rates superior to those of nominal GDP.
At the same time, economic growth has slowed.
The majority of the nominal interest rates for loans declined over the month.
Going forward, no rise in these terms is expected in a scenario of dilatory recovery of the global economy and better conditions expected in the global supply of petroleum.
Regulated price inflation went from 8.8% in June to 9.5% in July, mainly because of fuel and transportation.
Mr. Óscar Iván Zuluaga, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Inflation, economic growth and their prospects for the future were discussed and monetary-policy decisions were reached.
The annual increase in the price of tradables, excluding food and regulated goods and services, dropped from 1.9% in November to 1.4% in December.
On the supply side, the problems with weather since -2010 and recent political events have contributed to the increase in these prices.
It also was emphasized that the outlook for the world economy remains negative.
However, should the depreciation persist, this could be transmitted to a greater extent to internal prices, generating greater inflation expectations.In summary, aggregate demand continues to show a strong growth in a context close to the full use of the productive capacity.
Likewise, there are signs of persistence of inflation and the activation of indexation mechanisms, and the risk of an additional pass-through of depreciation to domestic prices cannot be disregarded, particularly considering the Fed's monetary policy stance.
They emphasize domestic risks stemming from the rising likelihood of a strongEl Niñophenomenon, which could impact agricultural and energy markets.
Industry’s demand for non-regulated energy continued growing quite dynamically in March (22.1% compared to 15.2% in February).
In the United States, the indicators showed stability.
A number of indicators confirm the slowdown in the U economy.
The gross loan portfolio in domestic currency continued to slow, registering an annual increase of 5.1% by November 6 compared to 7.3% the month before.
(iii) The international price for petroleum remains at high levels and the price for Colombian coffee has surpassed the average registered for 2013.
The measurements done through surveys show less pronounced increases.
Moreover, expectations within the business community (industrialists and merchants) regarding the performance of the economy in the coming months remained relatively high.
This shows an upsurge in comparison to 5.2% for the second quarter and 4.3% for the first semester.
The annual variation in eating was down again, although slightly, reaching 4.9%Within the non-food CPI, the regulated sub-basket posted an annual variation of 1.9% (88 bp less than in November).
With respect to investment, the poor result from public works projects implies a significant slowdown in the investment in fixed capital.
The indicators for orders and inventory show deterioration in the sector, as expectations for production three months out.Several of the figures for commerce and construction suggest slowdowns in these sectors as well.
Although wage adjustments had tended to be compatible with the inflation target up until December, the 5.8% raise in the minimum wage for 2012 increased the risk that pressure from the cost of wages would arise.
On its side, the GDP without foods stood at 3.13%, which means 10 bp more than in November and 31 bp above December’s GDP in the previous year.
For 2013, growth similar to that of 2012 is projected Financial Variables Total credit in national and foreign currencies (“MN” and “ME” credit) recorded in June an annual increase of 17.15%, this percentage being lower by 53 bp in the previous month and 254 bp in the previous quarter.
Given the recent decline in inflation expectations, they emphasize that a 25-bps reduction in the policy rate maintains the real interest rate largely unchanged.
Recent Developments in Inflation:Consumer inflation in April was 2.02% which is 10 basis points (bp) above what was seen in March.
This has generated a degree of calm in the financial markets, which has been reflected in stability in the risk perception of the emerging economies.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target  AND OPTIONSThe members of the Board agreed that the information published since the previous meeting of the Board of Directors shows that deterioration of the productive activity has been more pronounced than had been anticipated.
The average of core inflation indicators fell below the 3.0% target for the sixth consecutive month.
Recession in Europe is likely to be worse than anticipated months ago.
On the other hand, although some inflationary pressures have declined recently, there are still elements out there that add to the risk of higher increases in the general level of prices.
As a result, the pace of consumption observed in the second quarter is expected to continue.
This was the case when the industrial production index excluding coffee threshing fell 3.9% annually in August (in July, it had grown 0.2%) while there was significant growth in coffee threshing (it rose 12.7% annually in August and 15.1% in July).
Investment without works was the most dynamic component of internal demand, having risen substantially by almost 17% in the second quarter, which is very similar to the rate observed during the first quarter.
Sectoral performance has been irregular, with stagnation or decline in primary and secondary sectors and growth in the tertiary sector.
The entrepreneur and consumer confidence indices remain depressed, while sentiment indices in the manufacturing and service sectors have worsened.
The orders indicator, based on the same survey, has been at a standstill for several months.
In the Euro Zone, in turn, the differences between the countries with low levels of debt that are growing well, led by Germany, and the countries with high levels of debt that are virtually stagnant are becoming deeper.
Other supplies, perishable as well as processed, continue to present yearly adjustments of very high and increasing prices.
Regarding employment, DANE information as of August suggests that growth in labor demand was higher than labor supply.
The forecasts indicate domestic spending will keep growing at a good pace, accompanied by a slower than projected recovery in external demand.
According to estimations, in 2015 the economy would slow down, and the GDP would present a rate of increase of around 4.3%, within an interval between 3.0% and 5.3%.The new product gap estimations for 2014 indicate that this would be slightly positive and more closed that the forecast performed in the last quarter.
Mr. Juan Carlos Echeverry, Minister of Finance and Public Credit Mr. José Darío Uribe, Governor, Banco de la República Full-time Board Members in Attendance: Mr. Carlos Gustavo Cano Mr. Juan José Echavarría Mr. Fernando Tenjo Mr. Cesar Vallejo The situation with respect to inflation and economic growth was discussed, as were their prospects for the future, and decisions on monetary policy were reached.
This, however, continues to reflect an accelerationvis-à-vis2017.
On the supply side, the indicators available for industry continue to reflect weak performance.
This dynamism responds to the strengthening of domestic demand driven by household consumption, which expanded by 12.0% annually for that period.
The board members’ main points of discussion and analysis focused on the following aspects: (i) the inflation projections for 2010 and 2011, (ii) the change in the prices for tradable goods, (iii) the lagged effect of the monetary policy measures on production and prices, (iv) the growth projections for the economy and employment for 2010 and 2011, (v) the rise in consumer confidence and the performance of investment, (vi) the recent momentum in the financial system portfolio, (vii) the upswing in the prices for financial assets and housing, (viii) the drop in inflation expectations, (ix) the recent trend for capital flows, (x) the performance of public debt securities, (xi) the balance of risks between growth and inflation in the context of an economy that is recovering and an inflation that is in the lower half of the long term target range, and (xii) the need to maintain the credibility of the monetary authority and anchor inflation expectations around the long term target, (xiii) the growth data and projections for the worldwide economy.
The generalized reduction in price increases compared to other months when reductions were due fundamentally to lower food and regulated prices.
This increase was above the expectations of the technical staff and the market.
For example, in Latin America, the annual decline in Mexico’s GDP was 8.2%.
The percentage derived from the monthly survey of the expectations of financial market analysts was 2.85% and 2.90% for the end of the year and for a horizon of 12 months from now respectively.
On those same dates, the annual increase in consumer lending went from 0.6% to 1.5% and from 9.3% to 4% for commercial loans.
Viewed at the margin, the sample median drawn from Banco de la República’s monthly survey of economic analysts between March and April maintained their one- and two-year inflation expectations stable at 4.6% and 3.5%, respectively.
There are some symptoms of a recovery in some of the economies on the periphery although it is still at a very slow pace.
Although other industry indicators showed slight deteriorations with respect to the previous month, when an analysis of the trends is done, one sees that its long term components could be stabilizing.
A reduction in the loan portfolio in foreign currency explains this trend, since direct borrowing by the private sector increased 5% (in March) with respect to the same month in 2008.
In their opinion, the figures of economic activity were still very weak, with no evidence of recovery.
For all of 2014, the growth range for output remains between 3.3% and 5.3% with 4.3% being the most probable figure Financial VariablesBank loans (N/ and F/C) registered an annual growth rate of 12.8% in March, which is slightly higher than the level seen in the previous month (12.4%).
These groups represent 54.2% of the consumer basketAccording to the survey applied to financial analysts, inflation expectations are at 4.50% to twelve months and 3.68% to twenty-four months, figures slightly lower than the data from the previous month (4.63% and 3.83%, respectively).
On January 28, Banco de la República's board of directors (BDBR) voted 5-2 to approve a 100-basis point increase to the benchmark interest rate, bringing it to 4.0%; two dissenting members voted for a 75-point increase.The decision took into account the following considerations:Both headline and core inflation closed the year above expectations and on upward trajectories.Inflation expectations are high and also ended the year on an upward trajectory.
The rise in inflation, primarily due to higher food prices as a result of the weather, will be temporary.
This has taken place together with interest rates (for trade and consumption), which in real terms continue at levels below their historic averages (excepting credit cards).13.Regarding prices, inflation decreased in May, reaching 4.41%, a figure lower than had been forecast by the market average and the technical staff at the Central Bank.
With respect to the emerging market economies, most of the central banks have not changed their intervention rates.The risk premiums of the Latin American countries have remained relatively stable due to currently good conditions in the region.
The monetary policy actions undertaken so far, which consider these effects, should strengthen convergence of inflation to its target  AND OPTIONSThe Board Members emphasized that inflation has continued to fall.
By components, the increase in the current account deficit (USD $127 m) was explained by higher net outflows of factor income (USD $1,248 m) and, to a lesser extent, by non-factor services (USD $125 m).
However, this trend was reversed in the last few days, despite the increase in the Fed’s interest rate.
(vi) Annual inflation in June (2.16%) and average core inflation (2.5%) were slightly higher than in May.
However, it is important to bear in mind that the supply shock caused by temporary closure of the Cartagena refinery could explain part of the growth in this deficit.On the domestic front, new information at the close of June suggests second-quarter growth would be in line with the forecast presented in the last quarterly report on inflation.
The commercial loan portfolio, in turn, presented a slight recovery in its annual growth during April (13.5% compared to 13.2% in March).
For 2015, the most likely outcome remains at 2.8%, within a range from 1.8% to 3.4%.10.In July, annual inflation increased slightly and stood at 4.46%, somewhat higher than estimated by the technical staff and by the market average.
The monthly slowdown was led by the commercial portfolio, the annual increase of which declined 132 bp by shifting from 15.56% to 14.24% between July and August.
The average of core inflation completed one semester increasing, reaching 3.65%.14.Inflation expectations by market analysts and those derived from public debt bonds to 2, 3, and 5 years are within a range of 3.1% and 3.6%.In all, the slowdown that started by the end of 2014 from an output level that was close to the full use of productive capacity is expected to continue in 2015.
This is US$737 million (m) less than the deficit posted during the same period in 2008.
Recent economic forces at work may have led to an increase in the output gap.
In line with the abovementioned, the balance of sales in the Banco de la Republica’s Monthly Survey of Economic Expectations (EMEE in Spanish) shows that the merchants saw a slightly better demand in October and November than was seen in the third quarter.
Overall, net exports contributed negatively (-2.2%) to GDP growth.
Recent announcements helped to partially reduce these surges.
With the recent increases in the benchmark interest rate, the market rates are expected to approach their historical averages more rapidly and inflation expectations to converge towards the -point of the target range.
If this tendency continues it will be especially damaging for commodity exporting countries, as it will affect their terms of trade and, in doing so, their GDP Financial Variables There were no changes during May in the tendencies of the major monetary aggregates.
In both cases, the latest data shows levels that are lower than what their potential is estimated to be.
This posture is justified by the negative effects of external productive and financial shocks on aggregate demand and somewhat by the precarious recovery in some of the confidence and expectation indicators.
On the other hand, international commodity prices have increased in recent months because of supply and demand factors.
For 2012, the forecast interval remained between 4% and 6%.
Consequently, they concur on the desirability of commencing a process to gradually lower the intervention interest rate as soon as it is prudent.In this particular context, five Directors voted to keep the intervention rate steady at its current level of 13.25%, and two Directors voted in favor of a 25 basis points reduction that would bring the rate to 13%.
The cumulative 12- month increase in total exports is 21.1%.
The inflation expectations detected in the quarterly and monthly surveys conducted by the Central Bank at the beginning of July continue to show declines and are situated within the long-term target range set by the Board of Directors.
The policy rate has been lowered 200 bp since December of 2016, and it is possibly in a position close to neutral.
This better- than-expected performance is largely the result of the indicator for works and coffee production.
As for demand, household consumption continues to increase and confidence has recovered.
In contrast, non-salary costs saw a reduction in January when the significant decline in the annual change in the PPI to 3.7% in comparison to the 5.5% in December is taken into account.
Overall, this group of Directors holds to the expectation of accommodating greater policy rate reductions in the coming months as current uncertainty sources dissipate.The Board members who voted for a 50-bps reduction noted that the contractionary monetary policy stance implemented since September 2021 has been generating the necessary macroeconomic adjustment, as evidenced by the slowdown of aggregate demand to levels compatible with productive capacity, resulting from the deceleration of consumption and the sharp decline in investment.
The annual increase in prices for tradable goods, excluding food and regulated prices, went from 2.78% in June to 3.0% in July.
For the year elapsed as of August, the CPI accumulated a 2.64% increase, this being a little higher than the one recorded in the same period of the previous year.
Nominal growth in the commercial loan portfolio was 18.5% by July 15, having declined with respect to the increase in May and June.
(iii) Interpretation of the shocks that investment suffered in the second half of 2012 is complex and could be due to multiple factors as can be seen from the fact that all of the components of this aggregate showed a slowdown in the second half of the year.
As a matter of fact, the price rise for food was 6.63% in contrast with 1.69% and 1.64% during the same period in 2009 and 2010 respectively.
Interest rates are staying at levels that stimulate the economy’s aggregate expenditures.The members of the Board agreed that it would be appropriate to keep the benchmark interest rate unchanged.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit, José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank, and Board Members Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, César Vallejo Mejía, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook of the technical staff of the Central Bank on the macroeconomic situation (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).A moredetailed description of the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff will be presented in the Inflation Report for the second quarter of 2015 and in the statistical annex CONTEXT1.The new data for global economic activity suggest that the average growth of Colombia's trade partners for 2015 could be somewhat lower than estimated in the previous quarterly report (1.3%).
All of this translates into less international trade.
Venezuela, the most important market for Colombian industrial exports, surely will experience serious devaluation this year due to its fiscal and exchange imbalances, and a drop in growth from 5.5% in 2012 to 2.5% in 2013.
There have been reductions during this same period of: -182 bp for mortgage loans,  -171 bp for consumer loans, and -188 bp for construction loans.The levels of real interest rates for consumer loans, mortgages, preferential loans, ordinary commercial ones and commercial lines of credit as well as loans for construction in September were below their historical averages as calculated since 2000.
Investment in construction, both buildings and works, also is expected to grow considerably, as indicated by cement sales and building permits for March.
In line with this, the sales balance from the Banco de la Republica’s Monthly Survey of Economic Expectations (EMEE in Spanish) shows that the merchants saw a slightly higher demand in January and February than what was seen in the fourth quarter of 2013.
Processed-food inflation was at about the same level registered in January.
The above mentioned indicators with information up to the third quarter confirmed the forecast given in the last Report on Inflation when an annual expansion of the economy was projected to be between 6% and 7% for that period.
Real interest rates (deflated by the CPI without food) also exhibited a generalized reduction in January and particularly in February.
The growth of Germany to the end of 2014 turned out better than had been forecast, and in January the confidence and industry indicators of the euro zone showed positive trends.
In May, the annual variation of the PPI declined from 1.56% to 0.80%, and kept on declining since the fall commencing last October.
Vis-à-vis the previous report, the forecast suggests a more dynamic domestic demand with a faster closing of the output gap.
The drop in this variable is particularly dramatic in Japan, where the annual decline was around 48% in February.
If these forecasts take place, in 2015 external demand for Colombia would grow at a lower rate, somewhat below the one for 2014The lower international prices of oil and other commodities have pressured world inflation downward.
In spite of this, the expansion rate across the region remains very low (-0.7% annually in the second quarter of 2013) and the weakness persists since the labor markets are still vulnerable and credit has not shown signs of recovery yet.In the United States, the economic expansion continues at a modest rate.
The latter were 3.4% for different horizons.
This could have an important effect on total inflation in the next few months, depending on how the exchange rate performs.
The information at hand confirms there is every indication at the beginning of 2013 that the recession in Europe would be more prolonged.
In a context where there is a high current account deficit in the balance of payments which reflects an excess of expenditure over revenue, the additional effects of the supply shocks reinforce the need to act now with a 50 bp increase in the interest rate.
In this context, the long-term interest rates in said countries have lowered and continue at low levelsAppreciation of the US dollar vis-à-vis the majority of currencies has partially reversed.
Thus, the interest rates for loans to households and businesses are at historically low levels.
By February, it annual rate of industrial production was down by more than 45% and the level that month was lower than any other registered during the last two decades.
If the most likely growth forecasts take place, the output gap could be positive in 2014 and may become slightly negative in the present year (which had previously been estimated as positive).Regarding prices, inflation posted at 3.66% in December 2014, a number similar to the forecast by Banco de la República's technical staff, and which is 80 basic points (bp) above that of September.
Therefore, it is still reasonable to expect good growth in private consumption during the first quarter of 2011.
Moreover, the export and import levels accumulated in the first half of 2009 are less than those registered during the same period in 2008, but more than the levels reported between January and June 2007.
Medium and long-term government bonds valuated -22bp and -36 bp, respectively, during the four- week period ended March 16 AND The following points were emphasized by the Board of Directors during its deliberations: The February figure for inflation, which was less than the rate forecast by the Central Bank’s technical team and by the market concerning many of the sub-baskets in the consumer price index The drop in core inflation indicators, following the increase in January The temporary effect El Niño weather might have on price hikes The outcome for growth in 2009 as a whole and during the final quarter, which exceeded the technical team’s forecast Available indicators of economic activity in January and February 2010, particularly those concerning retail sales and the demand for energy, which suggest faster first-quarter recovery than anticipated The expectations of industrialists and merchants with respect to economic performance in the coming months, which remain high The increase in monetary aggregates at rates between 7% and 8% The peso loan portfolio in the financial system, which continues to grow more than nominal GDP The performance of market interest rates in response to the decline in the Central Bank’s benchmark rate The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and on output growth in the tradable sectors Interest rates on government bonds, which dropped in the case of medium and long-term bonds.
As for investment in building construction and works, lower growth rates are anticipated compared to those observed during the first quarter.There was some recovery in the amount of total exports in dollars during April and May, but annual growth in this respect remains negative (-2.5% in May).
The adjustment in the prices for processed foods, in turn, (-0.2% annually) stayed in negative territory with no significant changes while the meals away from home component remained stable (3.3% annually).The main upward pressures in the CPI excluding food came from the groups of regulated items and tradables.
This upside adjustment, driven by enduring global inflation pressures, tightens financing conditions for the Colombian economy.
The annual reduction in consumer goods was 6.3% by March 2009, in contrast to 15.7% annual growth in 2008.
With respect to emerging economies, the effects of the European crisis have already begun to affect the major economies in Emerging Asia.
This economy had a growth rate of 7.7% in 2013 (the same as the rate in 2012).
On the other hand, construction of works and buildings is still an item surrounded by a great deal of uncertainty in terms of how it will perform, particularly with respect to spending on works, construction and buildings.Total exports in 2012 (excluding re-exports of airplanes) came to US$ 60,235 million, which represents 5.8% growth compared to 2011.
On the other hand, rises were originated in the processed foods sub-baskets (rice among others) and out-of-home meals.
Similarly, oil prices and workers' remittances have exhibited a recovery trend.
In 2014, the average growth for Colombia's trading partners will be above that recorded in 2013 AND OPTIONSThe board of directors took the following relevant aspects into consideration:(i) There are no major changes in the outlook for worldwide growth in 2014 with respect to the ones described in the recently published Inflation Report.
This is 44 basis points (bp) less than the figure on record for December, a month that also witnessed a significant drop.
Considerable volatility and strong losses in the equity markets have been associated, in large part, with high uncertainty about the fiscal situation of some developed economies; markets are more and more skeptic with respect to the abilities of those affected by fiscal problems to stabilize their public debt.
Public debt securities with maturities of more than one year also rose in price.
The reported annual increase in GDP during the third quarter of 2007 was 6.6%.
On the other hand, inflation expectations derived from the TES yield curve exhibited less change and stayed within a range of 2.3% to 3.1% for different horizons    GrowthThe economic indicators for the second quarter suggest GDP growth will exceed the rate on record for the first three months of the year.
The temporary effect El Niño weather could have on price hikes The rise in consumer and business confidence indicators, which have improved The situation with M3 and liabilities subject to reserve requirements The financial system’s peso loan portfolio, which continues to grow more than nominal GDP Bond issues that have supplemented financing for the productive sector How market interest rates have performed in response to the decline in the Central Bank’s benchmark rate The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and on growth in output in the tradable sectors The performance of interest rates on government bonds The main points analyzed by the Board members centered on: i) the elements that affect the inflation forecasts for 2010, particularly an eventual temporary rebound in food and regulated prices due to El Niño weather; ii) the time it takes monetary policy measures to affect production and prices; iii) economic growth forecasts for 2010; iv) the sharp drop in exports to Venezuela during recent months and the decline in that country’s output; v) the performance of monetary aggregates and how it might affect economic recovery; vii) the recent momentum in the commercial loan portfolio held by the financial system; viii) the risk balance between growth and inflation in a context of economic slowdown and falling inflation; and x) the need to bolster the monetary authority’s credibility and to anchor expectations for inflation to the long-term target.
In April, the annual variation of the PPI remained at 1.6, in this manner consolidating the fall experienced in the previous months.
An interest rate cut that is not credible can affect the exchange market, the government bond market and future expectations of inflation, all of which could make it difficult for the Board to continue to pursue an anti-cyclical monetary policy.
Production and sales of cement, in turn, grew 6.2% and 11.5% respectively in July.In the case of industry, the annual growth of production was slightly positive (0.2%) in July.
Inflation of food in October increased by 38 bp as compared to the previous month, reaching 13.2%.
Despite the expected deceleration, the GDP forecast sets values 12% higher than those observed in 2019, prior to the pandemic.
According to the most recent information from DANE, industry grew at an annual rate of 2.8% in September.
The Board of Directors ofBanco de la Repúblicaraised the policy rate by 50 basis points (bp) thus putting it at 3.0% in a 4-3 majority decision at its December 17 session.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Banco de la República took place in the city of Bogotá on Wednesday, August 31, 2016.
Growth for the year up to July is still in negative territory (it went from -3.4% in June to -2.9% in July).
Finally, inflation expectations derived from the TES curve for 2-, 3-, and 5-year maturities have risen slightly since January to converge at 3.0% GrowthThe indicators available for the last quarter of 2013 suggest that the GDP expanded at a rate that was below the rate registered for the third quarter.
Also, the improvement in the risk indicators of the financial system was also noted.The members of the Board highlighted the consolidation of a broader environment of international liquidity, with which the Colombian economy is not expected to face external funding restrictions, nor increases in risk premia.
This acceleration is explained by the behavior of food, particularly perishable goods.
The same was true of M3, given less growth in liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR), which was related to an increase in government funds on deposit at the Central Bank at the end of April and the beginning of May to cover TES maturities.
In support of this, they expressed doubts about the sustainability of the pace at which domestic demand is picking up due to the reduction in household savings, the sluggishness of investment, the employment recovery lag, and the limits to consumption of durable and semi-durable goods.
Likewise, there was a moderate surge in meals away from home (from 3.08% to 3.26%) in December while in processed foods there was a slight slowdown with respect to the previous month (from -0.10% to -0.24%).The annual change in the CPI excluding food was at 2.36% in December, 15 bp more than it had been the previous month.
On the supply side, the industrial sector excluding coffee processing fell again in October (-0.1%) although at a slower rate than that recorded a month before.
This is the case, for example, for some investment projects in the mining-energy sector which suffered delays this year.
In August, the peso loan portfolio in the financial system maintained a growth rate of 19%, which is similar to what it was in July.
In the United States, real activity indicators have continued to expand, though the last information available evidences some slowdown signs.
In March and the beginning of April, the mortgage portfolio continued growing at a suitable rate (18.6% nominal) and the consumer portfolio maintained a slow recovery with an annual increase of 4.6%.
In June, exports in dollars grew 54% annually, a figure that is higher than the one registered in May (34%).
Several countries in Latin America, such as Brazil and Chile, showed clear signs of recovery and, during the third quarter, a number of countries in the region achieved the GDP levels registered in 2008.
In addition, the steadfast position of core inflation (excluding food and regulated items) persists, which stood at an annual 10.5% in June, a level similar to that observed in the preceding months.
In the case of goods of mining origin, the only item having y p ( p ) p for increased exports of agricultural products lies in the augmented exported values of banana (104%) and flowers (58%) serving to offset the 1.4% reduction in coffee exports Financial Variables In August, total credit in national and foreign currencies (“MN” and “ME” credits) exhibited an annual growth rate of 16.35%, therefore lower by 83 bp and 334 bp than the levels respectively observed in the previous month and in March.
Also, available information shows the productive sector in Colombia is feeling the negative effects of high costs and less demand.
The mortgage loan portfolio is growing at a good pace along with another increase in the new-house price index in March which remains at historically high levels.
Also imports would have exhibited a high growth rate (22.1%) and offset foreign sale dynamics.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the figures in dollars for imports of consumer goods showed an annual growth of 19.9% in January.Total exports, in contrast saw a change of -1.1% in January in comparison to the same month in 2012.
(iv) Accordingly, the Bank’s technical staff kept its forecast for second-quarter growth within a range of 2.5% to 4.0%, with 3.4% being the most likely figure.
The Board of Directors expects interest rates on commercial and household loans to continue to fall.
With the preliminary data available at October 20, inflation expectations based on government bonds negotiated at one, five and 10 years showed variations of 88 bp, 1 bp and -50 bp compared to the average figures for September, and were 3.71%, 4.55% and 4.58%, respectively.
This was due to Easter Week in March and one day less in February.
The most recent information for Europe continues to show a slow recovery, despite the build-up in Germany and England.
(ix) The risks to inflation that come from expectations have eased somewhat.
In this sub-basket, reductions or rare rises in the prices of imported goods such as cars, electrical appliances, electronic and communication devices, as well as airline tickets, etc.
Credit continues to contract and financial fragmentation is still affecting the most vulnerable economies in the region.In the case of Japan, the strong stimulus provided by the monetary policy is beginning to manifest itself in the positive indicators of economic activity in that country.
In this they were partly influenced by the good terms of trade, (iii) the information available so far, including the data on GDP growth (5.1%), suggests that the output gap will close in the second half of the year, (iv) the growth of credit continues to climb.
The decline in export value for traditional items (US$2.690b) was due mainly to coffee (-22.5%), crude oil and petroleum derivatives (-40.0%) and ferronickel (-39.4%).
Another member of the Board also considered it appropriate to raise the Bank’s benchmark rate by 25 basis points in order to ensure a positive level in real terms.
This increases the risk of inducing indexation processes at higher inflation levels.All the Board Members agreed that the increases in inflation and inflation expectations and the high rate of economic activity, which has been reducing spare capacity, warranted the continued withdrawal of monetary stimulus.
This will ensure the monetary authority can continue to use the policy tools at its disposal in a countercyclical way.
On the positive side, the unemployment rate declined again in November and the housing market continues to show signs of recovery though still at a very low level.In the case of the emerging economies in Asia, economic growth declined in the majority of the countries during the third quarter.
There were also few adjustments in the prices of products like oil and this could be due more to the appreciation of the peso than to movements in international prices which have not declined.
The annual increase in M3 was 15.2%, cash 9.8% and liabilities subject to reserve requirements (LSR) 16.05%.
In Asia, China has some signs of recovery but India and South Korea, etc.
However, the reduction in growth was offset, in part, by an increase in non- traditional exports to the United States.
This is high, but less than the figure for the third quarter (8.5%).
(iii) The momentum in the Colombian economy during 2008 and 2009 will be affected by the slowdown in US and world economic growth, and by possible future problems affecting Venezuela.
As for construction, cement production posted an annual drop of 4.8%.
This is well below the rate witnessed last year for the same period (6.9%).
This forecast assumes that household consumption in the second half of the year will grow at rates close to those seen in the first half of the year while investment in construction will surge significantly.
It is worth noting that, due to the basis of statistical comparison and to the normal agricultural cycle, the downward trend in annual food inflation could revert in the following months Inflation expectations to December 2017 obtained from the monthly survey to financial analysts lowered, posting at 4.16%.
The employment rate for household heads remains at levels above 74%.
However, the tendency in the broadest measure of the money supply (M3) experienced no major changes, and annual growth in M3 by the end of the first six months of the year came to 16%.
(iv) Something similar is happening with respect to the terms of trade (fed to a large degree by the price of petroleum), which have also reached unprecedented heights.
The annual variation of the CPI for non-tradable goods excluding regulated prices has been climbing slowly since March even after discounting for the effect of amusement, cultural, and vacation activities in June.
El Niño has intensified, increasing the risk of further increases in food and energy prices.
Exports and imports continue to contract in yearly terms.
With data to July, energy demand and production of coffee and oil exhibited annual falls.
In the United States, which is Colombia’s major trading partner, GDP during the second quarter of 2010 was revised downward from 2.4% (a/q) to 1.6% (a/q), primarily because of slower growth in investments and exports.
These rates were 4 bp, 15 bp and 2 bp less than those in December, in that order.
For this group, the possibility of leading monetary policy to an expansionary stance will depend on the above-mentioned factors.The remaining two Board Members considered that the weakness of economic activity deserves an immediate counter-cyclical response, since the output gap is increasing, and the results in terms of inflation have been good and according to the forecasts.
For example, the regional survey done by the Banco de la Republica (businessmen from various sectors are included in this) showed a very favorable perception of sales growth in December.
In attendance were Mauricio Cárdenas Santamaría, Minister of Finance and Public Credit; José Darío Uribe Escobar, Governor of the Central Bank; and co-directors Carlos Gustavo Cano Sanz, Ana Fernanda Maiguashca Olano, Adolfo Meisel Roca, Cesar Vallejo Mejia, and Juan Pablo Zárate Perdomo.These minutes contain a summary of the outlook by the technical staff of the Central Bank on the macroeconomic situation (section 1), followed by a review of the main discussion regarding monetary policy by the Board of Directors (section 2).Furtherdetail on the macroeconomic situationprepared by the technical staff from Banco de la República will be presented in the Monetary Policy Report of May and in the statistical annexMACROECONOMIC CONTEXTIn its meeting of June, the Federal Open Market Committee of the FED decided not to increase its benchmark interest rate.
The different inflation indicators are within the target range of 3% +/- 1 percentage point, GDP growth is close to its historical level, and the confidence surveys on consumers, manufacturers and merchants show important reductions.
However, information available throughout the year points out to more moderation in household consumption and investment in line with the growth forecast for the full year; (vi) The increase in the commercial loan portfolio has slowed down, as explained by lower dynamic in loans in foreign currency.
Those embedded in public debt bonds lowered in January, and are currently around 3.6%.In summary, observed inflation has been lower than expected, and it maintains its convergence to the target.