Insofar as capital goods imports are concerned, imported volumes have followed a gradual upward curve in recent months, indicating that investments in the Brazilian economy have also shifted into a growth curve.
This result was a consequence of increased industrial output and growth in foreign sales of those manufactured goods that are more dependent on imported inputs.
Aggregate supply indicators have registered steady growth during the year, as idle industrial output capacity has declined and both productivity and employment have moved upward.
Though this is the highest level registered by the statistical series, the possibility of bottlenecks in the flow of goods is limited to a few intermediate goods subsectors.
Since the previous forecast for the soybean harvest was revised upward by a volume greater than the reduction for the wheat harvest estimated in the most recent survey, the final result was greater than the overall output volume forecast in the previous month.
With regard to the labor market, accumulated data up to the month of August indicate that both employment and productivity have been moving steadily upward, without generating undue cost pressures.
Formal employment expanded for the tenth consecutive month, with creation of 775 thousand job positions in the year.
With the sole exception of the building industry, all sectors of the economy registered positive employment growth.
In recent weeks, concern has mounted as to the real possibility of increasing the supply of crude oil and its derivatives over the coming months, particularly at a time in which demand is also expanding.
The result of this worrisome situation has been a high degree of price volatility in recent weeks.
The stock levels of these products are considered insufficient, since they were allowed to dwindle as potential buyers initially sought to avoid importing at higher prices.
At the same time, the political tensions that have surfaced in the Middle East recently have contributed to a very jittery market.
The Committee concluded that recent data point to a more moderate pace of growth under aggregate demand, bringing this variable more into line with the growth potential of the economy.
Greater productivity gains have also aided in curtailing costs and attenuating pressures on core inflation, despite a situation of very low unemployment.
More recent indicators for the Japanese economy point to improvement in the economic environment.
The Tankan Business Confidence Index for the manufacturing sector expanded from 3 to 10 in the period, a full 6 points above the expected mark.
At the same time, the index that measures supply and demand conditions increased from 24 to 18 in the period from the second to the third quarters of this year.
In the month of August, the headings of orders placed with industry, industrial output and new housing starts also moved into a positive growth curve.
Going on to the euro zone countries, signs of increased economic activity are becoming increasingly clearer.
On September 22, the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and Bank of Japan moved to shore up the euro.
However, this effort, coupled with an October 5 increase in interest rates, was not sufficient to reverse the slide in the value of the single European currency.
The September result for this index was fully in keeping with expectations.
In Argentina, the oil price high was the item most responsible for growth in exports and the consequent reduction in the countrys trade balance deficit.
Lesser farm product prices and dissipation of the impact of recent increases in government managed prices pushed inflation into a downward curve in September.
The 1.08 percentage drop in relation to August growth was mostly due to a falloff in the growth pace of food and alcohol prices, coupled with a reduction in gasoline and bottled gas prices.
Negative growth in the month was also registered under residential rents, personal hygiene products, pharmaceutical goods and new automotive vehicles.
Based on newly available information, already identified shocks and their impacts on the economy were subjected to review.
Consequently, the forecast of an increase of one percent for food prices in general in the fourth quarter of 2000 was maintained; b. oil market prices are in the midst of a period of great volatility, as already existent worries have been worsened by growing turmoil in the Middle East.
However, notwithstanding slight growth in futures market prices, the structure of futures still points to a succession of monthly declines in With this, the hypothesis of an additional increase in domestic fuel prices in the current year was maintained in the basic scenario; c. with regard to other government managed prices, the scenario incorporates the impact of a possible rise in public transportation rates in those municipalities that have not yet authorized an annual increase.
The same situation exists in the case of Rio de Janeiro electricity rates.
IPCA core inflation was also presented.
This decision was expected by practically all the financial institutions consulted by DEMAB.
Among other factors, this rather conservative posture was justified by the continued volatility of international market oil prices, always at very high levels.
In the first two, these papers were negotiated with terms of four years, while the third offer was placed with a five year term.
Interest on LTN placements with maturities of six months and one year followed a slightly downward curve.
Banco Central acted on seven different occasions over a total period of 19 business days, with the aim of managing very short-term secondary market interest rates.
In all of these interventions, federal securities with resale commitments were purchased, in order to eliminate excess banking reserve market demand.
The growth pace of economic activity has remained solid and steady and well within parameters considered compatible with continued price stability.
With the increased supply of credit and greater consumer confidence, aggregate demand indicators point to robust expansion.
The value of imports has risen in comparison to last year, principally as a consequence of increased outlays on fuels and lubricants, but also due to larger purchases of raw materials.
One of the driving forces underlying this expansion has been growth in exports of manufactured products.
Industry has responded adequately to increased demand by expanding not only average utilization of output capacity, but output capacity itself.
Potential bottlenecks in the future output flow of some productive sectors of the economy should be avoided through increased investments.
At the same time, the prospects of a plentiful farm harvest will certainly contribute to favorable expectations regarding next years total output.
Following a brief peak in previous months, the September decline in inflation further strengthens the thesis that there is a very low degree of inertia in the economy at present.
This thesis supports expectations of a further decline in inflation in October.
Nonetheless, there is a significant risk factor in the external scenario.
The volatility of international oil prices has worsened.
Parallel to this, the prices of the foreign securities of emerging markets, particularly in Latin America, have been marked by increasing volatility, due to a great extent to uncertainties generated by the troubles in the Middle East and by devaluation of the euro.
Growth prospects have improved for Japan and are still quite good for the euro zone, despite the considerable uncertainty generated by the steady weakening of the new currency.
In the United States, the trajectory implicit in futures contracts does not point to any probability of a change in basic interest rates in coming months.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign exchange policy actions.
