To a great extent, this was due to expanded sales of items of greater unit value with the added stimulus of an increasingly greater flow of credit.
This performance was driven by such factors as longer average maturities in financing operations, interest rate reductions and lower levels of default in comparison to last year.
Investment indicators have expanded in recent months, particularly under capital goods output.
The strongest growth occurred under farm equipment, transportation equipment and products for the electrical energy sector.
One of the factors that contributed to this result was a larger bilateral surplus in operations with Mexico, which was more than enough to offset an increased deficit in trade with Venezuela and Argentina.
Aggregate supply indicators point to steady growth throughout the year, with upturns under average utilization of installed output capacity, employment and industrial productivity.
According to IBGE, GDP in the third quarter of the year registered its seventh consecutive positive result at market prices when compared to the previous quarter.
Insofar as the job market is concerned, data accumulated up to September confirm the trend toward growth in both employment and productivity with no additional cost pressures.
For the eleventh consecutive month, formal employment expanded in the month of September, with creation of 867 thousand job positions in the year.
With exception of the building industry, all sectors turned in positive growth.
Despite Opecs recent decision to increase petroleum output, the upward price trend continued.
Price formation in this market is strongly impacted by the political unrest in the Middle East, as well as by reports involving oil and derivative stock levels held by the United States, particularly in light of expectations of a sharp rise in consumption as winter weather begins to grip the northern hemisphere.
The Committee recognized the risk of increased inflationary pressures generated by an expanding job market and higher energy prices.
However, recent signs of a slowdown in demand growth coupled with financial market adjustments suggest that the economy may well continue expanding as a result of sharp growth in productivity while avoiding such pressures.
In Japan, more recent indicators point to a still incipient process of recovery.
With regard to the Euro zone countries, indicators point to a slight slowdown in economic activity with some degree of upward movement under inflation.
The single currency has come under significant pressure, leading the European Central Bank to intervene in the market three times in the month of November.
Uncertainties regarding fundamental aspects of the Argentine economy have come to the surface in recent weeks, resulting in increased sovereign risk perceptions and higher internal rates of interest.
The October initiatives were aimed at fostering private investment and, basically, stimulating economic activity, as the key to expanding employment and recovering previous tax inflow levels.
The measures taken in November featured structural reform of the social security and labor systems and called for a pact between the central government and the provinces aimed at stabilizing public spending for five years.
The reaction of financial markets to these measures was no more than lukewarm and financing costs remained very high.
However, this agreement will depend on congressional approval of measures aimed at bringing greater discipline to fiscal affairs, including passage of the 2001 budget and the social security reform bill, as well as the agreement already signed between the central government and the provinces.
Inflation declined once again in October, mostly as a result of a slowdown under farm prices and a drop in fuel prices.
Other factors that contributed to this result were declines in the prices of fuel alcohol, cooking gas, gasoline, personal hygiene products and hairdresser services.
Identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
Based on this evidence, the working hypothesis indicates stability in food prices up to the end of the year; b.
This impact will be incorporated into the IPCA at a rate of about one-fourth in November and three-fourths in December.
At the same time, an additional factor is that oil prices in 2001 will follow the mean implicit in the futures market curve; c. with regard to government managed prices, due account was taken of the impact of adjustments in urban bus fares in those capital cities in which this years prices have not increased in line with the average adjustments perceived by the IPCA.
This working hypothesis is consistent with the trajectories implicit in fed fund futures contracts.
The average level of exchange for October and November was adjusted in light of the recent depreciation of the real.
These operations were in keeping with the objective of fully rolling the maturing exchange security debt, considering only final interest and the nominal updated redemption value.
In the first two auctions, papers with five year terms were offered.
These terms were later reduced to three and two years so as to meet the specific needs of exchange hedging.
Contrary to what had occurred on previous occasions, this excess liquidity was not offset by the National Treasury cash surplus, but rather by the reduction in the volume of security purchases in open market operations carried out by Banco Central.
These interventions, which were made with the objective of managing very short-term interest rates, occurred on four occasions for a total of 23 business days.
Despite a temporary slowdown in September output indices, more recent data confirm continued growth in aggregate demand and a steady pace of overall economic expansion.
Consumption indicators reflect an increased supply of credit with lesser spreads and longer terms.
Aggregate supply has reacted in a consistent manner, registering growth in employment levels, productivity and average utilization of installed industrial output capacity.
The prospects of growth in the coming year are positive.
Industrial production indicators confirm that expansion has been powered by the performance of durable consumer goods as a result of both increased foreign sales and an expanding internal market, stimulated by a more ample flow of consumer credit.
The outlook for growth in the farm sector in 2001 is also quite positive.
Analysis of supply and demand conditions reveals no significant pressures on inflation.
Quite to the contrary, the recent behavior of inflation confirms Copoms perception of a low degree of inertia built into the process of domestic price formation.
Following the July and August supply shocks when inflation neared three percentage points in the two month period, the September and October results point to a rapid downturn and an accumulated rate of just 0.4 percentage points in the period.
For 2001, expectations are that inflation will close slightly below the target.
However, there are lingering doubts regarding the impact of a minimum wage increase on inflation.
At the same time, one should also note that in terms of the internal scenario growing imports and an ample supply of foreign financing have contributed significantly to internal equilibrium.
The increasingly more intense pace of economic growth has fired demand for goods and brought pressure to bear on the average level of utilization of the manufacturing sectors installed output capacity, particularly under the heading of intermediate goods.
The increased utilization of installed capacity in the intermediate goods industry has already begun impacting imports and the trade balance.
However, part of the recent upturn in imports is targeted at expanding exports, with an obvious beneficial impact on the trade balance.
Over the medium term, further improvement in the trade balance is expected, given that investment flows have been reacting positively and, consequently, paving the way for steady and sustained growth in the economy.
The recent privatization of Banespa confirmed the economys potential for attracting long term foreign resources.
However, the external sector is a risk factor that must be considered.
Though some uncertainties have been dissipated, the international financial market is marked by a high degree of aversion to risk and this could contribute to reductions in capital flows.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign exchange policy actions.
