Notwithstanding expectations of lesser primary surpluses in the final months of the year, 1999 fiscal performance has been quite satisfactory and easily surpassed the targets defined in the economic program agreed upon with the IMF.
Not only has this aided in attenuating the Brazil risk, it has also increased confidence that the 2000 targets will be achieved.
Exports expanded in both October and November.
Here, one should note that export volumes have been expanding since July, while the price indices for these goods expressed in data purged of seasonal factors have been improving since September.
Average prices for imports rose sharply, mostly as a consequence of oil price hikes.
According to IBGE statistics, GDP remained stable in the third quarter of the year.
In October, industrial output expanded in all use categories.
November figures are expected to reveal a similar result with no significant pressures on production costs.
According to a Banco Central survey, expectations of economic analysts for the major price indices were revised upward during the course of November.
Insofar as December is concerned, observers expect a lesser rate of inflation as the effects of the off-season harvest period wane.
External Environment Despite predictions of a growth slowdown in 1999, the United States economy has continued thriving.
The impact of recent interest rate increases has yet to be felt.
Measured by the consumer price index, inflation remained stable.
The first quarter, it should be recalled, registered strong growth.
The third quarter falloff was caused by a decline in consumption in all sectors of activity, including the public sector.
The Tankan indicator of expectations manufacturing industry - moved from 22 to 17, thus pointing to a sense of confidence in the continuity of the recovery process, albeit at a less accelerated pace.
In the case of the Euro Zone, the outlook was bright, particularly with regard to the expected performance of the German and French economies.
Among other measures, the fiscal adjustment now being negotiated with the Argentine congress depends on approval of the budget for 2000, redistribution of revenues and expenditures among the central government and provinces and increases in already existent taxes coupled with creation of new levies.
However, the same simulations indicate that maintenance of interest rates at the current level will make it possible to achieve the 1999, 2000 and 2001 inflation targets.
From November 11 to December 14, the National Treasury carried out eleven LTN auctions and five LFT auctions.
Preset papers were readily absorbed by the market in operations marked by longer maturities, thus indicating improvement in the overall economic environment.
In six auctions, LTNs were sold with terms of 6 months.
On December 1, the National Treasury carried out two NTN-C auctions at uniform prices, with terms of three and seven years.
Though buyers were allowed to effect payment to the Treasury with securitized credits for which they were liable, there was a general preference for liquidation in cash.
Definitive operations with Banco Central securities were limited to sales of NBCE and had the sole objective of offsetting redemptions of debt updated according to exchange rate variations.
Following its strategy of allowing the Selic rate to float more freely, Banco Central reduced its open market interventions.
Consequently, in the period between November 11 and December 14, the institution limited its interventions aimed at bringing financial system liquidity into line to just seven, with five being effected through overnight operations.
Monetary policy guidelines Now that the wave of seasonal shocks and increases in government managed prices that had generated upward pressure on price levels has been largely absorbed, inflation is expected to turn downward in coming months.
Fiscal policy has aided in maintaining price stability and recent results indicate that the targets for the primary surplus in 1999 and 2000 will be met.
Exports, which were impacted by a generally unfavorable international market scenario in 1999, have already begun reacting.
More recent wholesale and consumer price indices point to some degree of deceleration, though the drop in inflation measured by the IPCA from October to November was at best modest; give due consideration to uncertainties regarding the behavior of government managed prices in the coming year.
This is still the major source of concern in light not only of the direct impact of these prices on inflation in 2000 but also their indirect effects on the other prices of the economy.
