Among the factors that contributed to this turnaround, one should cite more plentiful credit and lower interest rates on bank credits, coupled with rising exports and private investment.
Personal credit and financing for acquisition of goods were the segments that turned in the strongest growth.
Growth was particularly strong under sales involving goods with high unit value as a result of a more ample supply of credit.
This movement corroborates the improvement that has occurred in consumer credit conditions, making it much easier to purchase goods over longer terms and at lesser interest rates.
Another factor that has contributed to a greater credit supply is the decline in the net rate of defaults.
This was the lowest level in the last 11 months and was caused by both a decrease in current defaults registered and an increase in cancellations of past defaults.
Investment indicators registered growth throughout the first half of the year.
One should stress that the manufactured goods exported by Brazil contain high levels of imported components.
However, when distributed into use categories, the only sector to register successive records was output of intermediate goods.
At the end of June, the output levels of durable goods, capital and semi and nondurable goods were still well below the most recent peak in this series.
Frosts in the month of July are expected to generate adverse impacts on the output of such winter crops as wheat and the intermediate corn harvest.
Despite this, however, this years harvest should still be slightly greater than that of last year.
With regard to the labor market, figures for the first half of the year indicate that the process of employment and productivity growth begun toward the end of 1999 has moved steadily forward.
Increased employment was registered in all sectors of the economy, with the sole exception of construction.
The result was creation of 590 thousand jobs in the first half of the year.
Recent indicators further strengthen the signs that the United States economic performance has begun leveling off.
Notwithstanding the high level of activity, inflation has remained stable, mostly as a result of productivity gains.
These figures indicate that inflation is firmly under control.
International oil market price moved upward once again at the end of July, reflecting worries generated by insufficient United States stocks, particularly in the case of such derivatives as gasoline.
In the month of July, both general price indices and consumer price indices registered the highest growth rates of the year.
The products responsible for this high were few and included beef, milk, beans and _ products.
Though these increases were no surprise to the market, their magnitude was unexpected and led the institutions included in the survey carried out by Banco Central to revise their projections upward for the year as a whole.
In order to evaluate the inflation outlook for the year, one must first identify the shocks capable of generating impacts on future price level trends.
These shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of new information.
In the first place, with the drought in major meat and milk production areas, the effects of the off-season period were felt earlier than usual.
Secondly, the failure of the sugarcane harvest in the southeast region generated a strong increase in sugar and alcohol prices, with indirect impacts on gasoline prices.
This unexpected performance had the natural impact of shifting the start of the future inflation trajectory upward.
Parallel to this, since fuel increases occurred in the second half of July, part of the impact will still be felt in terms of August inflation.
Despite lesser probability of changes in fed fund interest rates up to the end of the year, the hypothesis of a small increase in the fourth quarter, which is implicit in futures contracts, was maintained.
Both leading indicators for inflation and short-term forecasts were presented.
The leading indicators point to successive decline in inflation between August and November, with a slight upturn in December.
IPCA core inflation was also presented.
The method used to calculate this figure excludes items for which monthly growth is above the distribution percentile of 80 or below the percentile of In this procedure, those items that register change just once per year were smoothed out or, in other words, their impact was redistributed in equal shares in the month of the effective increase and over the other eleven months of the year.
BBCEs were offered on four different occasions.
In the first public offer, three year papers were offered, moving to four year securities in the remaining offers.
There were no public offers of LFT on August 15 when the National Treasury sold only preset papers.
Banco Central operations on the secondary market came to a total of seven, covering a period of 25 business days, and had the objective of managing very short-term interest rates in the period under consideration.
One should also stress that a committed sales auction of nonearmarked LTN was held on August Analysis of supply and demand indicates an absence of imbalances capable of generating inflationary pressures in the horizon relevant to the inflation targeting system.
The expressive fiscal results obtained in the current year confirm the governments commitment to austerity and stand as a guaranty that the targets defined in the Economic Program will be met.
Aside from this, announcement of the 2002 fiscal target reflects the willingness of the public administration to continue firmly on this path in the future.
As regards the external scenario, the fact that the drop-off in the United States economy is still very tenuous, coupled with reasonable growth in the Euro Zone and Asia and significantly less volatility on financial and capital markets, would seem to favor growth in net exports.
At the same time, these factors tend to improve the perceptions of risk in the emerging economies.
Most specifically, the successful placement of bonds of the Republic with 40 year maturities and the steady reduction in the nations risk premium have greatly improved the outlook of Brazilian companies with respect to foreign financing.
Of the factors that have caused the greatest concern on the international scenario, petroleum is the most troublesome.
The negative impact of oil prices has shown itself to be lasting while there is an increasing probability of new highs as the winter season takes hold in the northern hemisphere, at the same time in which the OPEC countries have transmitted only very vague signs of just how much oil they intend to pump.
Should international prices remain where they are or move upward, it may become advisable to introduce internal adjustment measures.
Inflation in July as measured by the IPCA was far above the level forecast by both the market and Copom.
The conclusion drawn in this framework is that the high is transitory.
This question is pertinent since, over the medium and long terms, inflation measured by the core and observed inflation tend to converge.
Once the data contained in more recent price indicators is incorporated into the forecasting instrument available to Copom, expected inflation in 2000 was revised upward by eliminating the margin that previously existed.
Though this would not jeopardize compliance in 2000, it could imperil the trajectory expected for In this light, one is going to have to keep a very close eye on price evolution in order to clear up any doubts regarding the transitory nature of the shocks and their effect in the future.
