Aggregate supply and demand Signs of expansion in aggregate demand began to appear toward the end of Growth occurred under industrial sales and check and credit card transactions and was accompanied by a moderate increase under banking credit, all in a framework of declining default levels.
With exception of the So Paulo retail trade sector, the first signs of credit growth became evident and were paralleled by a generalized drop in default levels.
Defaults in the private financial system have followed a downward trajectory since May In the public financial system, the default level moved into a downward curve in the September-November quarter.
The highlights of this index were the items expectations, with an increase from 120.8 to 128.7, and current economic conditions, with growth from 65.4 to 72.In accumulated terms for the year up to November, investment indicators registered negative growth rates.
In the case of imports, the volume index registered moderate growth in October and November, while average prices have risen sharply since the second quarter of the year, mostly as a consequence of oil price hikes.
Labor market indicators now point to a gradual decline in the jobless rate.
External environment In the United States, indicators point to a high level of aggregate demand with potential imbalances in relation to the pace of growth in supply.
However, it should be noted that price indices have not revealed any significant sources of consistent pressures.
The growth trajectory under output remained strong.
In Japan, growth in aggregate demand is still highly tenuous and reflects moderate growth in private consumption, downward movement in public and private investments and foreign sales that were impacted negatively by valuation of the yen.
On the supply side, the situation can be summarized in low stock levels and high levels of utilization of installed production capacity.
Real wages have registered positive growth in recent months.
In the Euro Zone, the economy has begun expanding at a more consistent pace and this has been reflected in both product and industrial output.
This result was consistent with the annual inflation targeting system that has been used as the basic monetary policy guideline since the month of June.
In December, the pace of price increases slowed.
Wholesale price indices reflected drops in farm and industrial prices, while consumer price indices showed that the impact of earlier alcohol and gasoline price increases had been fully absorbed.
According to a Banco Central survey, the expectations of analysts with regard to the major price indices in the first quarter of 2000 point to lower inflation, particularly in general price indices.
Prospective assessment of inflation trends Any evaluation of the inflationary outlook should begin with identification of shocks capable of impacting the future price level trajectory.
In relation to the macroeconomic environment considered in the December Inflation Report, the major difference is elimination of the doubts that had generated considerable wariness within highly computerized sectors of the economy as regards transition to the new century.
With respect to the rate of exchange, the process of valuation of the nations currency that began in December was confirmed in average terms in the first half of January.
This process has been further strengthened by sharp declines registered in the value of the risk premium on Brazilian sovereign debt papers since the fourth quarter of Based on alternative scenarios that deviate slightly from the core scenario, economic models were subjected to a series of simulations.
These simulations lead to the conclusion that maintenance of interest at current levels will, with a high degree of probability, make it possible to comply with inflation targets in 2000 and Short-term forecasts as well as antecedent inflation indicators were presented.
Analysis of these results leads to the conclusion that inflation will tend downward in the early months of In more specific terms, antecedent indicators suggest a more abrupt drop in inflation in the month of February.
It should be noted that January results still tend to reflect the supply problems that occurred under fruit and vegetables as a result of prolonged rain in the southeast region.
At the same time, they also incorporate the seasonal factors characteristic of the start of the school year.
This decision was in keeping with the expectations of practically all the participating market institutions consulted.
Between December 16, 1999 and January 18, 2000, the National Treasury carried out three LTN sales auctions, one LTN purchase auction and two LFT sales auctions.
No alterations were introduced into the programming of market security placements previously announced by the National Treasury.
Definitive operations with Banco Central papers were, once again, restricted to sales of two year NBCE.
One should note that, since December 28, 1999, the NBCE coupon has been defined in each issue notification.
Continuing its efforts to construct a more dynamic federal securities secondary market, Banco Central intervened in the money market on ten different occasions for a total of 24 business days.
The objective was to manage the financing cost of these papers in situations marked by imbalances in banking reserves.
Analyzing the January 17 position of interest rate forward operations, one notes a shift into a downward curve.
Monetary policy guidelines Analysis of supply and demand reveals an absence of imbalances capable of generating inflationary pressures for the inflation targeting system in the foreseeable future.
Consumption and credit indicators point to a process of still tenuous recovery with an outlook for considerable improvement during the course of However, they do not stand as risks to supply and demand equilibrium and, consequently, are not considered sources of inflationary pressures.
Fiscal policy will remain austere and will contribute positively to price stability.
Since December, the foreign sector and, more precisely, the trade balance has performed well and one can expect strong improvement in export operations.
Having overcome the sense of wariness that dominated highly computerized systems during the transition to the new century, the early days of 2000 were marked by strong capital inflows and improvement in foreign financing conditions.
Monitoring of the farm harvest reveals no significant price pressures during the year.
The decline in inflation measured by the IPCA from November to December points to convergence to a trend that is more compatible with inflation targets.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign exchange policy actions.
