At the start of the third quarter of the year, aggregate demand indicators, stimulated by a greater supply of consumer credit and expanding exports, pointed to continuation of the growth trajectory.
Sales of durable consumer goods and automobiles led this growth and were powered mostly by improved credit conditions.
Investment indicators have expanded steadily.
This growth was particularly strong under typically industrialized goods and transportation equipment and capital goods for the construction industry.
Imports of capital goods have continued on a downward slide, though the negative results registered in terms of imported volume have been declining throughout the year.
Fiscal results have clearly underscored the governments commitment to austerity and guarantied compliance with the targets defined in economic programming.
While imports of fuels and lubricants expanded as a result of price growth, foreign purchases of raw materials were pressured by growth in the volume of imports.
This performance reflects the process of growth in industrial output, particularly under foreign sales of manufactured goods.
One should note that production of the latter has a high level of imported components.
Aggregate supply indicators reveal that the growth process has continued, as the average level of utilization of installed capacity has expanded, new productivity gains have been achieved and industrial employment has turned upward.
This forecast is below those issued previously.
The decline in this case has been caused by adverse climatic factors that have impacted such winter crops as wheat and what is known as the intermediate corn harvest.
The output level of durable goods, capital goods and semidurable and nondurable products is still well below the peak registered by the statistical series in July, indicating that there is still considerable idle production capacity available.
With respect to the labor market, accumulated data up to July points to a growth trend under both employment and productivity, without generating pressure on production costs.
In the month of July, formal employment expanded for the ninth consecutive month, with creation of 696 thousand job openings in the year.
All sectors turned in expanded employment opportunities, with the sole exception of the construction industry.
The most recent macroeconomic indicators released in the United States further reinforced signs of lesser growth in aggregate demand at the start of the second half of the year.
In the case of Japan, more recent economic indicators point to deceleration in the pace of economic growth in relation to the expansion registered in the first half of the year.
Insofar as the euro zone countries are concerned, the level of economic activity remained high in an environment marked by a gradual increase in the rate of inflation.
The inflation high was caused by depreciation of the euro and increases in international petroleum prices.
High oil prices and their excessive volatility have been caused by supply restrictions imposed by the Organization of Petroleum Exporter Countries - OPEC, international economic growth, low stock levels in consumer nations and expectations of a seasonal increase in demand during the upcoming winter season in the northern hemisphere.
The impact of farm price increases and changes in government managed prices exerted added pressures on August price indices, though these pressures were somewhat attenuated in relation to the month of July.
Growth in farm prices was generated by adverse climatic factors that not only resulted in smaller than expected sugar cane and wheat harvests, but also provoked an early start to the meat and milk off-season period.
In the case of sugar cane, the harvest failure increased pressures on fuel prices as a direct result of higher alcohol prices.
Based on newly available information, both the shocks already identified and their impacts on the economy have been analyzed.
An analysis of the various components of this subgrouping indicates that this is a temporary price shock and that its effects will be dissipated as of September.
Despite this, the off-season agricultural period could have a marginal impact on inflation in the final quarter of the year.
This shortage of both petroleum and derivatives could generate added pressures on current prices, despite the fact that the structure of futures prices indicates successive monthly declines.
With respect to other government managed prices, just as had been expected, the most substantial pressure on inflation occurred in July and August.
For the remainder of the year, the basic scenario incorporated the impact of public transportation fares in municipalities that had not yet authorized annual increases, as well as electricity rates in Rio de Janeiro.
For 2001, the hypothesis is that public service rates will follow the growth trajectory estimated for the general indices used in the respective contracts and that other government managed prices will accompany the median level of the other prices of the economy.
However, the effects of these shocks dissipated rapidly and, since they are clearly temporary in nature, provoked no significant alterations.
Early figures for the month of September point to downward movement under inflation and would seem to confirm the lesser degree of inertia in price formation.
With this, inflation projected for 2001 is slightly below the target.
At the same time, in the alternative scenario which considers no additional increase in domestic fuel prices, the target for 2001 would be met with considerable ease.
Leading indicators for inflation were presented together with short-term forecasts.
IPCA core inflation was also presented.
Pressures were somewhat attenuated as foodstuffs registered a lesser high, generating expectations of a downturn in the IPCA core in September.
NBC-Es were offered on two separate occasions for purposes of partially rolling maturing exchange papers for which the National Treasury is liable.
In order to regulate liquidity, Banco Central operated on seven different occasions on the secondary market, involving a total of 19 business days.
In the secondary market, Banco Central carried out its second committed operation with no earmarking of the papers in question.
The balance of supply and demand points to an absence of imbalances that would indicate any significant inflationary pressures on the horizon relevant to the system of inflation targeting.
The pace of economic activity growth has remained solid and well within the parameters deemed compatible with price stability.
Aggregate demand indicators are strong, with a greater supply of consumer credit and growth in exports.
The highly positive fiscal result obtained during the course of the year confirmed the governments commitment to austerity and stands as a guaranty of compliance with the targets set down in the Economic Program.
The fiscal situation has been steadily improving, as economic expansion has made it possible to increase inflows.
At the same time as the confidence of economic agents in the Brazilian economy increases, it has become possible to gradually lengthen the maturities of public debt securities.
Led by durable consumer goods and capital goods, industrial output has been expanding.
One result has been an increase in average utilization of installed capacity.
Labor market indicators point to growth in employment and productivity, with no significant impacts on production costs.
The external scenario has gained in relative importance in terms of risk to the growth of the Brazilian economy, particularly in light of uncertainties surrounding petroleum prices.
However, other international economic conditions would seem to be generally favorable to Brazil.
More recent indicators reflect greater confidence in relation to the hypothesis of a smooth slowdown in the United States economy, at the same time in which futures markets would seem to discard any possibility of changes in American interest rates in the coming months.
Growth perspectives seem to have improved for Japan and remain solid for the euro zone, despite the downturn in the value of the common currency.
This situation will have a positive impact on Brazilian exports and contribute to improvement in perceptions of risk in the emerging nations in general.
However, international oil prices are still climbing and their volatility is such that forecasting is a somewhat futile exercise.
This highly adverse price shock has shown that it will be with us for some time to come and the probability of new highs will increase as winter in the northern hemisphere approaches.
Over the medium-term, the tendency in futures markets points in the direction of a price decline, though average prices expected for 2001 remain high, just over the level forecast for this year.
Measured by the IPCA, inflation in the month of August was slightly higher than estimates formulated both by the market and by Banco Central.
However, this was considered a result of temporary upturns under some foodstuffs.
Here, one should stress that unexpected but transitory increases have not altered the expectations of those responsible for price formation to the point of generating significant secondary impacts on inflation.
This low level of inertia was noted in the wake of the final quarter of 1999 and would now seem to be repeating itself, even though the economy as a whole is clearly in a stronger growth trajectory.
This leeway exists precisely for the purpose of making it possible to manage this type of shock, while also taking measures aimed at avoiding its spread into other areas of the economy.
However, price performance should be very closely monitored in order to confirm the hypotheses underlying these conclusions.
