The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.75 percent for the overnight RP prices and continue representation and coordination with concerned government agencies for this purpose; and the BSP’s policy pronouncements on the stance of monetary policy. The Advisory Committee’s recommendations were based on the following considerations: as lower inflation for services and steady inflation for clothing and food, beverages and tobacco (FBT) offset higher inflation for housing and repairs, fuel, light and water (FLW) and miscellaneous items. Average headline inflation for the first quarter of 2006 settled at 7.3 percent. - The arguments and information presented herein were the ones prevailing at the time of the Monetary Board decision on 6 April 2006. The highlights of the discussions of the 6 April 2006 meeting were namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director of the Treasury Department, and the Director of the Department of Economic Research. Meanwhile, year-on-year core inflation rose for the second consecutive month in March, bringing the year-to-date core inflation to 6.1 percent season ended. However, futures prices rose on expectations of higher demand for gasoline and other transport fuel for the summer season in the US, Europe and Asia. Domestic pump prices of petroleum products saw mixed trends: gasoline and LPG prices fell while diesel and kerosene rose in March. output. Average capacity utilization in manufacturing in January 2006 declined slightly to 80.2 percent from 80.4 percent in the previous month. The volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing posted a year-on-year decline of 2.8 percent in January compared to index (VAPI) increased by 16.1 percent year-on-year, higher than the previous month’s 12.8 percent. in the previous month. This was due to reduced consumption by residential users and the slowdown in commercial and industrial demand for power. February 2006 based on data from the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. (CAMPI). This was a reversal of the 16.7 percent growth in January. According to CAMPI and the Truck Manufacturers Association (TMA), the early months of the year are historically sluggish months for the industry. volume in January 2006. On a month-on-month basis, appliance sales posted a 9.4 percent growth, reversing the 35.4 percent decrease in December 2005. was a reversal of the 16.8 percent expansion in the previous month. January 2006, a deceleration from the revised growth of 28.9 percent in the previous month. Payments for electronic products, which comprised 42.9 percent of the total import bill, declined by 7.9 percent. percent in October 2005 but was lower than the year-ago figure of definition of unemployment. Based on the new definition of unemployment, the jobless rate also increased to 8.1 percent in January from 7.4 percent in October.[2] Expectations Survey (BES) of the BSP showed improving optimism for the first and second quarters of 2006. agricultural output grew by 4.0 percent in real terms, the highest rate recorded in the past five quarters. For 2005, the agriculture sector expanded by 2.0 percent, lower than the previous year’s 4.9 percent. available data. Treasury bill (T-bill) auction rates were generally lower. February from 8.4 percent in the previous month, based on data from the BSP’s Depository Corporations Survey (DCS).[3] year-on-year in January 2006 compared to a 0.9 percent rise in the previous month. Banks’ lending activities were channeled to the following sectors: financial institutions, real estate and business services (FIREBS) community, social and personal services, agriculture, fisheries and forestry sector. all tenors on 3 April 2006 due to improving fiscal outlook. Relative to the 27 March 2006 auction, T-bill rate for the 91-day tenor rose slightly by 1.5 basis points, while that for the 182-day and 364-day tenors eased by 19.4 basis points and 26.0 basis points. investors’ confidence. The peso was also supported by strong dollar of unemployed, which includes all persons who are 15 years old and over as of their last birthday and are reported as: (1) without work and currently available for work and seeking work; or (2) without work and currently available for work but not seeking work for the following reasons: (a) tired/believed no work available; (b) awaiting results of previous job application; (c) temporary illness/disability; (d) bad weather; and (e) waiting for rehire/job recall. The old definition of unemployment did not consider the availability criterion. The DCS, which replaced the Monetary Survey (MS) as the basis for measuring domestic liquidity, features an expanded list of surveyed institutions that includes the BSP, commercial banks, thrift banks, rural banks, non-stock savings and loan associations and non-banks with quasi-banking functions. inflows from portfolio investments, OFW remittances due to school graduation season, the appreciation of regional currencies against the US dollar, and foreign direct investments. below the programmed ceiling of P27.2 billion and 6.0 percent lower than the fiscal deficit for the comparable month in 2005. Revenues grew by 32 percent to reach P64.3 billion, while expenditures rose by 23.5 percent to P89.2 billion. For the first two months of 2006, the NG fiscal deficit stood at P48.1 billion or P7.7 billion below the program level. natural disasters over the past year. The United States continued to lead the global expansion amid the economic slowdown in the fourth quarter of strong. The solid performance of the services sector underpinned growth in most economies while a brisk pick-up of manufacturing activity was seen starting mid-2005. Sustained gains in labor market conditions and steady improvements in business and consumer confidence have aided the rebound in domestic demand. While short-term price movements appear to be dominated by developments in global oil prices, inflationary pressures continue to be modest and inflation expectations remain generally well-contained. its current level of 4.50 percent during its 8-9 March 2006 Monetary Policy Committee meeting, monetary authorities in major central banks in the world opted to tighten their monetary settings. The US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the federal funds target rate by 25 basis points for the fifteenth time since June 2004 to 4.75 percent. The European Central Bank voted to raise the minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations by 25 basis points to 2.50 percent to help ensure that medium to long-term inflation expectations in the Euro Area remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. In its March monetary policy meeting, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) decided to change its operating target of money market operations to the uncollateralized overnight call rate, which the BOJ will encourage to remain at zero percent. prices continue to provide room for the BSP to keep policy rates steady in the near term. In particular, they noted that the recent easing in oil prices and continued stability of the peso should help keep inflation pressures in check. Demand and credit indicators continue to suggest softness, while liquidity growth has stabilized to single-digit levels. Inflation expectations on the whole appear to remain stable. support keeping policy rates steady. The RVAT rate increase in February appears to have caused mainly one-time increases in prices, and sustained pressures do not appear to be a likely prospect. The March inflation rate was within the BSP’s forecast range for the month, and was thus consistent with the projected path for inflation. The BSP’s projected path for inflation suggests a deceleration in the second half of 2006 as cost-side pressures subside, and a reversion to the inflation target of 4-5 percent by 2007. additional inflation pressures. Oil market futures data, for example, continue to suggest an outlook of volatile oil prices over the policy horizon, given that expectations of tight global supply remain. Pending adjustments in domestic power transmission charges could also lead to increases in retail energy costs. The continued strength of the peso also increases the potential risk of a disorderly adjustment in the event of a reversal in market sentiment, and authorities thus remain alert to signs of renewed exchange market pressure. remain strongly committed to achieving the inflation target for 2007 and addressing the risks to future inflation. In particular, authorities will monitor closely for potential second-round effects in wage- and pricesetting and for indications of any adverse shift in inflation expectations. The Monetary Board will continue to assess thoroughly the conditions for prices, aggregate demand, domestic liquidity and other factors in order to determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy. has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board unanimously approved the following measures: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.75 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, energy conservation, and the development of alternative energy sources, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies; and dynamics and sources of price pressures in order to help guide the public’s inflationary expectations. Official policy pronouncements concerning the stance of monetary policy will also emphasize the short-term nature of the impact of the RVAT on prices. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary H:\derhome\EISS\MPRG\MB Highlights\2006\MB minutes 06-04-2006 meeting.doc