The volatility of food prices performed a fundamental role in the behavior of 2010 headline inflation.
This behavior of food price inflation partially mirrored domestic and external supply shocks, whose impacts were possibly heightened by the high volatility environment in international financial markets.
For the last four-month period, the most likely scenario indicates the continuity of this dynamics, with elevation of the headline inflation mainly determined by the increase in food prices.
In line with the evolution of headline inflation, the three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB increased between August and September.
GDP growth reflected, to great extent, statistical carry over, which, in general, was observed in the demand components and supply subsectors.
After registering positive growth rates in all months of 2009 until April 2010, the IBCBr has shown stability in the last months.
Industrial activity has partially been supported by the growth of industrial activity financing by public financial institutions.
The future behavior of industrial production will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be additional source of dynamism.
All ten sectors surveyed increased month-on-month in August.
In the next months it is expected that the retail sales trajectory continues to be benefited by governmental transfers, by real payroll growth, by credit expansion and by consumer confidence.
Therefore, evidence suggests that the utilization rates have accommodated at high levels, and that the maintenance of the reduced idleness margin is the result of the recent economic activity expansion, still not totally offset by the maturity of completed and ongoing investment projects.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to external demand is relevant for the reduction in the trade surplus.
The global economy recovery continues to be led by a group of emerging countries, whose steady pace of economic expansion is anchored mainly by domestic demand.
The possibility of eventual reversion in this recovery process cannot be completely discarded, though.
The US economic activity data indicate a scenario of gradual recovery from the crisis, but at a more moderate pace of growth than that recorded in the first quarter.
Consumer confidence in the US reached a new record low and the signs of relevant idleness margin persist, not only in the American economy, but also in the Euro Area and in Japan.
Regarding inflation rates, they have remained at very low levels in the G3 countries, despite the extremely expansionist economic policy actions, both at the fiscal and at the monetary sides.
Finally, the possibility that also the US adopts new expansionist monetary policy actions has contributed for the acceleration of the devaluation process of the US dollar that had been observed in the last months.
Among emerging markets, it bears highlighting that the Chinese central bank increased its interest rate after a long period of stability.
The low predictability of the asymmetric rebound of global economy, the dependence of supply growth on the maturity pace of risky investment projects and the geopolitical complexity of the sector add uncertainty to oil prices forecasts.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, oil prices swings might affect the domestic economy, for example, through the petrochemical sector or through expectations chains.
Regarding agricultural commodities, their prices continued to record increases, with highlights for sugar, cotton and corn.
Industrial commodities prices have also increased.
These price increases may be explained by price movements of important currencies and commodities global demand growth.
On its turn, the volatility observed in commodities prices results from a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations of demand growth and FX markets volatility is high.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Regarding the third quarter of 2012, in both scenarios, the projection is around the inflation midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation-targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to projected inflation and based on the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the price dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, and help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, mainly price setters.
It is additionally noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reinforce the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the process of maturing of the inflation targets stands at advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last six years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the FX and inflationary risk premium reduction, among other factors, seem to have resulted in significant reduction of the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has increased in the last years.
Despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables, it should be emphasized that this perception is supported by estimates generated by macroeconometric models used by the Copom.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the traction of monetary policy increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
Concerns about European countries sovereign debt and the deceleration in China remain elevated, as well as about the sustainability of the US economy recovery.
Even so, the prices of some commodities and Brazilian assets increased and, overall, prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
Meanwhile, the trajectory of price indices evidences the cooling of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas concerns regarding the prospects of deflation in other economies remain.
In this context, the probability of some influence of external disinflation over domestic inflation remains high, although uncertainty about the behavior of asset and commodities prices persists in a context of substantial volatility in international financial markets.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms its view that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
Although the accommodation observed in the last two quarters has been more intense than expected at the start of the year, as evidenced, among others, by data on inventories and industrial production, the prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable.
This assessment is supported, among other factors, by signs that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, despite at a more moderate pace, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, notwithstanding some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the dynamism of domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the vigor of labor market, despite the cooling in the generation of jobs in specific segments.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative stances for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures.
The prospective scenario substantially deteriorated early this year, but this dynamic has reversed, greatly mirroring less favorable prospects for global activity and the monetary policy actions implemented this year.
Despite the difficulty in identifying the nature of these shocks, and their intensity, duration and the possibility of reversal, monetary policy should act to prevent its propagation, the so-called second-order effects.
However, the prevailing view is that the convergence of inflation to the midpoint target tends to materialize.
For that, the Copom finds support in the pertinent considerations that monetary policy acts with time lags over activity and inflation, and that the effects of the adjustment process in the base interest rate initiated in April 2010 havent completely materialized yet.
Moreover, it is worth noticing that this hypothesis of convergence is subject to the materialization of the trajectories regarding fiscal and credit variables which the Committee considers.
Anyway, the Committee ensures that, in case this scenario does not promptly materialize, the monetary policy stance should be adjusted in order to guarantee the convergence between the pace of demand and supply expansions.
From another point-of-view, in case inflation does not promptly converge to the midpoint target established by the CMN, monetary policy will act in order to redirect price dynamics and, therefore, ensure the target to be fulfilled.
The intensity and frequency of shocks that both the global and Brazilian economies have undergone in recent years impose additional challenges to the analysis of the prospective scenario.
Evidence in this respect are manifested, for example, in the bimodal character of analysts view polled by the BCB, as some participants perceive a benign inflation scenario, in which the Selic rate would remain stable in the relevant horizon, while other participants show skepticism and advocate the base rate.
On its turn, the Committee recognizes an economic environment in which the uncertainty level prevails above the usual, where the remaining risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem from the domestic outlook.
For instance, it bears highlighting those deriving from domestic demand expansion, in a context of narrow idleness margin in the use of production factors.
In this context, it seems plausible to affirm that the factors that support these domestic risks have decelerated.
Moreover, there are signs that the economy has moved towards a trajectory closer to long-term equilibrium and, therefore, the effects of demand pressures and of the high level of utilization of factors over the balance of risks for inflation tend to cool down.
Still, the current balance of risks still points to the accomplishment of a benign scenario, in which inflation would remain consistent with the inflation targets path, which is largely due to the adjustment of the base rate implemented since April.
Also contributing to this scenario is the new information released since then, indicating an improvement in the balance of risks related to the regulated prices dynamics, as well as that the slowdown of economic activity in the last two quarters was more intense than the projected at the start of the year.
Regarding the external outlook, the probability of deceleration, and even reversion, of the already slow process of recovery of G3 economies remains high.
As a consequence, the influence of the international scenario over domestic inflation behavior shows some disinflationary bias.
Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
Moreover, although they tend to cool down, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should still contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness margin of factors at low levels.
The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent international financial crisis, by those referring to the worsening of the global economy prospects and especially by those stemming from the change in the monetary policy stance.
These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The changes in the three IPCA core inflation measures have accelerated in September month-on-month.
The main drivers of wholesale prices were corn, contributing 0.34 p.p.; cattle, 0.22 p.p.; and poultry 0.17 p.p.
In the last two months, there was decrease in optimism about the industry at present and recovery in relation to the future situation.
In the last twelve months through September, 2,263.9 thousand formal jobs were created in the country.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in August, reaching 457 days, up from 452 days in July.
Despite this bias, as the mature economies continue to present significant output gap, price indices are tamed.
In the emerging economies, despite some basic interest rate rises, as occurred in Peru, Chile and India, the monetary policy stance continues to support economic growth, as central banks have maintained the basic interest rates below the levels observed prior to the beginning of the crisis, with the perception that it will be necessary to continue to delay the withdrawal of monetary stimuli introduced during that period.
The VIX index retreated to twenty-point level, standing close to the values recorded at the end of April, before the fiscal crisis deepening in European countries.
The one- and three-year rates decreased by 0.08 p.p., and 0.01 p.p., respectively, while the two-year rate increased by 0.03 p.p.
The BCB also borrowed money through 33 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main drivers of liquidity expansion in the period were the BCB interventions in the FX market, the net expenses of the Union and the net redemption of federal public securities.
