The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed divergent behavior between December and February.
Note that all core measures continued to increase, according to twelve-month trailing inflation, compared to local record lows observed in October and two of them are above the inflation target.
Under this comparison basis, the acceleration of the IGP-DI reflected the behavior of its three components.
Regarding the IPA-DI, the inflation acceleration, under this comparison basis, derives basically from the behavior of industrial prices.
As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The positive contribution of domestic absorption to the Q4 GDP growth totaled 5.2 p.p., year-over-year, overweighting the 1.0 p.p. negative impact exerted by the external sector.
The analysis of the behavior of IBGE industrial output series, and its components, suggests that production experiences expansion at a pace which continues to be influenced by the international outlook, by business and households expectations, as well as by the easing of domestic financial conditions, supported not only by traditional sources of credit, but also by the recovery of capital markets and the performance of public financial institutions.
The recovery in industrial production dynamism, despite initially led by the production of durable goods, has become more widespread than before, reflecting tax exemption measures, currently in reversion process, as well as also the easing in financial conditions and income expansion.
The future behavior of industrial production, which should not be uniform over time, will depend on these factors, as well as on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be sources of dynamism, to which will be added the recovery of external demand.
Labor market has behaved more favorably, with benign aspects prevailing over signs of loss of strength.
Therefore, 390.8 thousand jobs were created in the first two months of 2010, a record high for the series in this period.
The manufacturing industry showed positive balance of 131.9 thousand jobs in the same period, which, together with the services and civil construction, also represented the highest balance registered for the series for this period.
Expanded retail sales data have been evidencing growth, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of durable goods, in response to temporary sector incentives granted by the government, to the improvement in the access to credit supply and to income expansion.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit and by the evolution of consumer confidence.
Similarly, the Nuci in the consumer goods, construction material and capital goods industries in February stood, in the same order, 4.8 p.p., 3.4 p.p. and 4.4 p.p. above the respective averages for the historical series.
The Nuci in the intermediate goods industry stood 1.7 p.p. above the same historical average.
The reduction of the idle capacity has been led by the expansion in economic activity, not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have been increasing in the last months, showing reduction in any remaining idle margin of the industry, despite the recovery of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the narrowing of trade surplus.
These developments can be attributed to some reduction in the concerns regarding fiscal deterioration in some mature economies, notably in Europe, despite the beginning of the reversal of the strong liquidity expansion occurred in 2009, notwithstanding the remaining high degree of uncertainty.
Under these conditions, there was some recovery in the demand for risky assets, as evidenced by the behavior of international financial markets.
Moreover, in face of fiscal concerns, the focus in the currency market was the depreciation of euro against other currencies.
The US economy recorded robust growth in the last quarter of 2009, sustained by the recovery of inventories, and the labor market performance showed some improvement.
The economic activity in Japan, on its turn, shows signs of consistent expansion, led by exports, especially to Asia.
In the Euro Area, where household consumption remains depressed, the recovery in the fourth quarter of 2009 was quite modest.
In short, uncertainty regarding the sustainability of consumption expansion in mature economies still remains, in a scenario of withdrawal of economic policy stimuli and modest prospects for credit expansion, but recovery seems to be consolidating.
Moreover, in many emerging economies, economic activity seems to have embarked on a consistent path of recovery, showing, in some cases, evidence of heat in the markets of goods, services, production factors and assets.
Therefore, inflation record lows in mature economies and major emerging economies have been exceeded.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in several countries, monetary policy began a phase of stability, whereas those economies that were less impacted by the international crisis and recover more quickly and intensely tend to adopt more restrictive monetary policy stance.
Future markets have increased as well.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can eventually affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
The same behavior was recorded for industrial commodities prices, except for nickel, which have notably increased.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
In the same direction, the projection under the market scenario increased and stands around the midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment.
Under this environment, both Brazilian asset prices, which had also been favoring the easing of domestic financial conditions, as well as the prices of some selected commodities, showed recovery.
So, it bears emphasizing that the prospects for foreign funding of Brazilian economy remain favorable.
On the other hand, the trajectory of price indices evidences the resumption of external inflationary pressures.
Consequently, the benign impact of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path could come to an end, in light of the persistence of uncertainty regarding the behavior of asset and commodities prices in the context of gradual normalization of international financial conditions.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom believes that, with the confirmation of the incipient evidences of intensification of domestic demand pressures over the market of factors, the probability that initially localized inflationary episodes pose risks to the inflation trajectory increases.
In this context, the risk of pass-through of wholesale price upward pressures to consumer prices increases as well.
The Committee judges that the materialization of this pass-through, as well as the spread of initially localized pressures over consumer prices, continues to depend critically on the economic agents expectations for inflation and on the idleness degree of the economy, among other factors.
Therefore, these and other variables are part of the information that is taken into account in the generation of the inflation forecasts of the BCB, which constitute a central element in the Committees assessment on the prospective inflation scenario.
Additionally, it should be noted that the behavior of domestic demand tends to exert some pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
In any event, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, which suffered some deterioration in recent months, instead of current inflation figures.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, as evidenced by data on trade, manufacturing capacity utilization and the labor market, as well as by signs of continued expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate.
It should be noted that consumers and businessmen confidence is at historically high levels.
Under these circumstances, the pace of activity depends significantly upon the evolution of real earnings, the effects of fiscal stimulus measures and the increments of governmental transfers that will occur in the upcoming months.
The dynamism of activity should also be benefited by the easing of financial conditions, favored, among other factors, by the policies of official banks.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decision will have more impacts from the middle of 2010 on.
The Copom believes that the main risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem, regarding the external outlook, from a possible rise in commodity prices and, regarding the domestic scenario, from the cumulative and lagged effects of the financial conditions easing and the fiscal and credit impulse over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in the context of the rapid reduction in the idleness margin in the use of production factors.
The balance of these influences on the future trajectory of inflation will be crucial for the assessment of the different monetary policy stances.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure that the convergence of inflation towards the targets path observed in 2009 continues to be registered in 2010 and This implies that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee considers that the accommodation of demand, driven by the tightening of financial conditions and the deterioration of the agents confidence, as well as by the contraction of the global economy, was overcome.
Therefore, it is reasonable to affirm that the economy is already in an expansion cycle, while there is still uncertainty to be resolved over time about the pace of this process.
Under this scenario, which is supported by the data available so far, monetary policy must ensure inflationary pressures remain contained.
In short, the Committee evaluates that, given the signs of strength in domestic demand, resulting in the reduction in the idleness margin of the production factors, as evidenced by indicators of manufacturing capacity utilization and labor market, and by the recent behavior of inflation expectations, the risks to the achievement of a benign inflationary scenario, in which inflation would remain consistent with the inflation targets, have increased.
Under this environment, monetary policy should remain especially vigilant in order to avoid that the greater uncertainty detected in shorter horizons spread to longer horizons.
In light of these considerations, there was consensus among committee members about the need to implement an adjustment in the basic interest rate, in order to contain the gap between the pace of domestic demand and productive capacity, as well as to strengthen the anchoring of inflation expectations.
Five votes were for the monetary policy action, and three votes were for 50-bps increase in the Selic rate.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a brief contraction, domestic demand recovered, largely thanks to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit resumption.
On its turn, important fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should contribute for the consolidation of activity resumption and hence, for the reduction of any residual idleness margin of productive factors.
The effects of these stimuli will be an important part of the context in which future decisions on monetary policy, which must ensure the maintenance of inflation convergence to the targets path in 2010 and 2011, will be taken.
In addition, it bears noticing that there was also consensus among the Committee members about the need to adapt the pace of adjustment of the basic interest rate to the developments in the prospective inflation scenario, as well as to the corresponding balance of risks, in order to limit the impacts caused by the behavior of current inflation over the underlying prices dynamics.
The annual adjustment of school fees contributed, individually, with 0.32 percentage points, constituting the greatest impact on the IPCA result, in February.
Food and beverages, and transportation, which have higher weights in the index, also recorded above-the-average monthly increases, despite their deceleration when compared to changes observed in January.
In fourteen out of the nineteen segments of the manufacturing industry, the Nuci presented positive performance month-on-month.
Despite the fall, related to seasonal aspects, the index remains 9.2 percentage points above the historical average.
The manufacturing industry outperformed in the month, with the opening of 68.9 thousand jobs.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in January for the fifth consecutive month, reaching 394 days, up from 390 days in December.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 288 days, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 523 days.
It is noteworthy that significant improvement in domestic demand in Japan results from the consumption of durable goods, especially cars, as a result of fiscal incentives.
It also bears emphasizing the deterioration in expectations of European consumers, the contraction in the index of purchases by managers in China, in addition to the reduction in the number of hours worked and weekly earnings in the labor market in the US.
In several ways, the Southeast Asian emerging economies continue to gain strength, a scenario that also prevails in commodity exporter countries in Latin America.
This recovery environment of emerging economies is supported not only by a pickup in domestic demand, but also by the force of the Chinese economy, to which converges significant share of exports of commodities exports, whose prices continue to grow, after the price correction at the beginning of year.
As the recovery is still fragile, particularly in mature economies, these central banks have kept the focus on liquidity management, including the closure of programs to increase the liquidity created during the crisis, avoiding, now, an increase in the basic interest rate.
Among the central banks of emerging economies, the People's Bank of China raised again the reserve requirements, a process also undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India, while the monetary authority of Malaysia surprised by increasing the interest rate, similar to the action taken again by the Reserve Bank of Australia.
In the short-term component of the yield curve, the successive upward revisions in inflation expectations, the disclosure of higher price indices and activity data and employment data, suggesting a consistent recovery of the economy, contributed to this movement.
The long-term component of the yield curve was influenced by the expectation of anticipation of the increasing cycle in the basic interest rate and by the inflow of foreign investors.
The two- and three-year rates decreased by 0.10 p.p. and 0.44 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 34 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main driver of liquidity contraction in the period was the net placement of securities by the National Treasury.
