The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed divergent behavior between February and March.
It is important highlighting that all core inflation measures continued to increase on a twelve-month basis, and are above the midpoint of inflation target.
From another perspective, the diffusion indices suggest dissemination in the inflation acceleration process.
Under this comparison basis, the acceleration of the IGP-DI reflected the behavior of its three components.
The IPA-DI inflation acceleration, under this comparison basis, derived mainly from the behavior of agricultural prices.
As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions, as well as on price setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The behavior of IBGE industrial output series, and its components, shows that industrial production expands at a pace that continues to be influenced by the international outlook, by business and households expectations, as well as by domestic financial conditions.
This process is supported not only by traditional sources of credit, but also by the recovery of capital markets and the performance of public financial institutions.
The recovery in industrial production dynamism was initially led by the production of durable goods, but it has become even more widespread than before, reflecting tax exemption measures, in advanced process of reversion, as well as the easing in financial conditions and the income expansion.
The future behavior of industrial production, which should not be uniform over time, will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be sources of dynamism, to which will be added the recovery of external demand.
Labor market continues to show favorable behavior.
In fact, 266 thousand jobs were created in March and, 657 thousand, in the first quarter of 2010, both record highs for the historical series.
Expanded retail sales data have been evidencing growth, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of durable goods, in response to the improvement in the access to credit supply, income expansion and temporary sector incentives granted by the government.
The retail sector continues to register positive performance and indicates that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, showing no signs of cooling.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will be benefited by fiscal transfers, by real payroll growth, by the recovery in the access to credit and by the evolution of consumer confidence.
The reduction in the idle capacity is a result of economic activity expansion, not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
Data regarding the absorption of capital goods showed recovery compared to the same periods of 2009 and increase in February month-on-month.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have recorded upward trajectory in the last months, showing reduction in any remaining idle margin of the industry, despite the recovery of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the narrowing of the trade surplus.
These developments can be attributed to fiscal concerns in mature economies, notably in Europe.
Under these conditions, there was some moderation in the demand for risky assets, as evidenced by the behavior of international financial markets.
Moreover, given the fiscal concerns in the Euro Area, the emphasis in the currency market remained the depreciation of the euro.
The US economy shows signs of gradual recovery, due to the improvement of conditions in labor market and industrial activity.
On its turn, the economic activity in Japan continues to suggest a slow recovery, led by exports, especially to Asia.
In the Euro Area, where fiscal concerns persist and where household consumption shows no signs of reaction, the economic recovery has been slower and uneven.
In short, uncertainty regarding the sustainability of consumption expansion in mature economies still remains, mainly in Europe, in a scenario of withdrawal of economic policy stimuli and modest prospects for credit expansion, but the recovery shows some consolidation.
On the other hand, in many emerging economies, economic activity seems to have embarked on a consistent path of expansion, showing, in some cases, evidence of heat in the markets of goods, services, production factors and assets.
Therefore, inflation troughs in mature economies and major emerging economies have been exceeded.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in several countries, monetary policy continues a phase of stability, whereas those economies that were less impacted by the international crisis and recover more quickly and intensely tend to adopt more restrictive monetary policy stance.
Australia and India, for instance, recently raised the basic interest rate.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can eventually affect domestic prices both through production chains, such as the petrochemical, and through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Under the market scenario, the projection also increased, however it stands around the midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment.
Indeed, there is a context of abundant liquidity, so that the prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
In line with these developments, both the prices of Brazilian assets and of some selected commodities have continued to rise.
On the other hand, the trajectory of price indices evidences the resumption of inflationary pressures in relevant economies.
Consequently, the benign impact of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path could come to an end, despite the persistence of uncertainty regarding the behavior of asset and commodities prices in the context of gradual normalization of international financial conditions.
On the other hand, this scenario may be quickly reversed, depending on the dynamics that derives from the market distrust regarding the solvency of some European economies.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
In this context, the risk of pass-through of upward costs pressures to wholesale price inflation, and from the last to consumer price inflation, increases as well.
The Committee states that the materialization of this pass-through, as well as the spread of initially localized pressures over consumer prices, continues to depend critically on the economic agents expectations for inflation and on the idleness degree of the economy, among other factors.
Therefore, these and other variables are part of the information set that is taken into account in the generation of inflation forecasts of the BCB, which constitute a key element in the Committees assessment on the prospective inflation scenario.
Additionally, it should be noted that the behavior of domestic demand has exerted some pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, which, considering the perspective for the evolution of the main factors sustaining aggregate demand, tends to be observed again in this and in the upcoming quarters.
In any event, the Committee reaffirms the commitment that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation figures.
This occurred despite specific moves of some domestic assets, which are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, as evidenced by data on trade, manufacturing capacity utilization and the labor market.
This assessment is also supported by signs of continued expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate; by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels; and by income growth.
The continuity and intensification of this outlook depends significantly upon the effects of fiscal stimulus measures and the additional governmental transfers that will occur in the upcoming months and, to a lesser extent, upon the pace of recovery in global activity.
The dynamism of domestic activity should also be benefited by the easing of financial conditions, favored, among other factors, by the policies of official banks.
Considering the Brazilian economys new cycle of expansion, these considerations become even more relevant when one takes into account that there are lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects over the activity level and inflation.
The Copom believes that the main risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem, regarding the external environment, from additional rises in commodities prices and, regarding the domestic scenario, from the fiscal and credit impulse over the evolution of domestic demand, in the context of virtual exhaustion of the idleness margin in the use of production factors.
Indeed, these developments may exacerbate an outlook that already evidences the presence of mismatch between the growth of domestic absorption and capacity of supply expansion.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Otherwise, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long term.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
Signs of overheat in the economy are evidenced, for example, in core inflation trajectories, in the rise of inflation expectations, in the evidence of workers shortage for some sectors and in the rising inputs costs.
In particular, during this period, the inflation projections considered by the Committee showed some deterioration in the prospective scenario.
The Copom believes that this deterioration should be contained and, therefore, the signs of persistent mismatch between the pace of aggregate demand expansion and aggregate supply, which, ultimately, tend to increase the risk for inflation dynamics, must be reversed.
In such circumstances, the monetary policy stance should be adjusted, on the one hand, because it contributes to the convergence between the pace of demand expansion and supply and, on the other hand, because it prevents that originally localized price pressures determine a persistent deterioration of the inflation prospective scenario.
In light of this outlook, the prevailing opinion among the Committee members was that monetary policy must act incisively in order to avoid that the greater uncertainty detected in shorter horizons spread to longer horizons.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a brief contraction, domestic demand recovered, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit resumption.
On its turn, important fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the reduction of any residual idleness margin of productive factors.
The effects of these stimuli, as well the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent international financial crisis, and a possible deepening of the fiscal crisis that several European countries face, are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
In addition, it bears noticing that there was consensus among the Committee members about the need to adapt the pace of adjustment of the basic interest rate to the developments in the prospective inflation scenario, as well as to the corresponding balance of risks, in order to limit the impacts caused by the behavior of current inflation over the underlying prices dynamics.
The behavior of food and beverages prices constituted the key driver of inflation in March, contributing 0.35 p.p. to the result, in particular due to the change in tubers, roots and vegetables, pasteurized milk, refined sugar and fruit, which jointly contributed 0.23 p.p. to the March IPCA result.
Despite the pressure stemming from food and beverages, the IPCA cooled in March, mainly favored by the depletion of the impacts caused by school fees readjustment, which had pressured the index in February.
Partial results of price indices indicated continuity in the process of inflation deceleration in April, reflecting, among other factors, the depletion of seasonal impacts responsible, in part, for the increase in inflation at the start of the year.
The food and beverages group continued to be the key driver for inflationary pressure, contributing 0.39 p.p. to the monthly IPCA-Considering wholesale price indices, there are also less intense highs, due to the cooling in the prices of final and intermediate goods, followed by fall in the prices of raw materials.
In eleven out of the nineteen segments of the manufacturing industry, the Nuci presented positive performance month-on-month.
The component relative to current conditions fell by 0.3 point compared to the previous month, while that relative to expectations increased by 0.1 point.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate fell by 0.3 p.p.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in March, reaching 396 days, up from 388 days in February.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 287 days, up from 280 days in February, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 526 days, eight more than the previous month.
In the US, expectations indicators showed continued rise in consumer confidence, while labor market indicators showed positive development, reflecting the net creation of jobs in the first quarter of the year.
The disposable income, in contraction, suggests that consumption growth in the period had as counterpart a reduction in the savings rate.
In the Euro Area, where the resumption of activity continues contained, the most recent data evidenced that consumer spending has not shown significant recovery yet and economic activity in the region continues to be driven mainly by the external sector.
In light of this outlook, the central banks of major mature economies kept the basic interest rates unchanged and were involved in the management of liquidity.
Moreover, among emerging economies, signs of reduction of accommodative stance for monetary policy prevail, with recent high in the interest rate in India and restrictions to credit in China.
The five-year CDS spreads in Greece and Portugal have recently increased, despite the statement of financial support to Greece signed in mid-April by the countries that comprise the Euro Area.
The Greek long-term debt was downgraded by a rating agency, and the Greek government formalized, with the countries that comprise the Euro Area and the IMF, the request for activation of the loan scheme.
However, lack of details regarding its implementation maintained the CDS in Greece at record highs.
The persistent rise in inflationary expectations, the slow deceleration of current inflation indices and the disclosure of activity and employment data suggesting consistent recovery of economic activity were key drivers of this movement.
The one- two- and three-year rates increased by 0.55 p.p., 0.62 p.p. and 0.69 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 28 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main driver of liquidity contraction in the period was the adjustment promoted by reserve requirements.
