In short, information available confirms deterioration of inflation dynamics at the start of 2010, but, on the other hand, there was marked improvement at the margin.
The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed convergent behavior between May and June.
Moreover, it bears highlighting the decrease at the margin of the IPCA-15 in July, for both core measures and the diffusion index.
Under this comparison basis, the acceleration of the IGP-DI reflected the behavior of its three components.
The IPA-DI inflation acceleration, under this comparison basis, derived both from the behavior of agricultural and industrial prices.
Furthermore, it should be emphasized that the dynamics of wholesale prices improved at the margin, particularly the agricultural prices.
Furthermore, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend, among other factors, on the current and prospective demand conditions, the exposure of each sector to foreign and domestic competition, as well as on the price setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The evolution of the IBC-Br, as well as other indicators of activity, suggests that the economy may have entered a path more consistent with economic growth rates evaluated as sustainable in the long term, rather than those observed in the first quarter of the year.
The behavior of the industrial output and its components remained stable around the levels prevailing prior to the crisis.
In the first months of this year, the buoyant pace in industrial activity has been influenced by the international outlook, the businesses and households expectations, as well as by domestic financial conditions, which have boosted domestic demand.
This process was also supported by the rebuilding of inventories and the anticipation of consumption, which, on its turn, partially resulted from the prospects of fiscal stimulus withdrawal.
Despite the stability on a month-on-month basis observed in May, the behavior of IBGE industrial output series and its components returned levels observed in the pre-crisis period.
This process has been supported not only by traditional sources of credit, but also by the recovery of capital markets and the performance of public financial institutions.
After the crisis, the recovery in industrial production dynamism was initially led by the production of durable goods, but it became widespread afterwards, reflecting tax exemption measures, in advanced process of reversion, as well as the easing in financial conditions and the income expansion.
The future behavior of industrial production will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be sources of dynamism, among other factors.
After decreasing substantially after the crisis, the unemployment rate has shown some stability.
Expanded retail sales data have been evidencing growth, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of durable goods, in response to the improvement in the access to credit, income expansion and temporary sector incentives granted by the government.
The retail sector indicates that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust and, therefore, it continues to register positive trend, although recent figures suggest some cooling.
For the next months, it is expected that the retail sales trajectory continues to be benefited by governmental transfers, by real payroll growth, by credit expansion and by consumer confidence.
The reduced idle capacity is the result of economic activity expansion, not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
Furthermore, data regarding the absorption of capital goods show recovery year-over-year.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have accommodated at high levels, despite the recovery of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand is relevant for the reduction in the trade surplus.
The US economy shows signs of recovery, but in an ambiguous way and at a slower pace than previously anticipated.
In fact, consumer confidence remains at levels below those prevailing prior to the crisis, and although the labor market shows some improvement, unemployment remains at a high level and should retreat slowly, which is common in after-crisis periods.
Recent indicators suggest loss of strength in the US economy, which could be attributed to effects of higher than expected anticipation of consumption.
On its turn, the Japanese economy cannot overcome deflation and recovers at a slow pace, led by exports.
Recent data on consumption recorded negative rates for Japan and also for the Euro Area.
In fact, the recovery in this region, besides being slow and uneven across the economies of the Euro, is very uncertain, partly due to the fiscal consolidation and the difficulties experienced by the credit market.
In short, the uncertainty regarding the sustainability and pace of economic expansion in mature economies increased, mainly in the US and Europe, in a scenario where economic policy stimuli are replaced by contraction measures.
As the economies of the G3 show high idleness for the production factors, a process exacerbated by fiscal concerns, central banks maintain the accommodative monetary policy stance.
In this context, after a period of aggressive easing, monetary policy continues unchanged in several countries, but in those economies that were less impacted by the international crisis, which recovered more quickly and intensely, the adoption of more restrictive monetary policy stance continues.
Despite the lower volatility in this period, the uncertainty concerning the quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of asymmetric global economic recovery, on major uncertainties about the recovery of the European economy, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices might affect domestic prices both through production chains, such as the petrochemical, and through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Regarding industrial commodity prices, aluminum and copper quotations increased, while the nickel quotation remained relatively stable.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Under the market scenario, the projection also decreased, and is positioned around the midpoint target.
Regarding the first half of 2012, the projection decreased in both scenarios, positioned around the midpoint target under the benchmark scenario, whilst below the midpoint target under the market scenario.
The dynamics of inflation expectations matches the view expressed in the last Inflation Report, through which, in spite of an increase in the projections between March and June, there were signals of reversal of this movement at the margin.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
Besides the persistent concerns about the sovereign debt in European countries, uncertainties about the sustainability of the US economy recovery and evidences of deceleration in China have arisen.
Even so, the prices of some commodities and Brazilian assets increased and overall prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
Meanwhile, the trajectory of price indices evidences the cooling of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas prospects of deflation in other economies resurfaced.
In this context, the probability of some influence of external disinflation over domestic inflation increased, although uncertainty about the behavior of asset and commodities prices persists in a context of substantial volatility in international financial markets.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative stances for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures.
In this regard, it bears highlighting that there was significant decrease in the dispersion of headline inflation expectations for both 2010 and 2011, and for market prices inflation expectations the most sensitive component, and which more quickly responds to monetary policy actions.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, at a less intense rhythm than the observed at the start of the year, as evidenced by data on trade, inventories and industrial production, among others.
This assessment is supported by signs of a more moderate expansion of credit supply, especially for individuals; by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, but with some accommodation at the margin; and by the recent trajectory of inventories in some industrial sectors.
Anyway, the dynamism of domestic activity should continue to be benefited, among other factors, by the remaining effects of fiscal impulses, by the policies of official banks and, at a magnitude lower than previously expected, by the global activity, which presents signs of moderation.
The Copom considers that this process shall be intensified and, therefore, the signs of the persistent mismatch between the pace of aggregate demand and supply expansion shall be reverted, because they tend to increase the risk for the inflationary dynamics.
In this sense, monetary policy stance should be adjusted, once this action contributes for the convergence between expansion paces of demand and supply.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee believes that the risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario are decreasing, and are limited to the domestic environment, such as those stemming from the expansion of domestic demand, in the context of virtual exhaustion of the idleness margin in the use of production factors.
Indeed, evidences of the market of factors tightening come from the real wages gains in some segments and higher pressures on production prices in the recent past.
It is plausible to affirm, however, that factors that support these risks have decelerated at the margin.
Moreover, it bears noticing that there are signs that the economy has moved towards a trajectory closer to long-term equilibrium, where the effects of these developments on the balance of risks for inflation tend to cool down.
Another contributing factor for that, in the same period, was the higher probability of deceleration in the already slow process of recovery of G3 economies.
As a consequence, the influence of the international outlook over domestic inflation behavior started to show a disinflationary bias.
Anyway, in spite of favorable conditions for inflation dynamics in both domestic and international scenarios, the prevailing opinion among the Committee members was that monetary policy should boost the effects of these changes and, in this direction, continue to act in order to avoid that uncertainties detected in shorter horizons, despite smaller than previously observed, spread to longer horizons.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forwardlooking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
Moreover, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness margin of productive factors at historically low levels.
The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent international financial crisis, by those stemming from the monetary policy stance change and by those referring to the worsening of the global economy prospects.
These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
There was consensus among the Committee members about the need to adapt the pace of adjustment of the basic interest rate to the developments in the prospective inflation scenario, as well as to the corresponding balance of risks.
The three IPCA-15 core inflation measures decelerated in July, month-on-month.
The three IPCA core inflation measures decelerated, in June, month-on-month.
Vehicles production reached 306.4 thousand units in June, according to data released by the Anfavea, seasonally adjusted by BCB.
Additionally, 2,168.9 thousand jobs were created in the last twelve months through June, of which 549.5 thousand in the manufacturing industry.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate increased 0.3 p.p.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in June, reaching 450 days, up from 435 days in May.
However, the risk of downturn in these rates turned to increase, in an environment with uncertainties related to the fiscal crisis in Europe.
In this sense, recent indicators suggest relative deceleration in the growth paces in the US and China, while the consumer annualized quarterly change recorded negative rates in Japan and in the Euro Area, and cooling in the US.
Additionally, it is important to notice the deceleration in the manufacturing industry in Japan and in the Euro Area, as well as the negative change in the number of formal jobs in the US and the deceleration of retail sales and gross fixed capital formation in China.
Government securities yields of the main developed economies fell in the period.
The number of central banks which decided to adopt more restrictive monetary measures have increased in the emerging economies of America and Asia, and in commodities exporters, such as Canada and New Zealand, where domestic demand has been heated.
The two concepts were equal due to the full payment of borrowing operations in foreign currencies in May.
The drivers of this movement were, regarding the domestic outlook, a more conservative reading of the Copom Minutes, the disclosure of below-than-expected current inflation indices and economic activity data and the expectation of a shorter monetary tightening cycle.
Regarding the foreign outlook, recent signals of cooling in the global economic activity were key drivers in the decline of long term rates.
Between June 7th and July 19th, one- three- six-month and one- and three-year rates increased by 0.62 p.p., 0.47 p.p., 0.21 p.p., 0.03 p.p. and 0.08 p.p., respectively.
The two-year rate decreased by 0.02 p.p.
The BCB also borrowed money through 31 overnight repo operations and conducted daily two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The net redemption of securities by the National Treasury and the federal government net expenditures were the main drivers of the liquidity expansion in the period.
