The recent elevation in food price inflation has partially mirrored domestic and external supply shocks, heightened by the high liquidity environment in international financial markets.
In line with the evolution of headline inflation, the three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB increased between September and November.
After strong retreat due to the crisis, industrial activity recovered, but has shown some accommodation at levels similar to those observed in the pre-crisis period.
This recovery has partially been supported by the growth of industrial activity financing by public financial institutions.
This evidences the robustness in capital goods investment, a relevant factor for economic recovery in the post-crisis period.
Out of the ten sectors surveyed, four sectors performed positively month-on-month in September.
In the next months the retail sales trajectory should continue to be benefited by governmental transfers, by real payroll growth, by credit expansion and by consumer confidence.
No monthly change was observed for the Nuci for the construction inputs industry and for the consumer goods industry in November.
The installed capacity utilization rates, despite at high levels, showed slight decline.
The reduced idleness margin is the result of the recent economic activity expansion, still not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to external demand is relevant for the reduction in the trade surplus.
The global economy recovery continues to be led by a group of emerging countries, whose steady pace of economic expansion is anchored mainly by domestic demand and, in specific cases, by the export sector.
Economic recovery has also continued in the US and Europe, despite at a more gradual pace than previously anticipated.
The Euro Area, in particular, faces different situations, once persistent uncertainties regarding the solvency of some peripheral economies remain, while the pace of expansion continues quite strong in Germany.
Business confidence reached, in November, a record high since the unification of that country.
Tightening monetary policy actions were also observed in Chile, South Korea, Hungary and India, whereas further easing was recorded in South Africa.
The main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of local gasoline prices, oil prices swings might affect the domestic economy, for example, through the petrochemical sector or through the expectations channel.
One factor that seems to contribute to the sharp elevations is the rebalancing of global demand from developed countries to emerging countries, where consumption tends to be more intensive in commodities.
It also bears noticing that, in the recent past, the movement of commodity prices seems to have been strongly influenced by wide global liquidity.
In recent weeks, however, there was some cooling in upward pressures, especially for agricultural commodities.
The high volatility observed in commodities prices results from a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations of demand growth and to the remarkable volatility in FX markets.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to new set of available information.
For the third quarter of 2012, the estimate is 65 bps spread.
Regarding the third quarter of 2012, the projections increased in both scenarios, but remained around the inflation midpoint target.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation-targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to projected inflation and based on the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, mainly price setters.
It is additionally noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reinforce the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the strategy adopted by the Copom aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the process of maturing of the inflation target regime stands at an advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last six years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the FX and inflationary risk premium reduction, among other factors, seem to have resulted in significant reduction of the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has increased in the last years.
Despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables, it should be emphasized that this perception is supported by estimates generated by the macroeconometric models used by the Copom.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the traction of monetary policy increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
The prices of some commodities and Brazilian assets remained relatively stable and, overall, prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
Meanwhile, the trajectory of price indices evidences the increase of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas concerns regarding the prospects of deflation in other economies cooled down.
In this context, the probability of some influence of external disinflation over domestic inflation retreated, although uncertainty about the behavior of asset and commodities prices persists in a context of substantial volatility in international financial markets.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms its view that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years be preserved.
Although the accommodation observed in the last two quarters has been more intense than the expected at the start of the year, as evidenced, among others, by data on inventories and industrial production, the prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable.
This assessment is supported, among other factors, by signs that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, despite at a more moderate pace, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, notwithstanding some accommodation at the margin.
The Copom considers, additionally, that the dynamism of domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the vigor of labor market, despite the cooling in the generation of jobs in specific segments.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative stances for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures.
These developments tend to be transmitted to the prospective scenario, among other mechanisms, through inertia, as pointed by the figures considered by the BCB in its inflation forecasts.
It also bears highlighting the persistence of the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates.
In this context, the Committee identifies risks to the materialization of a scenario in which inflation promptly converges to the midpoint target.
The Copom evaluates, on the other hand, that the effects of the adjustment process in the base interest rate, interrupted in July 2010, havent completely materialized yet to price dynamics, and, at the same time, reaffirms that the main scenario is subject to the materialization of the trajectories regarding fiscal and parafiscal variables which the Committee considers.
The main scenario also incorporates moderation in the credit pace.
The Copom emphasizes that there is some equivalence among macroprudential and conventional monetary policy actions and that the importance of this link tends to grow with the deepening of the credit market, a phenomenon already observed in Brazil in the last years.
However, these two sets of instruments cannot be seen as perfect substitutes, once they diverge, among other aspects, regarding scope and transmission mechanisms.
The macroprudential actions recently announced are inserted in a wider process, which includes, among other aims, the reversion of stimuli introduced to outweigh the effects of the crisis over the Brazilian economy.
Together with other measures, they constitute a sequence of initiatives that aim to adequate domestic financial conditions to the after-crisis scenario, characterized by intense contrast among the prospective scenarios for the main economic blocks.
The intensity and frequency of shocks that both the global and Brazilian economies have undergone in the last years impose additional challenges to the analysis of the prospective scenario.
The Committee recognizes an economic environment in which the uncertainty level prevails above the usual, where the risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario essentially stem from the domestic outlook.
On the other hand, these liquidity eases evidence the ambiguous influence of the international scenario over domestic inflation behavior.
Regarding the domestic outlook, the effects of Selic rate adjustments have not been totally incorporated into price dynamics.
Additionally, recently announced macroprudential measures, a quick and powerful instrument to contain localized demand pressures, will still have their effects incorporated to price dynamics.
Although the uncertainties that surround the global scenario, and at a lower scale, the domestic scenario, do not allow the clear identification of the lastingness of the recent pressures, the current balance of risks is less favorable to the materialization of a benign scenario, in which inflation would consistently follow the targets trajectory.
Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
Moreover, although tending to cool down, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in the last quarters, and should still contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness margin of factors at low levels.
The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent financial crisis and by recent macroprudential initiatives.
These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
In November, all three components accelerated.
As a consequence, average production quarter-on-quarter was unchanged.
Considering the 26 industry activities, twelve showed monthly increases.
It bears highlighting that, in this projection, corn and soybeans average yields, which follow last years averages, are below 2010 levels, historical record highs for these products.
The index behavior reflected, with greater intensity, lower optimism regarding the coming months.
In the last twelve months through October, 2,237.7 thousand formal jobs were created in the country.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations decreased in October, reaching 456 days, down from 458 days in September.
External Environment In the third quarter, economic activity accelerated in the US and in Japan and cooled in the Euro Area and in UK.
Regarding the US and Japan, GDP acceleration was positively influenced by the expansion in household consumption, although in Japan this demand component has been benefited by governmental incentives, already extinct for the automotive sector, but still in vigor until the end of the year for some certain durable goods.
In the US, the last Beige Book reported evidence of better performance of retail sales in several Districts, but it continues to signal a depressed housing real state market.
The assets prices in the financial and commodity markets shifted upwards and downwards.
The downward movement reflected the surge of fears regarding the monetary tightening in China and the fiscal sustainability of some European countries, whose uncertainties remain even after the agreement settled by Ireland, the European Union and the IMF.
In this sense, the US dollar, which had been depreciating in face of other currencies, started to appreciate in response to the growth of risk perception by financial agents.
On the external outlook, the increase in the US Treasuries rates also contributed to pressure the long-term domestic interest rates.
The one-, two- and threeyear rates increased by 0.88 p.p., 0.76 p.p. and 0.70 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 34 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main drivers of liquidity retreat in the period were the net issuance of National Treasury securities, the net revenues of the Union and the demand for currency by the public.
