In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have been increasing in the last months, showing important reduction in the idle margin of the industry, followed by the recovery of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the narrowing of trade surplus.
These developments can be attributed to increased regulatory uncertainty and fiscal deterioration in some mature economies, as well as the beginning of the reversal of the strong liquidity expansion occurred in 2009 in emerging economies.
Under these conditions, there was moderation in demand for risky assets, as evidenced by the behavior of international financial markets.
Thus, the US dollar strengthened against other currencies, especially those who had experienced more intense appreciation in previous months.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevailed over inflationary pressures in 2009, but recovery of economic activity seems to have been consolidating.
However, uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the expansion of consumption in mature economies still remains, in a scenario of withdrawal of economic policy stimuli and modest prospects for credit expansion.
On the other hand, in many emerging economies, economic activity seems to have embarked on a consistent path of recovery, showing, in some cases, evidence of heat in the markets of goods, services, production factors and assets.
Therefore, the inflation record lows in mature economies and major emerging economies have been exceeded.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in several countries, monetary policy began a phase of stability, whereas those economies that were less impacted by the crisis and recover more quickly and intensely show a trend of adoption of more restrictive monetary policy stance.
Future markets have retreated as well.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can eventually affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection under the market scenario decreased and stands below the midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment.
Under this environment, both Brazilian asset prices, which had also been favoring the easing of domestic financial conditions, as well as the prices of some selected commodities, showed decline.
However, it bears emphasizing that the prospects for foreign funding of Brazilian economy remain favorable.
On the other hand, the trajectory of producer price indices evidence the resumption, despite still incipient, of external inflationary pressures.
Consequently, the benign impact of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path could come to an end, despite the persistence of significant uncertainty regarding the behavior of asset and commodities prices in the context of gradual normalization of international financial conditions.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom believes that, if the prospect of intensification of demand pressures over the domestic market of factors is confirmed, the probability that initially located inflationary episodes pose risks to the inflation trajectory could be rising.
In this context, the risk of pass-through of possible wholesale price upward pressures to consumer prices would increase.
The Committee judges that the materialization of this pass-through, as well as the spread of initially localized pressures over consumer prices, continues to depend critically on the economic agents' expectations for inflation.
Additionally, it should be noted that the behavior of domestic demand could exert some pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
In any event, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation figures.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, as evidenced by data on trade, manufacturing capacity utilization and the labor market, and by signs of continued expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate.
Consumer and business confidence also show consistent signs of recovery.
Under these circumstances, the pace of activity depends significantly upon the evolution of real earnings, the effects of fiscal stimulus measures and the increments of governmental transfers that will occur in the upcoming months.
The dynamism of activity should also be benefited by the easing of financial conditions, favored, among other factors, by the policies of official banks.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decision will have more impacts from the middle of 2010 on.
The Copom believes that the main risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, regarding the external outlook, from a possible rise in commodity prices and, regarding the domestic scenario, from the cumulative and lagged effects of the financial condition easing and the fiscal and credit impulse over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in the context of the reduction in the idleness margin in the use of production factors.
The balance of these influences on the future trajectory of inflation will be crucial for the assessment of the different monetary policy stances.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure that the convergence of inflation towards the targets path observed in 2009 continues to be registered in 2010 and Such strategy, whose results have been evidenced throughout time, takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanisms and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Committee considers that the accommodation of demand, driven by the tightening of financial conditions and the deterioration of the agents confidence, as well as by the contraction of the global economy, shows persistent signs of having been overcome, despite the persistence of uncertainty, which should be resolved over time, towards positive and negative outlooks for the pace of economic recovery.
Anyway, under this scenario of recovery, which is supported by the data available so far, monetary policy must ensure inflationary pressures remain contained.
In short, the Committee judges that, given the signs of recovery in domestic demand, resulting in the reduction in the idleness margin of the production factors, as evidenced by indicators of manufacturing capacity utilization and labor market, and by the recent behavior of inflation expectations, the risks to the achievement of a benign inflationary scenario, in which inflation would remain consistent with the inflation targets, can increase.
Under this environment, monetary policy should remain especially vigilant in order to avoid that the greater uncertainty detected in shorter horizons spread to longer horizons.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a brief contraction, domestic demand has recovered, largely thanks to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit resumption.
On its turn, important fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should contribute to consolidating the resumption of activity and hence, to reduce the residual idleness margin of productive factors.
The effects of these stimuli should be carefully monitored over time and will be an important part of the context in which future decisions on monetary policy, which must ensure the maintenance of inflation convergence to the targets path in 2010 and 2011, will be taken.
In the event that the risk profile deteriorates so that it implies changes to the inflation prospective scenario considered this time by the Committee, the monetary policy strategy will promptly be adapted to the circumstances.
CNI indicators continued to show industrial production expansion, in the margin, in November.
The NUCI increased by 0.2 p.p.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased for the fourth consecutive month in December, reaching 389 days.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 283 days, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 520 days.
Global Economy The sustained recovery of the US economic growth and the maintenance of economic vigor presented by the emerging economies, particularly in the BRIC countries and in Southeast Asia, are signs of continued global economic recovery in In contrast to this perspective, it bears highlighting the evidence of new stagnation in Germany and deepening of fiscal difficulties in Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Spain, as well as weak domestic demand in Japan.
In these economies, where inflation does not constitute relevant risk in the short- and medium-term, monetary authorities have kept interest rates unchanged.
The release of improved data for economic activity and the labor market, the announcement of higher-than-expected inflation rates and the increase of market projections for 2010 GDP growth contributed to this movement.
The BCB also borrowed money through 34 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main determinant factor of the liquidity expansion in the period was the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury.
