The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed convergent behavior between April and May.
It is important highlighting that all core inflation measures, on a twelve-month basis, are above the midpoint of inflation target.
Under this comparison basis, the acceleration of the IGP-DI reflected the behavior of its three components.
The IPA-DI inflation acceleration, under this comparison basis, derived both from the behavior of agricultural and industrial prices.
As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions, as well as on price setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The positive contribution of domestic absorption to the Q1 GDP growth totaled 11.8 p.p., year-over-year, overweighting the 2.9 p.p. negative contribution of the external sector.
This process is supported not only by traditional sources of credit, but also by the recovery of capital markets and the performance of public financial institutions.
The recovery in industrial production dynamism was initially led by the production of durable goods, but it has become even more widespread than before, reflecting tax exemption measures, in advanced process of reversion, as well as the easing in financial conditions and the income expansion.
The future behavior of industrial production, which should not be uniform over time, will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be sources of dynamism, to which shall be added the gradual recovery of external demand.
Labor market continues to show vigor in clear process of expansion in the economic cycle.
In fact, 305 thousand jobs were created in April and 962 thousand in the year through April.
Expanded retail sales data have been evidencing growth, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of durable goods, in response to the improvement in the access to credit, income expansion and temporary sector incentives granted by the government.
The retail sector continues to register positive performance and indicates that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, but might, however, show some signs of cooling.
For the next months, it is expected that the retail sales trajectory continues to be benefited by fiscal transfers, by real payroll growth, by the recovery in the access to credit and by the evolution of consumer confidence.
The trend of reduction in the idle capacity is the result of economic activity expansion, not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have recorded upward trajectory in the last months, showing reduction in any remaining idle margin of the industry, despite the recovery of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the narrowing of the trade surplus.
Apparently, the perception of systemic risk resurfaced, fueled by the view that there would be interdependence between a possible fiscal consolidation in economies that are facing difficulties in this area and the balance sheets of financial institutions.
However, until now, the possibility of realization of a stress scenario seems limited, but, anyway, there was some moderation in demand for risky assets in international financial markets.
The U.S. economy shows signs of recovery, as can be seen, for example, at the end of the process of rebuilding of inventories, with positive impact on industrial activity and retail sales, although these indicators show some volatility.
The levels of consumer confidence also advanced, although remaining at levels well below those prevailing before the crisis of Moreover, the labor market begins to show signs of recovery.
On its turn, the economic activity in Japan continues to suggest a slow recovery, led by exports.
In the Euro Area, fiscal concerns turn the recovery more uncertain, the household consumption shows no consistent signs of reaction, and the economic recovery tends to be slower and uneven.
On the other hand, in many emerging economies, economic activity remains in a path of expansion, showing, in some cases, evidence of heat in the markets of goods, services, production factors and assets.
In fact, there is already concern about the dynamics of inflation in major emerging economies.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, monetary policy continues unchanged in several countries, and in those economies that were less impacted by the international crisis, which had recovered more quickly and intensely, the adoption of more restrictive monetary policy has started.
In fact, the uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of asymmetric global economic recovery, on major uncertainties about the recovery of the European economy, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices might affect domestic prices both through production chains, such as the petrochemical, and through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Furthermore, measures to reduce liquidity in China may have an effect on commodity prices.
On the other hand, iron ore, an important input in the production chain of the industrial sector, has shown significant increase in price, although there was a reduction in May.
Market players expect another price change in the contracts.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Under the market scenario, the projection increased, and is positioned above the midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
Although liquidity in international markets reduced, the prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
In line with greater risk aversion and more scarce liquidity, the prices of some selected commodities and Brazilian assets decreased.
On another front, the trajectory of price indices evidences inflationary pressures in relevant economies.
In this context, the influence of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path is more ambiguous, although uncertainty persists about the behavior of asset prices and commodities in the context of the worsening international financial conditions.
The Copom assesses that this scenario can deteriorate, depending on the dynamics that derives from the market distrust regarding the solvency of some European economies, but, on the other hand, recognizes that this is not the baseline scenario considered.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
In this context, the risk of pass-through of upward costs pressures to wholesale price inflation, and from these to consumer price inflation, increases as well.
The Committee states that the materialization of these pass-throughs, as well as the spread of initially localized pressures over consumer prices, continues to depend critically on the economic agents expectations for inflation and on the idleness degree of the economy, among other factors.
Therefore, these and other variables are part of the information set that is taken into account in the generation of inflation forecasts by the BCB, which constitute a key element in the Committees assessment on the prospective inflation scenario.
Additionally, it should be noted that the behavior of domestic demand has exerted some pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, which, considering the prospects for the evolution of the main factors sustaining aggregate demand, may continue.
In any event, the Committee reaffirms the commitment that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, as evidenced by data on trade, manufacturing capacity utilization and the labor market.
This assessment is also supported by signs of continued expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate; by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels; and by income growth.
The dynamism of domestic activity should also be benefited, among other factors, by fiscal impulses, the policies of official banks and, to a lesser extent, the pace of recovery in global activity.
Considering the Brazilian economys new cycle of expansion, these considerations become even more relevant when one takes into account that there are lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects over the activity level and inflation.
The Copom believes that the risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem mainly from the domestic side, for example, those resulting from the expansion of domestic demand in the context of virtual exhaustion of the idleness margin in the use of production factors.
Incidentally, evidences of narrowing of the market factors are the acceleration of real wage gains in the recent past in some segments and higher producer price pressures.
Indeed, these developments may exacerbate an outlook that already evidences the presence of mismatch between the growth of domestic absorption and capacity of supply expansion.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
Signs of overheat in the economy are evidenced, for example, in core inflation trajectories, in the behavior of inflation expectations, in the evidence of workers shortage and in the rising inputs costs.
In particular, during this period, the inflation projections considered by the Committee showed slight deterioration in the prospective scenario.
The Copom believes that this deterioration should be contained and, therefore, the signs of persistent mismatch between the pace of aggregate demand expansion and aggregate supply, which, ultimately, tend to increase the risk for inflation dynamics, must be reversed.
In such circumstances, the monetary policy stance should be adjusted, on the one hand, because it contributes to the convergence between the pace of demand expansion and supply and, on the other hand, because it prevents that originally localized price pressures determine a persistent deterioration of the inflation prospective scenario.
On the other hand, it is worth noting that in that same period, external developments have introduced a certain amount of caution in the analysis of the prospective scenario.
Anyway, the prevailing opinion among the Committee members was that monetary policy should be adjusted incisively in order to avoid that the greater uncertainty detected in shorter horizons spread to longer horizons.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forwardlooking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
Domestic demand appears robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit resumption.
Moreover, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the reduction of any residual idleness margin of productive factors.
The effects of these stimuli, however, counter the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent international financial crisis, and a possible deepening of the fiscal crisis that several European countries face.
These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
In addition, it bears noticing that there was consensus among the Committee members about the need to adapt the pace of adjustment of the basic interest rate to the developments in the prospective inflation scenario, as well as to the corresponding balance of risks, in order to limit the impacts caused by the behavior of current inflation over the underlying prices dynamics.
The variations of the three core measures accelerated, in May, month-on-month and year-over-year.
The other categories of use reported favorable results in the month, with highlights for the performance of the industry of capital goods, quoted above.
Hours worked and employment showed relative stability in the same period.
The monthly analysis shows that the service sector recorded the creation of 96.6 thousand jobs in April, followed by the manufacturing industry, 83.1 thousand; and civil construction, 38.4 thousand.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate fell by 0.2 p.p.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in April, reaching 404 days, up from 399 days in March.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 287 days, one day up from the average observed in March, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 538 days, seven days more than in the previous month.
Apparently the adoption of a broad set of measures to restore financial stability in Europe was not sufficient to calm market participants.
Risk aversion has increased, rates of stock exchanges in several countries retreated and the euro reached the lowest value against the US dollar in the last four years.
In contrast, the movement of investment in assets perceived as less risky reduced the government securities yields of major mature economies.
Available data suggest the continuing process of global economic expansion, driven primarily by the US, Asia and Latin America, however, in an environment of high uncertainty.
In the US, the most recent indicators for retail sales, industrial production and the net creation of jobs remained pointing to a positive performance.
In the euro area, domestic consumption remains fragile, and the expansion of economic activity over the first quarter was due to the positive contribution of inventories.
In this context, the central banks of G-3 retained the accommodative monetary policies stance.
The persistence of high unemployment and idle production factors in conjunction with anchored inflation expectations should help to maintain this accommodative stance for a longer period of time than had been anticipated.
The two concepts were equal due to the full payment of borrowing operations in foreign currencies in May.
The short-term rates increased influenced by the disclosure of activity data suggesting consistent recovery of the Brazilian economy and expectations of inflation above the targeted path.
The resume of crisis in Europe and greater pessimism about the recovery of the global economy, moreover, were key drivers in the decline of long rates.
The two- and three-year rates decreased by 0.40 p.p. and 0.66 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 28 overnight repo operations and conducted daily one- and two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The net redemption of securities by the National Treasury was the main driver of liquidity expansion in the period.
