In short, information available shows improvement in inflation dynamics.
The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB showed convergent behavior between June and July.
Under this comparison basis, the acceleration of the IGP-DI reflected the behavior of its three components.
The IPA-DI inflation acceleration, under this comparison basis, derived both from the behavior of agricultural and industrial prices.
Furthermore, it should be emphasized that the dynamics of wholesale prices improved, particularly the agricultural prices.
Furthermore, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend, among other factors, on the current and prospective demand conditions, the exposure of each sector to foreign and domestic competition, as well as on the price setters expectations for the future inflation path.
After registering growth for sixteen consecutive months until April, the IBC-Br was stable in May and June.
The evolution of the IBC-Br, as well as other indicators of activity, suggests accommodation of the economy in the second quarter, in contrast to the fast pace observed in the first quarter of However, the outlook for second half of 2010 signals that the economy may grow, but at a pace more consistent with rates evaluated as sustainable in the long term.
In the first months of this year, the strength of industrial activity was influenced by the international outlook, the businesses and households expectations, as well as by domestic financial conditions, which have boosted domestic demand.
This process was also supported by the rebuilding of inventories and the anticipation of consumption, which, on its turn, partially resulted from the prospects of fiscal stimulus withdrawal.
Due to the fall in the month-on-month comparison basis observed throughout the second quarter, the behavior of IBGE industrial output series and its components continues close to that observed in the period prior to the crisis.
Industrial production should resume the upward trend, being this process supported not only by traditional sources of credit, but also by the recovery of capital markets and the performance of public financial institutions, among other factors.
After the crisis, the recovery in industrial production dynamism was initially led by the production of durable goods, but it became widespread afterwards, reflecting tax exemption measures, in advanced process of reversion, as well as the easing in financial conditions and the income expansion.
The future behavior of industrial production will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be sources of dynamism, among other factors.
After decreasing substantially after the crisis, the unemployment rate has shown some stability.
The reduced idleness capacity is the result of economic activity expansion, still not totally offset by the maturity of investment projects.
Furthermore, data regarding the absorption of capital goods show recovery year-over-year.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have accommodated at high levels.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand is relevant for the reduction in the trade surplus.
The US economy shows signs of weakening, evidencing that the current recovery should unfold at a pace slower than previously anticipated, and the possibility of a reversion may not be abandoned.
In fact, consumer confidence remains at levels below those prevailing prior to the crisis, and unemployment remains at a high level, with prospects of slow retreat in the next months.
On its turn, the Japanese economy continues to grow at a noticeable slow pace.
The recovery in the Euro Area is uncertain, besides being slow and uneven across its economies, partly due to the fiscal consolidation and the difficulties experienced by the credit market.
On the other hand, German economy, the most important in the Euro Area, shows some signs of resumption.
In short, the uncertainty regarding the sustainability and pace of economic expansion in mature economies increased, mainly in the US and Europe, in a scenario where economic policy stimuli are replaced by contraction measures.
As the G3 economies show high idleness for the production factors, a process exacerbated by fiscal concerns, central banks maintain the accommodative monetary policy stance.
In this context, after a period of aggressive easing, monetary policy continues unchanged in several countries, but in those economies that were less impacted by the crisis, which recovered more quickly and intensely, and that adopted more restrictive monetary policy stances, some accommodation has been verified.
Volatility has increased, and the uncertainty concerning the quotations has remained high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in a context of asymmetric global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices might affect the domestic economy both through production chains, such as the petrochemical, and through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
On their turn, industrial commodity prices also increased in the same period.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Under the market scenario, the projection also decreased, and is positioned around the midpoint target.
Regarding the first half of 2012, the projection decreased under the benchmark scenario, although the contrary movement was observed under the market scenario, but under both scenarios the projection is around the inflation midpoint target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom confirms that under the inflation-targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to projected inflation and based on the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the price dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, and help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, mainly price setters.
It is additionally noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reinforce the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate.
Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected.
Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the process of maturing of the inflation targets stands at advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy.
Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last six years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced.
Progress in the financial markets structure, the FX and inflationary risk premium reduction, among other factors, seem to have resulted in significant reduction of the neutral rate.
From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has increased in the last years.
Despite recognizing that a high degree of uncertainty surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables, the Copom considers that the most pessimist estimates regarding the current level of neutral interest rate tend, with significant probability, not to find support in fundamentals.
The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the traction of monetary policy increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions.
Concerns about European countries sovereign debt and the deceleration in China remain elevated, while the worries regarding the sustainability of the US economy recovery increased.
Even so, the prices of some commodities and Brazilian assets increased and, overall, prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable.
Meanwhile, the trajectory of price indices evidences the cooling of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas prospects of deflation in other economies remain.
In this context, the probability of some influence of external disinflation over domestic inflation remains high, although uncertainty about the behavior of asset and commodities prices persists in a context of substantial volatility in international financial markets.
Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
Prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable, at a less intense rhythm than the observed at the start of the year, as evidenced by data on trade, inventories and industrial production, among others.
This assessment is supported by signs of a more moderate expansion of credit supply, both for individuals and corporate; by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, but with some accommodation at the margin; and by the recent trajectory of inventories in some industrial sectors.
The Copom considers, on the other hand, that the dynamism of domestic activity will continue to be benefited, among other factors, by the vigor of labor market, by the remaining effects of fiscal impulses and of policies of public banks and, at a magnitude lower than previously expected, by the global activity.
The Copom considers important to emphasize, once more, that there are time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative stances for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures.
This assessment finds support, for instance, in the significant reduction of analysts projections for the Selic rate, without resulting in unfavorable changes in the median of inflation projections, which, in fact, have substantially reduced for 2010 and increased only marginally for Moreover, regarding the forwardlooking scenario, it is fundamental to highlight that there was retreat in the values projected for inflation by the BCB.
Despite recognizing the existence of risks of inflation increase in the short run, the Copom considers that the convergence of inflation to the midpoint target tends to materialize.
For that, it finds support in the pertinent consideration that monetary policy acts with time lags over activity and inflation, and that the effects of the adjustment process in the basic interest rate initiated in April 2010 havent completely materialized.
On the other hand, the Committee ensures that, in case this scenario does not promptly materialize, the monetary policy stance should be adjusted in order to guarantee the convergence between the pace of demand and supply expansions.
From another point-of-view, in case inflation does not promptly converge to the midpoint target established by the CMN, monetary policy should act in order to redirect price dynamics and, therefore, ensure the target to be fulfilled.
The intensity and frequency of shocks that both the global and Brazilian economies have undergone in recent years impose additional challenges to the analysis of the prospective scenario.
The Committee recognizes an economic environment where uncertainty stands above the usual and the remaining risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem from the domestic outlook.
For instance, it bears highlighting those deriving from domestic demand expansion, in a context of narrow idleness margin in the use of production factors.
Evidences of this fact come from the real wages gains in some segments and higher pressures on production prices in the recent past.
It is plausible to affirm, however, that the factors that support these domestic risks have decelerated.
For example, there are signs that the economy has moved towards a trajectory closer to long-term equilibrium and, therefore, the effects of demand pressures and the high level of utilization of the factors on the balance of risks for inflation tend to cool down.
Another contributing factor for that, in the same period, was the higher probability of deceleration, and even reversion, of the already slow process of recovery of G3 economies.
As a consequence, the influence of the international outlook over domestic inflation behavior shows a disinflationary bias.
Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion.
Moreover, although they tend to cool, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and still should contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness margin of factors at low levels.
The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent international financial crisis, by those referring to the significant worsening of the global economy prospects and especially by those stemming from the monetary policy stance change.
These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
It can be emphasized that, according to this comparison basis, all segments decelerated, relative to July.
The three IPCA-15 core inflation measures cooled down in August.
The IPCA segmentation shows that the stability in the last two months stemmed mainly from the decreases in the prices of food and beverages, which have offset the positive contributions of the other segments.
Despite the stability of the last two results, it should be noted that the decrease in the prices of food and beverages in the period cooled down, which can affect the pattern of the index in the next months.
The three IPCA core inflation measures decelerated, in July, month-on-month.
Economic Activity The IBC-Br showed stability in June, month-on-month, considering seasonally adjusted data.
From August 2009 to July 2010, 2,212.3 thousand formal jobs were created, a record high for the twelve-month period.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates reached 452 days, up from 448 days in June.
External Environment Data for the second quarter GDP in the US, Japan and China confirmed the deceleration of the global economic activity growth pace.
High frequency recent indicators have corroborated the prospects of maintenance of this deceleration process.
In Europe, although the fiscal affairs remain as an important source of concern, the economic environment has improved, driven by the favorable results of the stress tests applied in the European banks.
In the period, the dollar reached a record low against the yen in fifteen years, and the 10-year government securities yields of the main developed economies fell, with the Germany securities reaching a record low for the historical series.
The G3 central banks kept the accommodative stance of their monetary policies, while the Fed is reinvesting the fund obtained from mortgages backed redemptions in long-term treasuries.
In fact, this process of delay on the normalization of monetary policy has been verified in the major part of mature and emerging economies.
The drivers of this movement were, regarding the domestic outlook, the disclosure of inflation figures in line with market expectations and of data signaling economic activity accommodation.
Regarding the foreign outlook, signals of cooling in the US economic activity recovery and in global economy dynamism originated a global movement of interest rate drop, boosting the foreign investment flow to domestic interest rate markets, which contributed to the long-term interest rate fall.
The one-, two-, and three-year rates decreased by 0.31 p.p., 0.38 p.p. and 0.54 p.p., respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 31 overnight repo operations and conducted daily two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The net issuance of securities by the National Treasury and the federal government net revenues were the main drivers of the liquidity contraction in the period.
