The FAE for 2018-19 featured an acceleration in gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) and a slowdown in consumption expenditure (both private and government).
These risks can magnify if climate changes cause a repeat of weather disruptions as has often happened of late with unseasonal rains affecting some horticulture crops.
There is, however, uncertainty about the sustainability of this softening in inflation in fuel items.
A review of wide range of indicators of the recent economic activity point to a mixed outlook for growth.
Accordingly, I vote to increase the policy repo rate by 50 basis points to 5.4 per cent.
Commodity prices remain elevated, and consequently, inflationary pressures have accentuated in most advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market economies (EMEs), prompting monetary tightening by a few central banks in the former group and several in the latter.
The MPC has decided to remain accommodative as long as it is necessary to revive growth and mitigate the fallout of COVID-19.
Currency in circulation expanded steadily during this period.
This increase in growth has been underpinned by a significant upward revision in private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) due especially to improved rural demand on the back of a seven quarters.
In the financial sector, credit conditions remain strong even as the cost of funds tightens.
Net foreign direct investment doubled in April-May 2017 over its level a year ago, flowing mainly into manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade and business services.
Core inflation softened further since the last policy.
Sharp tightening of monetary policy in several major advanced economies has also adverse implications for capital flows, financial markets and exchange rate for 2022 in the major urban areas shows weaker optimism in the general economic conditions for one-year ahead, with overall household spending expected to increase 22.
Accordingly, I vote for status quo on rate and monetary policy stance in this policy.
It is important to break this recessionary loop, shore up the erosion in confidence, incentivise banks to invest and lend, and people to spend.
During April-July 2023 period, index of industrial production (IIP) data reflects strong YOY growth of cautious optimism.
Accordingly, this transient supply shock, however favourable it might be, has to be looked through while setting monetary policy so that the focus is on the real risks to food inflation looming over the horizon from (a) increases in minimum support prices announced in the union budget; and (b) the shortfall in wheat output and the implications for prices of cereals.
Wage pressures in the rural sector moderated; however, those in the organised sectors remained firm.
While the debt segment of the domestic capital market attracted foreign portfolio investment of US$ 14.4 billion, there were significant outflows in the equity segment in August-September on account of geo-political uncertainties and expected cent in the second half of 2017-18.
To some extent, government expenditure made up for weakness in private consumption and capital formation.
The Reserve Bank has also been proactively managing liquidity to ensure that funds flow to all productive sectors of the economy.
However, both global and domestic financial conditions have tightened, which may dampen investment activity.
Inflation remains highly vulnerable to food price spikes, as the spurt in momentum in daily data on key food items for the month of November and early December reveal.
For sub-sectors such as infrastructure (especially public transportation, railways etc.)
Trimmed mean measures of inflation remained elevated.
Much of this weakness seems to have continued into moved into expansion zone in March after three months of contraction.
Considering a range of factors influencing the inflation pattern in the short-term, the headline inflation is projected at 5.6% and 5.2% in Q3 and Q4: 2023-24, respectively, and 5.2% in Q1: 2024-25 followed by 4% in Q2 and 4.7% in Q3.
The war-induced price spikes in food, oil, gas, fertiliser and several key industrial inputs, together with continued supply chain bottlenecks, are posing major upside risks to inflation which has already scaled multidecadal highs in several countries.
Fourthly, the unusual spike in the prices of health and education needs to be closely watched.
Food inflation rose to 8.6 per cent in April from 7.8 per cent in March.
Even if one excludes the direct HRA impact, one has to be vigilant about the second order effects, especially on inflation expectations as States would also start implementing revision in salary and allowances.
However, recovery remains vulnerable to political uncertainty, which has dampened consumer confidence.
The consumer optimism is accompanied by caution as the survey indicates that the expectation of increase in overall spending - _i.e., the percentage of respondents_ expecting increased spending - is yet to reach levels of pre-pandemic period.
The calibration and timing of a monetary policy response and preventing build-up of financial stability risks are very important in such an uncertain environment.
CPI inflation excluding food and fuel also increased in December, partly due to housing inflation driven by the effects of house rent allowance for government employees under the 7[th] central pay commission.
With the inflation outlook remaining benign as lockdown-related supply disruptions are mended, the policy space to address growth concerns needs to be used now rather than later to support the economy, even while maintaining headroom to back up the revival of activity when it takes hold.
Private sector capex remains sluggish even though pre-conditions for its acceleration have been engendered by increasing capacity utilisation, deleveraging of balance sheets and improved profitability of corporates.
PMI for services registered a sharp uptick in November, driven by new business.
Therefore, excess outflows or a temporary balance of payments deficit requires some of these reserves to be used to moderate excess rupee volatility.
In April last year, I expressed a preference for a pre-emptive policy rate increase, sensing that inflation is rising out of the demonetisation trough.
In the past few reviews, I have flagged four such risks: (i) increases in minimum support prices (MSP), (ii) staggered implementation of the pay commission award by the States, (iii) slippages in the fiscal deficit in an election year, (iv) a sustaining of the price of oil at a high level.
Other developments on increase of USD 5 per barrel in crude oil prices, exchange rate appreciation, energy price revisions and monsoon expectations have all together led the RBI next 12 months.
Fuel inflation has eased due to a drop in international Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) prices.
As the supply side restrictions are lifted, revival of demand in terms of consumption, investment and exports is needed to sustain economic recovery.
Investment activity production of capital goods declined on a year-on-year (y-o-y) basis in November.
While strong domestic fundamentals and healthy level of foreign exchange reserves shall bode well for the external sector, the speed of domestic vaccination drive will be key in containing short-term risks to domestic economic recovery and mitigating spillovers from global shocks.
Gold prices have risen, underpinned by safe haven demand in response to geo-political uncertainty and volatility in equity markets.
These have been the positive developments as far as inflation scenario is concerned.
I would have preferred a smaller rise of 25bps, but 6.25% works well as a focal rate.
At the current juncture, however, the gains in output stabilisation are being threatened by the incidence of sporadic supply shocks which elevate the general level of prices instead of dissipating at the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC 9 f S ( ) through relative price adjustments within the budget constraint.
The discussion on terminal rate in monetary policy is clouded by the uncertainty on the strength and direction of growth and inflation impulses.
The thirty second meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held from December 6 to 8, 2021.
All other rates in the system firmed up in sympathy, with term premia getting restored gradually.
Growth is picking up.
The reality, however, is that in terms of the policy responses, the biggest economies in the world are pulling in opposite directions.
High inflation erodes purchasing power, especially for those least protected against the higher costs of essentials like food.
economy in Q4 of 2020 have persisted, although recent arrivals of high frequency indicators suggest that a gradual but uneven recovery may be forming.
The demand conditions are expected to improve steadily in the next two quarters of the current financial year.
Viral V. Acharya voted to keep the policy rate unchanged.
Accordingly, I vote for raising the policy repo rate by 50 bps.
But in this meeting, it is appropriate for the MPC to pause.
This resulted in a sharp upward revision of food inflation for the month of April and May.
Economic activity in India is evolving broadly in line with the baseline projection.
The twenty eighth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held from April 5 to 7, 2021.
The fight against inflation is complicated by the global outlook.
The negative deflator (around -2.5% for July-August) and base effects will also extend support to the real GVA growth in the manufacturing sector in Q2.
The future trajectory will be conditioned by a number of factors like lower area sown under pulses, dip in reservoir pressures but marginally lower growth in selling prices in Q3 compared to the previous quarter.
While the vaccinations are making progress in the Advanced Economies, there has been a rise in Covid infections in the winter months.
A variety of high frequency indicators look fairly weak which nowcast a loss in growth momentum.
While government borrowing to finance the fiscal deficit is at a high level, government spending to support investment and consumption are needed at this juncture.
While weak external demand is a drag on our merchandise exports, growth of remittances and exports of services is robust.
There is also evidence of the time varying trend of food inflation increasing, negating the gains made through core disinflation.
On balance, therefore, it is prudent to wait and watch how these factors play out and impinge upon the outlook.
Retail inflation, measured by the consumer price index, moderated for the second consecutive month in March 2020 to 5.8 per cent after peaking in January.
The momentum is expected to pick up in H2:2021-22 and there are upside risks and stickiness of core that warrant attention.
The domestic economy is experiencing strong momentum.
The dollar is weakening especially as other advanced economy central banks also raise rates.
The inflation trajectory going ahead would be shaped by both global and domestic factors.
Future course of action should depend on how the scenario on growth and inflation develops.
Although the YOY growth in Q2 is well below 13.5 per cent registered in Q1, it reflects a strong sequential momentum with QOQ growth at 3.6 per cent.
However, with capacity utilisation rate currently at 63 per cent in Q2:2020-21 and likely to be about 70 per cent by end of the year, capex funding need of private sector are currently limited and the monetaryfiscal coordination to support a larger public investment that can crowd-in private investment can work so long as it is followed by an unflinching commitment to strong fiscal consolidation thereafter.
Accordingly, GVA growth for 2017-18 is projected at 7.4 per cent, with risks evenly balanced (Chart 2).
stands 30 bps higher than its last forecast based on CPI data up to February 2018.
The Indian economy has been treading a trajectory that diverges from the global situation.
Railway freight and port traffic, and motor spirit sale show YOY growth rates of less than five per cent but E-way bills and toll collections continue to register double digit growth.
The latter is less affected by transient shocks and measurement issues.
Svensson had warned long ago that flexibility (P5) in inflation targeting (IT) is very important for its social acceptance.
Why then would higher real policy rates be required now to fight inflation that is lower?
Capacity utilisation by manufacturing firms increased significantly in Q4:2017-18 as revealed in the latest round of output of eight core industries accelerated in April on account of a sharp expansion in coal production, which reached a 42-month peak.
On the other hand, food inflation has remained muted over the past few months and the usual seasonal pickup delayed, softening the projections in the short run.
Headline inflation is expected to remain above or close to the upper threshold in Q3 and Q4:2022-23.
Fuel inflation was driven up by a rise in LPG and kerosene prices.
If at all some guidance is needed at this stage, it has to be a soft one; with the Reserve Bank preparing markets that while policy stance is likely to remain accommodative till growth is revived on a durable basis, liquidity levels will be adjusted dynamically to appropriate lower levels that are still consistent with accommodative stance.
The YOY growth of GDP in Q4:FY2021-22 is 4.1 per cent, 6.7 per cent over the previous quarter.
On the domestic front, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth surged to a nine quarter high of 8.2 per cent in Q1:2018-19, extending the sequential acceleration to four successive quarters.
Despite the large inflation spikes to vegetable and crude oil prices, there is favourable news on inflation.
First, after an initial extreme reaction, cross border flows discriminate on a country basis.
There is some consensus growing around a milder slowdown than earlier feared, although geographical disparities complicate the prognosis.
Concerns on elevated food inflation, however, is a major source of uncertainty for the inflation outlook.
The MPC reiterates its commitment to achieving the medium-term target for headline inflation of 4 per cent on a durable basis.
In IT services where share of wage cost is above 50% wage growth is reducing as export demand slows.
Apart from the unidirectional loss of speed in real GDP growth, monetary conditions are also reflecting the fragile state of demand.
The policy rates were left unchanged in October with Repo rate at 4 per cent and continuation of the accommodative monetary policy stance into the next year.
As the system turned into deficit again in the fourth week of January, the 17.
Taking all these factors into consideration, real GDP growth for 2023-24 is projected at 6.5 per cent with Q1 at 8.0 per cent; Q2 at 6.5 per cent; Q3 at 6.0 per cent; and Q4 at 5.7 per cent, with risks broadly balanced.
With the present growth momentum, GDP in 2021-22 is expected to exceed the level achieved in 2019-20.
Persistence of negative output gap imposes severe social costs on the economy that is largely borne by the poor and the unemployed.
Given the uncertain outlook, it may engender a situation where we may find ourselves striving to do a catch-up through stronger policy actions in the subsequent meetings to ward-off accentuated inflationary improvement in the inflation outlook.
Fourth, the statistical impact of an increase in HRA for central government employees under the 7[th] CPC will continue till mid-2018, and gradually dissipate thereafter.
Accordingly, (1) I vote to increase the policy repo rate by 35 basis points and also (2) I vote to remain focused on withdrawal of accommodation to ensure that inflation remains within the target going forward, while supporting growth.
High food inflation would therefore hit growth adversely as it affects consumption and require restrictive monetary policy to soften core inflation, especially when faced with significant spillovers of persistent food price pressures to core components.
Fourth, it is a no-brainer that the fiscal impulse needs to be factored in our monetary policy calculations.
That is not yet achieved; any faltering from this commitment could undermine the prospects of the Indian economy.
It worked well in the last few years also reducing core inflation to historic lows.
On the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic situation, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at its meeting today (February 10, 2022) decided to: - keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) unchanged at 4.0 per cent.
Markets have priced in a possible pivot, although communication shocks continue to create volatility.
of 50 per cent.
Brazil appears to be emerging out of recession, although growth dynamics remain fragile due to worsening labour market conditions and political turmoil.
The drag on aggregate demand from net exports also moderated in Q3 due to a marginal acceleration in exports and a sharp deceleration in imports led by a decline in crude oil prices.
The economy needs to be opened up smartly.
Second, if the general moderation of price increases in CPI excluding food and fuel continues, it will contain upside pressures on headline inflation.
Although there is substantial fiscal slippage by the Centre, the fiscal performance of major states needs to be watched.
Third, the CAD will rise, especially if negative real rates persist and impact domestic savings.
Meanwhile, economic activity has held up well and is expected to be resilient, supported by domestic demand.
The data shows that consumers have incurred financial liabilities and reduced net financial savings to support consumption.
The survey of enterprises indicates expectation of increased growth in output prices in Q2:2024-25 in the case of enterprises in the service and infrastructure sectors as input cost pressures also rise.
During Q1:2020-21, the economy faced its deepest contraction ever, which was also the worst amongst G20 countries.
Although the sequential month-on-month momentum has moderated in June in the case of food and fuel and declined in the core components, the inflation rate remains elevated.
However, it has still not started exercising any pressure on unemployment and wage scenario and thereby on inflation.
There are indeed factors that may change this scenario, particularly the impact of geopolitical tensions affecting international commodity prices and trade, and the impact of macroeconomic policies of the advanced economies.
Excluding vegetables, both food and headline inflation edged up during November-December 2022.
Input costs relating to both industry and farms remain benign tracking international prices.
Global inflationary trends have remained on the upside too.
The official GDP growth estimate for Q2: 2023-24, YOY basis, turned out to be surprisingly strong at 7.6%, following the growth of 7.8 per cent in Q1.
After several years of high inflation in the run-up to 2014, the March 2018 CPI headline inflation (ex-HRA) rate of 3.9% is a testimony to the successful conduct of monetary policy given its consistency with the 4 +/- 2 percent target recommended by the Urjit Patel Committee report in 2014 and enshrined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 in 2016.
While we had moved towards calibrated exit from extra-ordinary supportive measures to mitigate the impact of Covid-19 as the curve was flattening, we have already made considerable adjustments in exit dates for these measures.
The median YOY CPI inflation rate in 2024-25 estimated from the survey is 4.5 per cent, the same level as CPI excluding food, fuel and pan, tobacco and intoxicants is below 4 per cent.
- The MPC also decided to remain accommodative while focusing on withdrawal of accommodation to ensure that inflation remains within the target going forward, while supporting growth.
The MPC observed that CPI inflation has risen by around two percentage points since its last meeting.
In all the three major production sectors, YOY growth rates are the same or higher in the PE as compared to the SAE for 2023-24.
5 In trimmed mean measures, CPI items which are located in the tails of the inflation distribution for every month (indicating highly volatile inflation movements) are excluded.
Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Ashima Goyal, Dr. Mridul K. Saggar, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted to continue with this accommodative stance at least during the current financial year and into the next financial year, with Prof. Jayanth R. Varma voting against this formulation.
Economic growth has on the other hand proved resilient in the face of an adverse global environment.
There are fewer mitigating factors to rising inflation compared to two months ago.
The MPC notes that inflation is currently projected to remain within the target over a 12 month ahead horizon.
On the domestic front, the growth of real gross value added (GVA) accelerated sequentially in Q2 of 2017-18, after five consecutive quarters of deceleration.
Moreover, Indian structural reform has reduced the cost of doing business and this time Indian inflation is less than international.
Countercyclical taxes may not raise the fiscal deficit because of buoyancy of taxes under high nominal output growth.
Senior Advisor, National Council of Applied Economic Research, Delhi; Dr. Ashima Goyal, Emeritus Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai; Prof. Jayanth R. Varma, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Dr. chaired by Shri Shaktikanta Das, Governor.
High frequency indicators, after impressive sequential improvements during June-October 2021 lost momentum in November but bounced back in December.
Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 6.50 per cent.
There are more indications of the expected turnaround in private investment.
Exports for the survey of Order Books, Inventories and Capacity utilisation in companies conducted in January-March 2022, reveals increase in capacity utilisation rate in the manufacturing sector in Q3:2021-22, moving closer to its long-term average.
In such an environment, continued policy support remains necessary.
The increased dependence on fossil fuels can structurally lift energy inflation and its passthrough to general price level.
After that second order effects will take effect.
Households reacted to the recent hardening of food inflation adaptively and raised their inflation expectations survey of households.
Higher investment and income would reinforce higher savings as we have seen in Q4:2022-23 when the net household financial savings normalised to its long-term average of 7.0 per cent from a low range of 4.0 to 4.6 per cent in the first three quarters of 2022-23.
The monsoon is likely to be normal and may help to sustain the low food inflation trajectory.
Indicators of fixed investment have tanked: finished steel consumption has declined by -90.9%, and IIP Capital goods (which proxy for machinery and equipment) have also fallen by -35.6%.
vi) Thus, there is enough policy space to cut the policy repo rate to correct the high real interest rate in the economy.
Dr. Pami Dua, Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted in favour of the decision to reduce the policy repo rate by 25 basis points.
More recently, the appetite for risk has returned in AEs, buoying equity markets and hardening bond yields as a response to the growing likelihood of further increases in the Federal Funds rate during the year.
Increasingly, financial markets have shown resilience to geo-political events and have swiftly priced them in.
The realisation of the projected growth will translate to only a meagre average growth rate of 0.85 per cent in two years following 2019-20.
This makes inflation management challenging.
It is the depreciation in NEER that affects headline inflation.
We must, therefore, remain unwavering in our commitment to bring down inflation to ensure a decisive and durable moderation in inflation towards the target of 4 per cent over the medium term, while being mindful of growth.
The economic impact of the rise in Omicron variant of the coronavirus appeared limited.
In this scenario, the important point to note is that the terminal rate is time varying and has to be discovered based on incoming data and evolving situation.
For all practical purposes the reverse repo rate is now the effective policy rate.
This implies that the overall savings of households is expected to hold steady with compositional shift in favour of physical savings.
The baseline inflation path faces several uncertainties, viz., (i) the outlook for oil prices; (ii) continuing volatility in global financial markets; (iii) the risk even as the pass-through to output prices has remained muted so far; (iv) the impact of the likely revision in the MSP formula; and (v) second round impact on inflation on account of the staggered impact of HRA revisions by various state governments, though the direct statistical impact of HRA revisions will be looked through.
Overall, the economy presently reflects the impact of strong drivers for growth despite the unfavourable conditions in some respects.
Note that this is the case even after excluding the HRA impact.
Indian growth has outperformed expectations once again, suggesting it has strong roots.
However, this should not lull us into assuming a goldilocks scenario.
The Committee is of the view that the persistence of inflation excluding food and fuel could set a floor on further downward movements in headline inflation and trigger secondorder effects.
Turning to Q3, the Committee felt that the assessment is clouded by the still unfolding effects of the withdrawal of specified bank notes (SBNs).
So, I vote for keeping repo rate unchanged and continuing the accommodative stance.
Inflation excluding food and fuel has turned down in three readings now, but it is still not generalized and projections still run ahead of headline inflation in the rest of 2017-18.
Inflation in major countries has eased in recent prints but remains significantly above their respective targets.
Among advanced economies (AEs), output in the US and the Euro area underwent a deeper contraction in Q2:2020 than in the preceding quarter.
In India, however, market expectations at present seem to be closely mile of disinflation process when beliefs are consistent with the policy regime contributing towards anchoring of long-term expectations.
This requires further significant decline in inflation expectations, especially since the services component of inflation that is sensitive to wage movements has been sticky.
Low for long interest rates will certainly bring in macroeconomic imbalances and it is expedient that policy rate should be raised as soon as growth is judged to recover on a durable basis or inflation is seen to be turning endemic.
_Fourth, since the last review, a variety of high frequency indicators have_ declined sharply.
As the resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets out, an exceptional configuration of factors is obscuring a clear assessment of the outlook.
We do not need such a high real policy rate.
Importantly, non-food non-fuel inflation has remained sticky, notwithstanding the transitory impact of demonetisation on consumption demand.
The GDP growth rate for FY 2023-24 is projected at 7.1 per cent for Q1 and 5.9 per cent for Q2.
With persistently high food inflation, it would be in order to continue with the disinflationary policy stance that we have adopted.
The forty fourth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under Section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held during August 8 to 10, 2023.
A low positive repo is also called for since it balances (P6) these differing interests.
I vote for status quo on the policy rate at this juncture and to maintain the accommodative mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
I also vote for the present stance to continue since at present liquidity is in surplus and policy needs to signal continuing watchfulness towards bringing inflation to the target.
Various indicators of service sector activity, however, present a mixed picture.
For all sectors together, GVA in Q2 increased by 19.4% over Q1.
The latest assessment by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) for Q4 indicates a loss of momentum in global trade due to declining export orders.
Thus, while high inflation continues to be the major concern, revival of economic activity remains steady and is gaining traction.
Headline inflation excluding food and fuel has moderated somewhat due to a fall in crude oil past three prints, with inflation in health and education components showing a spike in December due to unexpected rise in prices of medicines and private tuition costs.
The Second Advance Estimates by the National Statistical Office place the GDP at constant prices lower by 8 per cent in 2020-21 over the previous year, slightly steeper decline than decline of 7.7 per cent as per the First Advance Estimates.
Moreover, India is subject to large negative liquidity shocks from rise in currency holding, government cash balances and foreign capital outflows[1].
Merchandise exports clocked double-digit growth for the fifteenth successive month in May 2022, despite heightened global uncertainty.
It is supported by rising sales growth, an uptick in seasonally adjusted capacity utilization, drawdown of finished goods inventories and upbeat business confidence even as the regaining of pricing power is helping to shore up profit margins.
This is precipitating diverse monetary policy actions which are accentuating the fissures in the global economy.
In each of the last four months, WPI prices have increased for larger number of commodities than ever in any of the months since October 2013.
Between mid-June to end-July 2017 tomato prices increased to touch Rs.
Mark-ups tend to be countercyclical, falling as capacity utilization rises and fixed costs are spread.
In my opinion, the neutral policy stance needs to be seriously reconsidered in favour of the accommodative stance given the above arguments.
The uneven feature of growth points to vulnerabilities.
2 [The implicit GDP growth projection in the 6th bi-monthly monetary policy statement was 7.4 per cent for 2018-19](https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=43078) 26.
Fuel price deflation is likely to deepen in the near term following the recent cut in LPG prices.
GDP growth projection for 2019-20 has been successively revised down from 7.4 per cent (in February 2019) to 7.2 per cent (in April 2019), 7.0 per cent (in June 2019) and to 6.9 per cent in the 3rd bi-monthly policy of August 2019.
Hence, I vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged and retaining the stance of monetary policy as basis in the coming months, there is possibility of space opening up for policy action in due course.
The global economy now is on a more difficult tangent of slowing growth momentum with entrenching inflationary tendencies.
Surplus durable liquidity can help to absorb and counter these, especially as the US Fed exits accommodation.
A monetary policy reaction in the inflation target over a medium term horizon but the persuasive pull of the transient weakening of growth in the interregnum potentially undermines this commitment.
On the domestic front, the real gross value added (GVA) growth as per the first advance estimates (FAE) released by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) is estimated to decelerate to 6.1 per cent in 2017-18 from 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 due mainly to slowdown in agriculture and allied activities, mining and quarrying, manufacturing, and public administration and defence (PADO) services.
Five members were in favour of the monetary policy decision, while Dr. 26.
While fuel inflation surged, core (CPI excluding food and fuel) inflation moderated in April across most sub-groups barring housing and health, mainly due to base effects.
Further, the strength in leading indexes of U.S. economic growth signal higher economic growth.
An increasing number of high frequency indicators are moving into positive territory, construction is boosted by policy initiatives, and public administration, defence and other services will be supported by the pay commission award.
This was the period of highest fear and uncertainty that very likely affected consumer responses.
Vegetable prices, a major source of inflation volatility, have remained contained in the year so far and are likely to remain soft, assuming no disruption due to unseasonal rains.
In June, I warned against declaring victory based on the inflation prints of just a couple of months, and expressed discomfort with the self-congratulatory tone of the MPC statement of that month about inflation having come inside the tolerance band.
Commodity prices, especially crude, have been volatile and so has the exchange rate.
Bond yields in major AEs have been largely range-bound.
marked by an increase in selling prices.
A significant portion of this liquidity has been parked back at central bank window.
The significant increase is over a decline of 10.4 per cent in the previous year highlighting again the need for sustaining this momentum.
As the transitory impact of demonetisation recedes and remonetisation sets in, the environment, the real neutral rate of interest in India seems to be higher than the one for most of the developed countries.
Average Indian inflation is lower and trending down.
With marked increase in area sown under foodgrains, alongside the buffer of food stock at double the norms, prices should soften.
Though the pipeline investment from last year is weak, there is anecdotal evidence of new projects that are or can soon get into financial closures.
International crude oil prices keep surging as Iran sanctions approach, creating a difficult choice between pass-through to the pump prices and fiscal or quasi-fiscal absorption through excise cuts.
Available forward industrial outlook survey and the consumer confidence survey do not suggest much risk of immediate demand pressures.
However, lack of contestability and collusive behaviours have been seen in the past and the price rises can follow to protect margins.
While the real repo rate is a useful guide to actions, and has theoretical clarity, it is difficult to estimate the neutral rate precisely.
[5 ] Third, investment activity is picking up as witnessed from improving capacity utilisation, pick up in investment intentions, and continued buoyancy in steel consumption and capital goods imports.
International crude oil prices remain volatile and elevated, with considerable uncertainties surrounding global supplies.
Fourth, services sector is particularly vulnerable.
Assuming a normal monsoon next year, CPI inflation for 2024-25 is projected at 4.5 per cent with Q1 at 5.0 per cent; Q2 at 4.0 per cent; Q3 at 4.6 per cent; and Q4 at 4.7 per cent (Chart 2).
The distribution of given the close connection between sovereign yields and funding conditions in the economy.
Excluding food and fuel, CPI inflation moderated for the third month in succession in June, falling to 4 per cent as price momentum moderated inter alia in respect of education due to delay in fee revision cycles, and also in respect of health, clothing and footwear.
The outlook is grim; even when it improves, the expectation is one of slow, hesitant recovery, with the situation likely to worsen before it gets better.
EME currencies largely remained stable and have traded with an appreciating bias.
Amidst all these, the Indian economy presents a picture of resilience with macroeconomic and financial stability.
These developments certainly have two major takeaways for central bankers.
Meanwhile, the deceleration in external demand on account of trade and geopolitical tensions has muted exports and sunk imports into contraction.
If States choose to implement salary and allowance increases similar to the Centre in the current financial year, headline inflation could rise by an additional estimated 100 basis points above the baseline building up in vegetables and animal proteins in the near months.
Crude outlook is fast changing with the changing perceptions on demand supply in line with the geopolitics and developments in the middle east, which is on the edge.
We cannot let down our guards against inflation at this juncture, when supply shocks are proving to be so persistent.
iv) The household survey rounds for inflationary expectations carried out in May and July 2020 provide very interesting results.
But in EMs communication has more impact.
Moreover, though the Indian economy has been highly resilient to geopolitical and commodity price shocks so far, the weakening of exports in July indicates that India would not be immune to growth shocks emanating from the rest of the world.
Headline CPI, therefore, is widely predicted to remain within the 30.
The sustained economic recovery leading to a projected positive year- on- year GDP growth in Q3 and Q4 reflects the rising momentum of economic activities built up by the relaxation of restrictions on movement of goods and commerce as the Covid cases have reduced.
Merchandise exports and imports including non-oil non-gold imports have registered negative YOY growth rates in the recent months.
This should also be supported by the fall in international crude oil prices observed towards end-November, albeit to the extent that it is passed on to the retail pump prices.
Going forward, upside risks include expectations of high international prices of crude Rent Allowance and likely fiscal slippages may also continue to push inflation up.
sharply in Q4FY23, input costs have fallen, wage pressures are not there, and since demand is slack they are unlikely to raise prices.
The IMF update also notes that the risks to the projections are on the downside, with lower growth and higher inflation, but more moderate than its October 2022 assessment.
The overall situation needs to be monitored carefully, both in the sides of growth and inflation.
Tightening global financial conditions and recessionary fears in advanced economies are acting as drags on the domestic economy as well.
While there are positive drivers such as FDI, the uncertainty surrounding the relief from the pandemic and global growth scenario are the other factors affecting caution in investment decisions.
Then durable liquidity must be adjusted.
There is thus room for a policy repo rate cut by 25 basis points.
The government have helped in reducing the potential impact of price impulses from external markets.
Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, rose to 3.2% in June 2019 from 3% in May.
The latest agreement within the Organisation of Petroleum Countries (OPEC) plus to raise oil production for a likely restoration of output to the prepandemic levels by September 2022 imparted transient softening to spot and future crude prices from the recent peak in early July.
(v) Implementation of the revisions in HRA for employees of different states and related organizations (like universities, research institutes, municipal bodies, etc.)
Global crude oil prices have been highly volatile of late and can move in either direction from here.
Discretionary consumer demand, which got impacted in the immediate aftermath of demonetisation, is expected to bounce back.
The second wave amplified the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on contact-intensive activities and the informal sector.
Turning to the stance, I find that with every successive meeting, this stance is becoming more and more disconnected from reality.
On the domestic inflation front, headline CPI inflation fell from 6.6 per cent in February 2020 to 5.8 per cent in March.
The recovery in domestic economic activity is turning increasingly broad-based, with the expanding vaccination coverage, slump in fresh COVID-19 cases and rapid normalisation of mobility.
In my opinion, these indicators are foretelling a revival of business and consumer confidence.
Quick implementation of various reform measures can also inject growth impulses into the Indian economy in the medium to long term.
Non-food credit growth September and November 2022 point to a gradual improvement in sentiments relating to overall economic conditions, employment and income.
A good example of forward-looking time-consistent monetary policy is the monetary in October 2016, the MPC took monetary policy action that was consistent.
The fourteenth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held 2.
Notwithstanding these developments, inflation is well below target in most AEs and is subdued across most EMEs.
Domestic economic activity is starting to recover with the ebbing of the second wave.
Central banks worldwide are taking such actions.
In the agricultural sector, a pick-up in rabi sowing (6.4 per cent higher than a year ago on December 2) is supported by the good progress of the north-east monsoon and above average reservoir levels.
Moreover, the which allowed the play of base effects.
Our approach can be a good template for the future.
Since the August meeting, the risks to inflation have increased, but only slightly.
It is uncertain if domestic demand will sustain after the festival spike.
After the MPC meeting of April 2017, the two monthly readings of the CPI combined inflation turned out to be more consistent with my forecast stated in the Minutes of the previous meeting than of the RBI forecast.
The rate declined in December 2020 to 4.6 per cent.
ii) On the other hand, the RBI surveys show that consumer confidence on income, employment and overall economic environment is very low and declining in recent times.
With this, inflation expectations have declined cumulatively by as much as 160 basis points for the three-month ahead and 170 basis points for one-year ahead horizons in the last four survey rounds.
The world is changing in many important ways.
Fiscal space is more or less exhausted but the space for the monetary boost has fortunately been available now for a relatively long period.
The outlook for aggregate demand is progressively improving but the slack is large: output is still below pre-COVID level and the recovery is uneven and critically dependent upon policy support.
registered price rise of below 6%.
Taking into account these factors, and assuming a favourable monsoon rainfall, the average headline inflation rate for 2024-25 is projected at 4.5 per cent, the same as in the MPC meeting of June.
In M. Greenberger (Ed.
Since the adoption of flexible inflation targeting in India (de facto in 2014 and de jure accomplishment.
The high flux in elevated international crude prices remains a risk to inflation and to the terms of trade.
However, agricultural prices must become more resistant to possibly more frequent weather shocks.
The global outlook becomes increasingly uncertain and tilted by downside risks.
Capital flows to emerging market economies (EMEs) remain volatile and global spillovers pose risks to growth prospects.
Growth in money supply (M3), however, was contained at June as government spending slowed.
There has been significant improvement in the progress of the monsoon and _kharif sowing in July; however, the_ impact of the uneven rainfall distribution warrants careful monitoring.
The Japanese economy is gradually recovering and an accommodative monetary policy stance is expected to buttress domestic spending.
Food inflation is the main factor behind the grudgingly slow pace of disinflation.
The combination of OPEC supply cuts and strengthening global demand appear to be keeping international oil prices at a relatively high level, and the volatility of prices around the high level has been relatively low in the past three to six months.
especially as the US fiscal deficit continues to rise.
Manufacturing, services and infrastructure firms prices to harden.
The adverse risks on the price front are also emerging from the supply side considerations.
The impact on fertiliser and other input supplies add to the cost of supply across the agricultural sector.
Continued policy support with a focus on revival and sustenance of growth is indeed the most desirable and judicious policy option at this moment.
IGIDR Working This could change as the recovery gathers steam, and the MPC must be sensitive to the risk that inflation expectations could become entrenched if inflation remains elevated for too long.
Therefore, liquidity needs to be kept in sufficient surplus to absorb these shocks even as the excess is reduced allowing the reverse repo to rise gradually and arrangements for non-banks remain in place.
Manufacturing firms participating in the industrial outlook survey expect output prices to ease in Q2.
The rise in projected inflation rate above the 4.5 per cent mark in H2 of the financial year reflects the underlying price pressures, which if not addressed would not meet the policy goal.
Industrial GVA growth remained unchanged in Q3, with manufacturing GVA growth slowing somewhat.
Real GDP in 2023-24 is expected to grow at 7.3 per cent on top of a growth of 7.2 per cent recorded in 2022-23.
Keeping in view these factors, the projection of real GVA growth for 2017-18 has been retained at the June 2017 projection of 7.3 per cent, with risks evenly balanced (Chart 2).
GVA growth in 2018-19 is forecast at 7.2 per cent, which will be a significant improvement over the current year.
Most indicators of the output gap suggest that it is closing.
Let me now cover the growth and inflation assessment and the trade offs involved.
Several high frequency indicators for May-June also suggest weakening of services sector activity.
Global financial instability on account of monetary policy normalisation in advanced economies also implies risks to inflation.
The outlook for growth in the current year, therefore, has both the positive features that may help maintain the momentum of 2023-24 and downside risks associated with both domestic and external factors.
However, the passthrough to output prices remains muted presently.
Economic activity in Russia recovered further, supported by strengthening global demand, firming up of oil prices and accommodative monetary policy.
The scenario, however, has been reshaped by the Russia-Ukraine war, the economic fallout of which has affected the overall global growth and price conditions sharply.
Cargo carried by sea, rail and air also registered higher growth in November, but showed mixed performance in December.
Inflation is gradually trending down, but the pace is slow and uneven.
These developments should work towards keeping the current account deficit within sustainable limits.
Services imports declined YOY basis in July and August with exports growing at a modest 8.4 per cent in August.
Second, inflation excluding food and fuel has been unrelenting.
On the other hand, core inflation remained elevated.
Considering the above, I vote for leaving policy rate unchanged and for staying accommodative, while focusing on withdrawal of accommodation as indicated in the resolution.
Successive meetings that promise to withdraw accommodation while actually keeping rates unchanged do not enhance the credibility of the MPC.
The expectations of a red piping-hot recovery have been belied.
The service exports and imports also rose in April-June this year YOY basis, although there was a decline in exports and imports in June over May.
Even for June, the sample was not satisfactory to prepare the estimates for different states.
Business expectations of headline inflation as well as input costs are showing similar trends, rising steadily in RBI's and other surveys.
It is in this context that the MPC has decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and to continue with an accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive and sustain growth on a durable basis and continue to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Liquidity in the system may also be seen in totality taking into account all moving variables including excess CRR and SLR holdings of banks, and revenue and expenditure pattern of the government.
As the central banks navigate the last mile of disinflation, financial markets are responding to changing perceptions on the timing and pace of monetary policy trajectories.
World trade volume growth is expected to have been robust in Q1, as gauged from the data on container trade throughput, air freight and export orders.
Given the likely short-term nature of the vegetable price shocks, monetary policy can look through the first-round impact of fleeting shocks on headline inflation.
All the upside risks to inflation cited in previous resolutions are materialising.
As expected, this has happened.
Excess capacity and unemployment continues to be high.
This should be a crisis that is not wasted.
These indicators represent a wide range of sectors that are maintaining their pace, which we had noticed in the previous round of MPC deliberations as well.
India is being lashed by global spillovers.
In the revised inflation trajectory for the first half of 2017-18, the near term inflation outlook is admittedly benign.
On the domestic front, the growth of real gross value added (GVA) in Q2 of 2016-17 turned out to be lower than projected on account of a deeper than expected slowdown in industrial activity.
Activity in cash-intensive retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transportation and unorganised segments has largely been restored.
Honorary Senior Advisor, National Council of Applied Economic Research, Delhi; Dr. Ashima Goyal, Emeritus Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai; Prof. Jayanth R. Varma, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Deputy Governor in 3.
In the case of services also, PMI rose from April to June but fell in July.
The contribution of supply shocks from food and fuel prices account for 71 per cent of inflation deviations in the first half of 2020-21, followed by 28 per cent from unanchored inflation expectations (deviations of trend inflation from target).
The slower output growth is also production of passenger cars and the travel restrictions affecting the aviation sector and the related businesses.
India is being impacted by the global inflation crisis as recent outcomes have shown.
In my view, a phased normalization of the corridor would increase the ability of the MPC to keep the repo rate at 4% for a longer period, and this should in my view be a greater priority for the MPC than maintaining an ultralow reverse repo rate for some more time.
The large divergence between gross value added (GVA) and GDP growth is expected to narrow down substantially in the current fiscal as central government subsidies are budgeted to contract moderately compared to a large contraction seen in the previous year.
Inflation targeting anchors inflation if policy rates rise one for one with expected inflation, so the expected real rate is positive and close to the equilibrium rate.
Looking ahead, agricultural production and rural demand are expected to remain resilient.
Moreover, high new investment.
Research shows commodity price shocks and credible RBI guidance to be major determinants of inflation expectations.
Household inflation expectations have become much less volatile in the post-pandemic period, falling slowly along with inflation itself.
Domestic demand conditions are expected to benefit from the sustained buoyancy thrust on capex, and healthy balance sheets of banks and corporates.
The infection containment efforts this time around were localised and calibrated, which allowed manufacturing and industrial activity to operate in varying degrees across states during this period.
Aggregate demand conditions are facing similar conflicted pulls.
Monetary policy clearly can do little about the first-round effect of a supply side shock emanating from say vegetables.
At 7.3 per cent, it is also higher than any of the previous four quarters of 2021-22.
As economic activity further normalises and supplies are restored, cost push price pressures faced by firms are likely to dissipate.
Real rates remain positive for firms with respect to WPI inflation but are negative for households with respect to CPI inflation.
Further, core inflation has also likely bottomed out in June, primarily as the impact of the mobile-tariff revision is likely to get reflected in CPI core inflation numbers in July.
The lower _rabi sowing reflects a deficient north-east monsoon (44 per cent_ 2019) was marginally higher than in the previous year.
The above assessment gives me the comfort to vote in favour of a cut in the repo rate by 25 basis points.
These survey of May 2021.
This, in turn, may act in narrower with falling external demand acting to dampen price pressures that have turned elevated from the supply-side.
On inflation, food inflation may ease with the usual winter softening, but core inflation will keep us awake, especially with the likely cost push from recent upward revisions of telecom tariffs and GST rates on clothing and footwear, the safe haven upswing in gold prices and the increasing likelihood of selling price revisions in respect of consumer durables, lags and semi-conductor shortages cannot last indefinitely and should certainly improve in the second half of 2022, as predicted by the IMF.
The highest priority now is to revive growth along a sustainable trajectory that becomes compatible with the inflation target as the pandemic recedes.
The sharp decline in Q2: 2024-25 corresponds to the period when inflation rate was a high 6.4 per cent in 2023-24.
Indeed, growth in the Indian Leading Export Index, a predictor of the direction of exports growth maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, remains in the doldrums, indicating an unfavourable Indian export growth outlook.
We are also in an advantageous position in terms of contribution to potential output through labour and total factor productivity (TFP) channels.
Economic activity remained robust in emerging market economies (EMEs) in Q1:2018.
Oil prices have continued fluctuating within the range I had mentioned in my earlier statements.
Although equity markets have made gains in EMEs in general, they faced risk aversion in some economies.
The minutes of the 28.
In July, the PMI declined into the contraction zone with a decrease in new orders and a deterioration in business conditions, reflecting _inter alia the roll out of the GST; however, both new export_ orders and the future output index rose, reflecting optimism in the outlook.
While a favourable south-west monsoon and lower inflation rate may support higher personal consumption growth, sustained momentum of GFCF and export growth would also be crucial for the high growth in 2024-25. economic growth at 3.2 per cent, projected previously in April.
The liquidity position is expected to return to the normal level consistent with the neutral stance soon.
[4] With less budgeted market borrowings and bond inclusion driven flows expected in 2024, the fisc has vacated space for the private sector on the one hand, while on the other hand taken steps to crowd in private investment through its continued focus on capex and other long term sustainable growth initiatives in areas like solar energy, health, innovation and renewables.
Furthermore, low interest rates create space for and liquidity accommodation.
are however sensitive to the assumed momentum on food inflation.
Traditional measures of the output gap suggest some opening up, i.e., realised output below the potential output; however, my preferred measure, the finance-neutral output gap, remains positive, i.e., realised output is slightly above the potential output, as it captures the healthy aggregate credit growth and stable stock market performance.
In the external sector, merchandise exports contracted in the first two months of Q2.
Inflation in many key EMEs has risen on surging crude prices and currency depreciations, caused by a firm dollar and domestic factors.
With medical solutions yet to be found, it is difficult to anticipate the output loss that might occur from further waves of infections even as path to normalisation has begun.
Friend shoring has begun[10].
It is therefore best to pause and wait and watch while maintaining a vigil on inflation.
Protein based food items could also emerge as a pressure point, given the tight demand-supply balance in the case of pulses.
Domestic economic activity is holding up well, supported by domestic demand in spite of the drag from weak external demand.
Considering these additional developments, I strongly plead for at least a 25 basis points (bps) cut in the policy rate.
Recent data arrivals point to a pick-up in seasonally adjusted momentum of real GDP growth into positive territory in the second quarter of 2022-23.
On the downside, international crude prices have been easing recently and their pass-through to domestic prices of petroleum products should alleviate pressure on headline inflation.
Economic crosscurrents however make it difficult to diagnose precisely the underlying damage because of the virus over the next year.
In the case of private investment, that includes corporate and household sector investment, the favourable policy incentives emerging new opportunities in the economy and spending.
Acceleration in the vaccination program and availability of health care would be a key to boost the confidence of the consumers, workers and producers in the resumption of their economic lives.
We need to undertake forward-looking assessment of the evolving inflation-growth outlook and stand ready to act, if situation so warrants.
The weighted average lending rates on fresh rupee loans of commercial banks declined by 43 bps in March 2020 alone.
However, if the seasonal pick-up does manifest in the first half at some point, then the headline prints will have little abatement from any of its constituents.
Inflation in rural fuel items such as firewood and chips and dung cake also moderated.
If that turns out to be the case, why not stay on hold now, watch the shape and slope of the upturn and if it is benign, deliver credible monetary policy that supports the economy?
Spreads widened for 10-year G-secs, although rates fell to their lowest in many years.
Domestic economic activity is maintaining resilience.
As in the case of aggregate GDP, PFCE and GFCF are below their pre-pandemic levels in Q1: 2019-20.
On the other hand, there is considerable uncertainty about demand conditions.
These decisions are in consonance with the objective of achieving the mediumterm target for consumer price index (CPI) inflation of 4 per cent within a band of +/2 per cent, while supporting growth.
Indian oil majors turned profitable in the summer last year and are showing large profits.
Also, the global manufacturing Purchasing a deepening cyclical downswing, suggesting that Indian export growth will remain in a 41.
This is intuitive because consumer durable and housing loan demand is interest elastic and induces demand for working capital and investment funds.
The result is supply bottlenecks in goods producing sectors and spare capacities in services.
Core inflation remained elevated.
Vegetables and edible oils are contributing to the sequential momentum and going forward, prospects of Kharif output would affect the price pattern.
Inflation rose back to 5.0 per cent in February after receding close to target at 4.1 per cent in January 2021.
For instance, the lower growth numbers for Q4 FY17 not being in line with several high frequency indictors for this period is puzzling.
After a spike, daily new infections are now back at the levels that prevailed at the time of the last MPC meeting.
Reflecting incomplete pass-through to domestic petroleum product prices, inflation in transport and communication remained muted in December.
RBI consumer headline inflation estimate for the year is raised to 5.7 per cent, which implies the real rate has fallen further and is now too negative.
To speak to these questions, the baseline projection of growth is subject to downside per cent in the second half of 2018-19, not 7 per cent.
Indicators such as railway freight, motor spirits consumption show improvement YOY basis and remain above 2019-20 levels or catching up with them.
On the other hand, consumer confidence turned more demand is expected to remain anaemic under the weight of the global recession and contraction in global trade.
The weak external demand conditions have also meant favourable input prices in the international markets.
Overall, out of the 59 high frequency indicators that have become available for October out of 67 that I track, 88 per cent of the indicators exhibited month-on-month improvement after a somewhat weak August and September.
The Committee believes that the environment for timely transmission of policy rates the banking sector is hastened; and, (iii) the formula for adjustments in the interest rates on small savings schemes to changes in yields on government securities of corresponding maturity is fully implemented.
Policy making in the real world cannot be based on an abstract, theoretical and model specific construct which is unobservable and time varying.
On the growth front, with GDP growth at 7.8 per cent for Q1:2023-24 and our nowcast of around 6.5 per cent for Q2, it seems to be tracking our projection of 6.5 per cent for the full financial year.
Oil prices have declined by more than 30 percent since its peak in early October mainly reflecting increases and prospective increases in global supply.
The likelihood of lower interest rates has spurred rallies in equity markets, although uncertainty about the timing of interest rate reduction is reflected in bidirectional movements in the US dollar and sovereign bond yields.
The climate change activism that is partly responsible for current spikes will also reduce oil demand in the future.
Forward-looking actions are aiming to be state-contingent, carefully calibrated to the evolving situation and to incoming data.
The supply side measures taken by the government would help to alleviate some cost-push pressures.
Households are telling us that their inflation outlook has moved palpably upwards.
We can continue to support growth for now as the flexible inflation targeting framework allows temporary deviation from the target so long as inflation is expected to be within tolerance bands.
The governments will be required to maintain their spending levels to meet the extraordinary demands to support livelihoods and lives in the present conditions.
However, given the buoyancy in oil, and the risks of imported inflation from movements in the exchange rate, both variables need to be carefully watched.
Food inflation dropped from 4.5% in July to 1.8% in October 2021.
The prevailing macroeconomic conditions point to a continuation of the strong growth momentum into 2024-25, particularly as a normal monsoon brings relief to the outlook for agricultural sector.
The rise in global energy prices had clear impact on the domestic prices.
The near-term inflation outlook is expected to improve on the back of vegetable price correction and the recent reduction in LPG prices.
Nevertheless, headline CPI inflation in Q4 of 2016-17 is likely to be below 5 per cent.
Going forward, the combined effects of the observed moderation in food inflation in January-February and the expected further softening in March are likely to result in lower will be despite the likely seasonal reversal of food prices in the first half.
This is also supported by RBI consumer confidence surveys showing worsening sentiments for income, employment and overall environment.
Cushioned by government spending and rural of services, such as passenger vehicles and railway freight, have gradually recovered in Q2.
Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of HRA for central government employees moderated significantly from 4.6 per cent in June 2018 to 3.8 per cent in July and further to 3.4 per cent in August, reversing the trend of previous three months.
During the same period, merchandise import growth accelerated sequentially with over one-third of the growth emanating from petroleum Pearls and precious stones, electronic goods and coal were major contributors to non-oil non-gold import growth.
Global growth is expected to fall in FY24 but a turnaround is possible in FY25.
Even as the supply side is expected to ease gradually as the lockdown related restrictions are phased out, it is the demand side, which will continue to weigh heavily on economic activity for some time to come.
When rates are below neutral because of excess crisis related accommodation, the initial rise only takes them towards neutral.
Services exports have expanded YOY basis in October but declined relative to September.
In the services sector, domestic air passenger traffic, e-way bills, toll collections and diesel consumption exhibited buoyancy in April-May, while railway freight and port traffic registered modest growth.
Accordingly, I vote for the continuance of the stance of withdrawal of accommodation.
Output gap is especially difficult to measure under distress as well as pull out of a decade long investment slowdown.
However, the pattern has been uneven across sectors and also over time.
Global growth picked up modestly in the second half of 2016, after weakening in the first half.
On the supply side, industrial growth has weakened as reflected in deceleration in the growth of index of industrial production (IIP) for January; the growth of core industries for February remained sluggish.
I voted, however, for holding the rate unchanged through the June and August meetings to allow transitory effects to fully pass.
Fourth, should the monsoon turn deficient temporally and/or spatially, it may have a significant bearing input and output prices to rise, going forward.
The next meeting of the MPC is scheduled during August 6 to 8, 2024.
That, in itself, will put downward pressure on prices and neutralize several upside risks to inflation.
The fall in prices was also observed in other food components such as eggs, sugar, meat and fish, oils, spices, cereals and milk.
Greater credibility makes disinflation less costly, helps hold down inflation once it is low (Blinder, 2000[8]).
Yields in the US traded sideways on weaker than expected inflation pressures and the anticipated rate hike by the Fed.
One of the factors that has led to the upward revision is the increase in average crude oil price for the year also affecting trade balance.
These price pressures in food and fuel resulted in a pick-up in CPI inflation in October despite large favourable base effects.
It will also depend on the impact of the combined stimulus from fiscal, monetary, social and administrative measures that have been implemented to create conditions conducive to survival in the crisis, as well as for revival in growth.
Growth is resilient, and that is also encapsulated in upgrade in growth forecasts for Q2, Q3 and Q4 of 2022-23.
Disconcertingly, global risks to inflation from crude prices and financial market turbulence are materialising on an ongoing basis.
I vote in support of the resolution to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Consequently, the standing deposit facility (SDF) rate stands adjusted to 5.15 per cent and the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate and the Bank Rate to 5.65 per cent.
Private corporate investment is also gaining steam with capacity utilisation reaching its highest level in 11 years.
The demand outlook as reported by firms polled in the Reserve policy, and for H1:2019-20 at 7.5 per cent, with risks somewhat to the downside (Chart 2).
Monetary policy has more space to affect demand, while high debt and interest payments constrain fiscal spending.
Economic activity in Russia lost pace, with soft oil prices posing a downside risk to growth.
Inflation has moderated into the tolerance band but is not yet firmly on the path to target, particularly in view of monsoon related uncertainties.
Lead indicators for the hotels sub-segment, _viz., foreign tourist arrivals and air passenger traffic, point to softening in_ contracted in October-November, while that of broadband continued to expand in October.
Headline inflation increased to 5.0 per cent in February after having eased to 4.1 per cent in January 2021.
manufacturing sector continued to improve with the latest round of the RBI industrial outlook survey (of 1095 manufacturing companies) showing strong sentiments on production and order seasonally adjusted increase in capacity utilization at a 20-quarter high.
Although housing and personal care inflation softened marginally, the steady rise in inflation in respect of education, medical and health services, and transport and communication has imparted stickiness to inflation in this category.
As per the baseline projections, inflation is likely to remain above 6 per cent till Q3:2022-23.
This warrant continuing policy support till it is set on a firm trajectory of self-sustaining expansion.
In the deliberations of the MPC, my view is that the threats to growth have to be addressed frontally and aggressively or risk a more dire outlook 64.
The renewed jump in COVID-19 infections in several parts of the country and the associated localised and regional lockdowns add uncertainty to the growth outlook.
A rate cut can amplify it if the central bank is seen as encouraging risk-taking.
On the expenditure side, the growth of gross fixed capital formation improved for the second successive quarter.
Cumulative rainfall has been 9 per cent above long period average with its temporal and spatial distribution satisfactory.
By end-September, reservoir levels at 80 per cent of the full reservoir level were above the decadal average which 10.