Inflation, however, showed an uptick in meat and fish, and nonalcoholic beverages.
So, the advanced economies face a big inflation gap and a closed output gap, thus justifying aggressive tightening based on the central bank reaction functions.
Overall, monetary policy geared towards price stability while taking into account output dynamics is the best guarantee to ensure lasting prosperity.
The strong public investment in roads, railways and inland waterways, the recent efforts to unclog cash flows in large projects under arbitration, and the boost to spending from the 7[th] Pay the acceleration in the pace of activity in Q1 appears to have been sustained.
Thirdly, inflation excluding food and fuel remains persistently high.
We need to continue to sustain the impulses of growth in the new financial year 2021-22.
After the last meeting of MPC in June 2019, several important events have occurred.
Monetary policy has adopted an ultra-accommodative stance to revive growth and mitigate the effects of COVID-19.
Turning to inflation, food prices other than vegetables are exhibiting sustained firmness and a pick-up in momentum.
The meeting was attended by all the members - Dr. Chetan Ghate, Professor, Indian Statistical Institute; Dr. Pami Dua, Director, Delhi School of Economics; and Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Executive Director (the officer of the Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the amended Act); Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor in charge of monetary policy - and was chaired by Dr. Urjit R. Patel, Governor.
Previous version available at: 5 While an IMF study in 2014 found causality from headline to core inflation, subsequent studies all find a reversal.
The next meeting of the MPC is scheduled on December 5 and 6, 2017.
The effect of an increase in House Rent Allowance and the lingering impact of the goods and services tax (GST) also contributed towards the pressure on inflation.
The January 2022 update by IMF also projects the World trade volume - goods and services - to grow in 2022 at a lower rate than the previous October 2021 projections.
COVID-19 led to crash in demand as well as disrupted domestic supply chains.
The move towards an active disinflationary stance of monetary policy since the beginning of 2022-23 has helped to bring down inflation from its highly elevated levels, break the core inflation persistence and prevent inflation expectations from getting unanchored.
Administered prices of LPG and kerosene are set to rise with the calibrated reduction in subsidy.
In the process, spending will slow down, so will demand and so will the economy.
As pressures on oil prices persist, pump prices began rising steeply in end March.
On the domestic front, though inflation has moderated and plateaued since its recent peak of April 2022, it remains unacceptably and uncomfortably high.
Indicators such as E-way bills, GST collection and toll collection suggest sustained expansion in domestic economic activity.
It need not be a concern for the MPC.
While there is some comfort that inflation is forecast to be below the upper end of the tolerance band, it is important to emphasize that the inflation target for the MPC is 4% and not 6% or even 5%.
In fact, much of the policy rate action is yet to be transmitted to even the broader spectrum of interest rates.
The balance sheet of key stakeholders like corporates and banks remain strong.
Consumer confidence improved sequentially in Q2:2021-22 but remains gap down compared to normal levels pre-pandemic.
The overall inflation outlook is expected to be clouded by volatile and uncertain food prices and intermittent weather shocks.
Both the industrial outlook survey and the consumer confidence survey conducted by the RBI suggest that negative output gaps will remain in Q2 also.
The thirty first meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held from October 6 to 8, 2021.
Moreover, base effects will reverse and turn adverse during Q3 and Q4 of 2017-18.
The time to begin is upon us.
crude oil prices, US yields and US dollar, all of which were rising then.
Thus, to a large extent, the fiscal slippage of the Centre is compensated by the fiscal discipline shown by the States.
The number of central banks that have becoming visible.
investment plans for FY 2023-24.
With inflation projected to rise above 4 per cent over the 12-month ahead horizon, it is apposite to persevere with the stance of calibrated tightening to head off inflation pressures from potentially corroding the foundations of the growth path that is evolving over the medium-term.
Food inflation increased in June primarily due to an uptick in inflation in edible oils, pulses, eggs, milk and prepared meals and a pick-up in vegetable prices.
However, global trade remains subdued due to an increasing tendency towards protectionist policies and heightened political tensions.
Since mid-June to end-July 2023 tomato prices have surged by 362 per cent, with more than 80 per cent of the price escalation happening during endJune and first half of July.
This inflation correction bears testimony to careful projections and judgment that by keeping policy accommodative, enabled avoiding what could have been a costly policy mistake.
Taking Indian repo rates too high imposed heavy costs in 2011, 2014 and 2018.
The inflation expectations survey of households shows a sharp 100 basis points fall in current household inflation perceptions between September and November.
The Reserve Bank remains committed to undertake pro-active conventional and unconventional measures and to effectively channelling the systemic liquidity to alleviate stress of critical sectors which have borne the brunt of the second wave.
The manufacturing purchasing managers index (PMI) remained in expansion in May although it moderated to 50.8 from 55.5 in April due to a slowdown in output and new orders.
As the path of disinflation needs to be sustained, the MPC decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 6.50 per cent in this meeting.
The question that is uppermost is: Has the global recovery peaked prematurely, leaving behind the scars of the pandemic?
Despite recovery in 2021-22, real GDP is only marginally higher than the pre-pandemic level with private consumption still trailing its 2019-20 level.
Macroeconomic and financial stability is now well entrenched and needs to be nurtured and preserved with well calibrated and timely actions.
Hence, I vote for status quo in the policy rate and maintenance of the neutral stance.
The surge is a warning, however, to raise the level of care and precaution.
In many key EMEs, however, inflation has risen, though the recent retreat in energy prices, tightening of policy stances by central banks and stabilising of currencies may have a salutary impact, going forward.
I had earlier in my statements starting October 2020 stated that output gap will close towards the end of 2021-22.
The liquidity needs arising out of expansion in currency were met by the Reserve Bank through purchases under open market operations (OMOs).
Going forward, growth is likely to get some support from fiscal spending in the remaining months of this fiscal year when bulk of the on-budget stimulus is likely to be spent.
While the level of i t t h d t d i l l it i ll b l th pandemic trend line.
_Kharif_ sowing is progressing well thanks to the south-west monsoon.
This provides an overall context for an assessment of the likely course of growth and inflation in the short to medium term.
In view of the above arguments I vote for a 25 bps cut in the repo rate and a change in the stance to neutral.
It remains to be seen how it might respond ahead as pent-up demand wanes while animal spirits remain anaemic.
My reasons for this recommendation are the following: 38.
Dr. Ashima Goyal voted to increase the repo rate by 35 basis points.
Consequently, markets and analysts get increasingly certain that inflation may remain elevated through the greater part of 2022 and growth will slow further absent policy action to unclog supply bottlenecks.
The economy needs a larger push.
As per the latest available information, this risk has materialised with the uneven progress of the monsoon manifesting in the form of excess rains in the northwest regions and disrupting supply, and deficient rains in the eastern part delaying crop and the largest in recent memory.
Furthermore, there are clear signs of economic activity holding up well in Q1:2023-24[2] as indicated by various high frequency indicators and this optimism is expected to follow through in the remaining quarters of 2023-24.
The assessment by international agencies point to significant improvement in the global trade conditions in 2024 and the economic growth is expected to remain stable at the level of the previous year.
High-frequency indicators of the services sector suggest some moderation in the pace of activity.
Growth uncertainty has increased with the second wave in Covid-19 in some states.
On the other hand, steel output has recorded sustained expansion following the application of countervailing duties.
Spikes in food prices can therefore be looked through as long as they remain just that.
Recovery in economic activity is expected to begin in Q3 and gain momentum in Q4 as supply lines are gradually restored to normalcy and demand gradually revives.
There is still a chance CPI inflation may fall steeply in the next few months on supply-side action supported by favourable base effects.
Accordingly, I vote to keep the policy repo rate at 4.0 per cent.
Across the developing world, food shortages will likely last through this year and the early part of next year, exacerbating the pain of soaring food prices.
This, combined with huge uncertainty about future demand, both domestic and external, is likely to hamper new will also be a challenge.
With the likely contraction in economic activity and the inflation outlook remaining soft, the policy space has opened up.
Apart from favourable base effects, the unlocking has picked speed and would significantly reduce supply chain bottlenecks causing both agriculture and non-agricultural prices to correct.
For the period April-October, the merchandise trade deficit was lower by US to remain muted, notwithstanding some loss of remittances and software exports under invisibles.
Accordingly, I vote for status quo on both stance and rate in this policy.
Since then, the headline inflation prints have revealed further softening of inflation in January, followed by a pick-up in February.
In my statement for the last meeting (April 2024), I expressed concern about the growth sacrifice in 2024-25 induced by restrictive monetary policy.
Source of deeper contraction in GDP has been the lower net taxes on products as the GVA decline was lower at 6.5 per cent in the second advance estimates compared to 7.2 per cent in the First Advance Estimates.
On the other hand, deficient monsoon could have a more tangible impact on inflation due to the higher share of food items in the CPI consumption basket.
Investment activity, in particular, has accelerated.
8 [https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=187655](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=187655) 9 United Nations Population Fund.
Nevertheless, it is my considered view that the balance of risk and reward at the current juncture is still in favour of monetary accommodation.
Although it seems meaningful to compare progress with a pre-pandemic year, it needs to be noted that in 2019-20, a cyclical downturn had matured over 2 and a half years, taking down real GDP growth to its lowest in the 2011-12 based series of national accounts.
Considering all of above, I vote for leaving the policy rate unchanged and maintaining accommodative stance as communicated in the resolution, that emphasises need for continued support to growth, while remaining watchful for a durable reduction in inflation to use the available space so as to ensure that inflation remains within the target going forward.
The export growth in October-November 2021 has continued to support overall GDP growth.
Several other risks remain.
Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Ashima Goyal, Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted to increase the policy repo rate by 35 basis points.
The RBI Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted in January 2024 provides estimated median forecast of headline inflation at 5.1% in Q4 2023-24 followed by 5.2%, 3.8%, and 4.9% in Q1 to Q3 2024-25, respectively.
While prospects for the rabi crop have improved, especially for wheat and oilseeds, risks from adverse weather events remain.
In the case of non-IT services firms, sales growth in Q3 is negative but less contractionary than Q2: 2020-21.
Wheat prices could see some correction on robust _mandi arrivals and_ procurement.
Upside risks associated with an increase in minimum support prices (MSPs) still persist.
The outlook for agriculture is robust.
Steps have also been taken in the Union Budget to revive economic activity, with a focus on rural and infrastructure sectors.
The risk of ceding part of the operational range to the indifference range makes it imperative to emphasise the primacy of the 4 per cent inflation target.
I remain concerned about the impact of farm loan waivers on inflation and growth, due to induced departure from fiscal discipline, shift in the nature of state spending and the crowding out of private credit by further state borrowings from the market.
The domestic recovery is gaining traction, but activity is just about catching up with pre-pandemic levels and will have to be assiduously nurtured by conducive policy settings till it takes root and becomes self-sustaining.
The Indian economy is well-poised to achieve this combination and to reduce its chronic underemployment.
While the indicators such as non-food bank credit, GST collections and PMI for both manufacturing and services point to the continued momentum of domestic demand, the overall YOY growth in H2 of 2022-23 is expected to be lower compared to H1.
While the US and the Euro area registered record-setting contraction in output in Q2:2020, the emerging market economies (EMEs) also look set to see large declines in output.
With the abolition of the incremental cash reserve ratio from December 10, liquidity management operations have consisted of variable rate reverse repos under the LAF of tenors ranging from overnight to 91 days and auctions of cash management bills under the market stabilisation scheme (MSS) of tenors ranging from 14 to 63 days.
Business and consumer confidence rose in October.
The Great Inflation episode after the oil price shock of 1973 bears testimony of these risks to which one needs to be mindful, even though recent flattening of Phillips curve has diminished correlation between core inflation and output.
Considering it appropriate to wait for growth signals to become solidly entrenched while remaining watchful on inflation dynamics, the MPC decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and to continue with an accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive and sustain growth on a durable basis and continue to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
In the construction segment, steel consumption was robust.
Core (CPI excluding food and fuel) inflation eased further to 3.2 per cent in April, the lowest in the current CPI series, with core services inflation also falling to historic lows.
the services and infrastructure.
The core inflation[1 ]is projected at 4.9 per cent in Q2, followed by 4.7 per cent and 4.6 per cent in Q3 and Q4, respectively.
Since the advent of the pandemic, the repo rate was further cut by 75 basis points in the March MPC meeting, amounting to a total cut of 210 basis points between February 2019 and March 2020.
Primary goods growth accelerated, driven by mining, electricity and petroleum refinery products.
Hence, I vote for keeping the policy rate unchanged and for continuing with the stance of withdrawal of accommodation.
On balance, the need to support relaxing the supply side constraints is a priority as this is also needed to address inflation concerns.
Monetary policy is much less effective than fiscal policy for providing targeted relief to the worst affected segments of the economy.
Global trade continued to expand, underpinned by strong investment and robust manufacturing activity.
This has adversely impacted the outlook for crude oil prices.
Accordingly, I vote for increasing the policy repo rate by 50 basis points and for maintaining the stance of withdrawal of accommodation.
Soft global prices of metals and other industrial raw materials are likely to keep input costs low for domestic firms.
All members, namely, Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Ashima Goyal, Dr. Mridul K. Saggar, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das, except Prof. Jayanth R. Varma, voted to continue with the accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive and sustain growth on a durable basis and continue to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Prof. Jayanth R. Varma voted to reduce the policy repo rate by 25 basis points.
iii) RBI survey has found that companies have started investing in financial assets rather than fixed assets.
Third concern relates to interactions between monetary policy and financial stability, which could intensify further, especially later into next year.
While a negative demand shock because of the withdrawal of SBNs will lead to a decline in consumption demand, the risks that such a reduction will have longer term effects by impinging on overall investment sentiment and investment activity are low.
Taking into account these considerations, I vote for a pause in the policy repo 32.
Various measures of underlying inflation are converging to the headline at above 5 per cent.
Bank credit growth has continued to improve.
One needs to wait for some more time to ascertain whether our unwinding of its asset purchase program; we might see a pick-up in imported inflation be entirely benign for inflation.
The ongoing trade tensions and the possible cooling of the housing market pose major risks to growth in China.
Taking into account double digit inflation in salient food categories such as cereals, pulses, spices and vegetables for several months, empirical evidence points to a rise in the time varying persistence of food inflation, i.e., it is taking longer to revert to its trend after a shock.
This enhanced guidance should strengthen and quicken the pace of transmission to longer-term yields and help support consumption and investment demand in the economy.
Growth in the index of industrial production (IIP) slowed down to 4.5 per cent Order Books, Inventories and Capacity Utilisation Survey (OBICUS), increased from 73.8 per cent in Q1 to 76.1 per cent in Q2, which was higher than the long-term average of 74.9 per cent; seasonally adjusted CU also increased to 76.4 per cent.
The decline in economic output is reflected in both production and expenditure accounts across most components.
This optimism regarding domestic and global economic growth is also reflected in the leading indexes compiled by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York.
The supply chains for the key food commodities were also exempted from transport restrictions, leading to sustenance of supply of these commodities.
Accordingly, continuity in the stance with a clear-cut objective of aligning inflation to the 4 per cent target is important.
The slippage during 2019-20 without additional resource mobilization (since it was an interim budget) also turns out to be less than 20 bps from the fiscal consolidation path.
In this regard, measures taken by the government and the RBI to encourage flow of credit to shadow banks are important confidence building steps.
Food (with a weight of around 46 per cent in overall CPI) contributed disproportionately at around 60 per cent to the surge in inflation.
While measures to address the local and domestic conditions related to both the economy and the pandemic have borne fruit, the global conditions appear diverse as far as the pandemic is concerned.
Although recent food inflation prints have surprised on the downside and prices of petroleum products have softened considerably, it is important to monitor their evolution closely and allow heightened short-term uncertainties to be resolved by incoming data.
Domestic air passenger traffic rose significantly in April.
Moreover, the fragile demand conditions could help limit the pass-through of input cost pressures across manufacturing and services to output prices.
Investment activity is push, and strengthening bank credit.
So it is important to ensure a sustained and sustainable revival this time.
The sequential gains in the manufacturing sector are strong with the PMI-Manufacturing in expansion zone for the past 8 months.
Global conditions affecting commodity prices are the other exogenous elements impacting the fuel prices and prices of other inputs.
Year on year growth in GST collection has maintained its strong growth and Non-food Bank Credit has maintained its higher pace of YOY growth since December 2021.
Moreover, imputed CPI excluding food and fuel inflation during April-May surged by 90-100 bps from March readings.
The imminent approvals for vaccines for the Covid-19 pandemic have raised the prospects of return to normal economic activities at the global level, subject of course to all the safety considerations until the vaccination programs cover all the population.
To align the inflation expectations with the policy target rate of inflation, further increase in policy rates is necessary at this juncture.
The level of foreign exchange reserves 19.
There are clearer signs of revival of investment activity.
Both the service and manufacturing PMIs continue to be in expansion mode for the last several months.
U.S., Eurozone and China, are in continued cyclical downswings, pointing to a further slowdown in global growth.
As growth regains solid ground, it could likely sustain inflation above the target.
The resurgence in inflation in May and June above the upper threshold has reignited the debate on the appropriate monetary policy response.
The recovery in economic activities requires support from consumer spending.
The Provisional Estimates brought out by National Statistics Office (NSO) for 2020-21 on May 31 now place the real GDP growth at -7.3 per cent over the previous year, a lower rate of contraction than provided in the Second Advance Estimates.
The potential for the spread of the virus in the absence of critically vital safety precautions such as masks and social distancing cannot be ignored until the effective vaccination is achieved.
The fortieth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under 2022.
Overall Indian growth is resilient, but it is still below potential.
Merchandise exports declined by 1.1 per cent in October 2017 after showing positive growth for 14 consecutive months.
Since nonbank financial intermediaries do not have access to a lender of last resort and penalties for credit default are now high they also tend to hold excess liquidity.
The composite PMI output index 15.
that the size of the economy in 2021-22 will be moderately higher than 2019-20.
Crude oil prices jumped to 14year high in early March; despite some correction, they remain volatile at elevated levels.
Taking all these factors into consideration, real GDP growth for 2023-24 is projected at 6.5 per cent, with Q2 at 6.5 per cent, Q3 at 6.0 per cent, and Q4 at 5.7 per cent, with risks evenly balanced.
Risks to inflation arise from price stickiness and supply chain disruptions, high costs of rebuilding or modifying supply chains and less than competitive markets under lockdowns, translating into higher retail margins.
Hence, more forceful tightening of monetary policy in 2023 may be required if terminal rates have to be achieved.
Finally, price adjustments to account for pandemic induced altered supply-side conditions may also emerge as the demand conditions improve.
Gold prices, which touched a two 1 From this resolution onwards, growth in gross domestic product (GDP) will be used as the headline measure of economic activity.
Sustained growth in fixed capital formation may also require maintaining the pace of government capital outlay.
Although household inflation expectations are naive and much in excess of realized inflation, the direction of change is instructive.
The 3 month commercial paper rate is above 7%.
Capacity utilisation saw some improvement in Q2:2020-21 and a further pick-up is expected from Q3 onwards.
I vote for status quo i) Price quotations collected for various items from the designated shops by NSO to measure inflation could not be collected during April and May because of the nationwide lockdown.
Third, there is evidence of continuing generalisation of price pressures, especially in core.
Markets benefit from recovery and so are better able to absorb rate hikes that are in step with the latter.
I have consistently highlighted the risk that the persistence of CPI inflation excluding food and fuel poses to meeting the medium-term headline inflation target of 4 per cent within a band of +/- 2 per cent.
Net exports dragged down aggregate demand in 2017-18 due to a surge in imports and deceleration in exports in Q3, the latter being driven in part by GST-related working capital disruptions.
The industrial sector, by contrast, suffered a manufacturingdriven contraction in early fiscal year Q2, after a sequential deceleration in gross value added in Q1.
Rural wage growth is flat at 4.8 per cent.
In my view, these healthy developments on the economic activity front are likely to remain durable due to steady progress in the time-bound resolution of twin balance-sheet problem affecting our banks and corporates.
The recent data suggests that the incidence of new infections has declined.
I want to thank the Reserve Bank of India and the Government of India for giving me this opportunity.
Imports of capital continued in contractionary zone in July to 34.2, although the downturn eased relative to the May and June readings.
The monthly headline CPI inflation prints of January and February 2019 have continued to undershoot the RBI projections substantially, forcing the RBI for further downward revision of headline inflation from 2.8 to 2.4 percent for Q4:FY 2018-19.
Urban consumption continues to be steady.
Imports of coal, electronic goods, pearls and precious stones, vegetable oils and machinery also accelerated.
The minutes of 30.
The key challenge for monetary policy at this stage is to resuscitate domestic demand to avoid any harmful effect on income and employment in the short run and potential growth over the medium term.
I also worry that India is not consolidating fiscally although the extra budgetary spending on social welfare and stimulative programs may not materialize (unless states match it with their own initiatives).
Should an inflation-targeting central bank react to a narrowing output gap in such a scenario?
Much of what I wrote in my December statement remains valid now as well.
Inflation expectations also remain elevated.
I therefore vote to keep the policy rate unchanged.
The arguments made in my last statement are still valid.
Available data for Q3:2021-22 indicate that the momentum of economic activity is gaining further traction, aided by expanding vaccination coverage, the rapid subsiding of new improved in October over the same month of 2019 (pre-pandemic level), while motorcycle sales are slowly inching towards their pre-pandemic levels.
The only source of comfort is that all the evidence at the moment suggests that inflation is being driven not by domestic demand, but by supply side factors including the global surge in commodity prices.
At present only small steps are required to align the repo with the fall in inflation so this should not be seen as the start of a rate cut cycle.
Otherwise also, consumer confidence has been dented and consumers are likely to cut down on discretionary spending.
It is important, therefore, while remaining pre-emptive and forward looking, to wait for data on actual outcomes, watching for first signs of second round pass through in inflation as well as for alleviation on the supply-side.
An unwinding of taxes on petroleum products by both the centre and the states could ease the cost push pressures.
Accordingly, I vote to increase the policy repo rate by 50 basis points to 4.90 per cent.
Through the current episode, inflation has declined from an average of 7.3 per cent in the first quarter of 2022-23 (peak at 7.8 per cent in April 2022) to 4.6 per cent in the first quarter of 2023-24 (4.8 per cent in June 2023), i.e., by 270 basis points.
_Ref: Cogley, T., Primiceri, G. E., & Sargent, T. J.
The Covid 19 pandemic is seen to be coming under control combined with fiscal stimulus measures to revive demand.
Soft fuel prices and weak aggregate demand have kept inflation below target in AEs, although in some EMEs, supply disruptions have imparted upward price pressures.
Maintaining the growth momentum of consumption demand.
Even as the domestic economy is showing signs of mending, the external environment is turning more uncertain and challenging, with headwinds from slowing growth in some major Asian and advanced economies, steep jump in natural gas prices in the recent weeks and concerns emanating from normalisation of monetary policy in some major advanced economies.
At a broad level, output levels of the various sectors in Q2FY22 measured by GVA at constant prices are above Q2FY21.
Instead, reasonable conclusion is that vegetable prices continue to show seasonality over years, something amenable to monetary policy actions, and certainly not at short horizon of a few months at which it is likely to, and typically does, revert.
Some moderation in the rate of increase in prices of 14.
Accordingly, the MPC decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and continue with an accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive and sustain growth on a durable basis and continue to mitigate the impact of COVID19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Also, the reverse migration of labour to villages has been muted relative to last year and inter-state movement of goods continues smoothly.
Meanwhile, inflationary pressures have continued unabated, posing challenges for monetary policy.
High frequency indicators of service sector activity such as passenger and commercial vehicle sales, domestic air passenger traffic and foreign tourist arrivals also experienced sizable contractions in March.
If the pace of this recovery is slower on the supply side, prices would rise if demand grows more quickly.
However, demand will take time to li d k i t i t th t I th i t corporate pricing power is unlikely to recover, though upside risks to inflation remain from possible collusive behaviour in less competitive industries, as also further unforeseen supply disruptions in food.
Research finds inflation to be more in Covid-19 affected products.
In keeping with this stance, the policy rate has been reduced by 75 basis points since February 2020 when the virus outbreak assumed pandemic proportions.
The meeting was attended by all the members - Dr. Chetan Ghate, Professor, Indian Statistical Institute; Dr. Pami Dua, Director, Delhi School of Economics; and Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Executive Director (the officer of the Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor in charge of monetary policy - and was chaired by Dr. Urjit R. Patel, Governor.
A key factor influencing the private investment in the manufacturing sectors appears to be the level of capacity utilisation, which is still below the long-term average reflecting both demand and supply constraints.
activity, has eased in recent months.
Consumers remain optimistic about the outlook, and business sentiment of manufacturing firms is gradually improving.
Further, a potential increase in financial market volatility due to global developments, including the unwinding of the balance sheet by the Fed and the possibility of normalisation by the ECB, are also major concerns.
Effective supply management by the government, as in the recent past, could help in keeping food inflation under check.
The available data on a wide range of indicators of output and demand conditions for January and February point to an on-going recovery.
The OECD points out that seasonally adjusted Indian quarter on quarter growth was the lowest after China and Poland.
Coupled with expectations of fiscal expansion in the US, this has propelled the US dollar to a multi-year high.
CPI inflation excluding vegetables has moved higher.
The optimism generated by these evolving macroeconomic conditions and the recent improvement in financial conditions in response to prudent and growth-stimulating budgetary announcements would come full circle if inflation eases and aligns with the target.
One cannot reject the hypothesis that the recent slowdown in the real GDP growth in India is on account of high real policy rates among other factors.
GDP numbers for Q2:2019 in respect of some major advanced and emerging market economies have been subdued.
Economic recovery is likely to ensue.
Global risks are rising with the Omicron variant as well as with expectations of an earlier Fed taper.
This is consistent with inflation cycle downturn that began in mid-2018 is poised to persist.
On the output front, GDP growth slowed down significantly in the first quarter of 2017-18, reflecting slower agricultural and manufacturing growth, along with tepid consumption and investment demand.
First, aggregate bank credit and overall financial flows to the commercial sector continue to be strong, but are yet to be broad-based.
The southwest monsoon has picked up and is progressing well.
Oil has a much faster supply response now because of shale oil as well as green substitutes, capping future rise in prices.
In other words, the assumption of particularly benign food inflation in the short run imparts significant upside risk to the inflation trajectory, at the short- and/or medium-term horizons, from the fiscal adjustments that would be necessary to address resulting agrarian distress and to boost rural demand.
Let me now briefly sum up how growth and inflation scenarios might unfold and my view on the decisions at hand.
But this is likely to be temporary, although uncertainty remains about the timeline.
It is the MPC, whose mandate covers all interests, respond to pressing priorities and seize opportunities.
All this, after a period of four years of uninterrupted success in keeping inflation well within the tolerance band and in fact, closely aligned with the target, which has earned the country credibility in monetary policy conduct, investor confidence and the anchoring of expectations!
Policy has to tighten against negative supply shocks as well as against positive demand shocks that raise the equilibrium rate.
Capital flows to EMEs have continued, but appear increasingly vulnerable to the normalisation of monetary policy by the US Fed.
Investment demand is lagging consumption demand but has started to look up.
In Q3 up to early November, liquidity conditions remained in mild surplus mode.
In the Euro area too, GDP growth moderated in Q2 on worsening external conditions.
Rural demand is gradually improving while urban demand remains ebullient.
This was largely driven by domestic demand, especially investment activity.
However, under prevailing circumstances, the immediate transmission should be considered not so much in terms of the bank deposit and lending rates but more specific rates influencing new investments such as housing loans, vehicle loans and long term bonds.
Deficient demand may hold down pressures on core inflation (excluding food and fuel), although persisting supply dislocations impart uncertainty to the near term outlook.
On the services side, the picture remained mixed.
flows are still capped at 6 per cent of outstanding stocks of G-Secs.
Retail inflation, measured by y-o-y change in the CPI, declined from 3.4 per cent in October 2018 to 2.2 per cent in December, the lowest print in the last eighteen months.
In summary, even though the projections have been revised downwards significantly, several upside risks remain.
(The cutoff yield in the last 91-day T-bill auction before the October meeting was 3.36% while the corresponding yield for the last auction now that this reduction of rates carries significant risks and very little rewards.
In the US, the equity market witnessed some selling pressure in the last week of March on weak economic data.
As it is very well recognised, the fears of upside risks to inflation considered so far either have not materialised or are considerably subdued except the statistical impact of the implementation of revised HRA for the government employees.
This means that a reduction of over 50 basis points in the repo rate is needed within a short span of time, but it makes sense to move cautiously in this direction.
After the firm-lending based NPAs most banks are trying to increase retail loans.
I, therefore, feel that risks to food inflation, other than in pulses, are minimal at this stage and overall food inflation is expected to resume its downward trajectory from May/June.
Volatility in financial markets and rising asset prices also pose upside risks to the outlook.
Construction activity indicators slackened, with contraction in cement production in June on increase in new business activity, new export orders and employment.
When the standard errors are considered, there was no statistically significant difference between May and July rounds of the survey in the three months ahead and one year ahead inflationary expectation of households.
A flattening of the yield curve remains an important goal but, I think it must be pursued using other instruments which largely lie outside the remit of the MPC.
Fortunately, growth in agriculture has held up, with the total area under summer crops (kharif) including rice, pulses, coarse cereals, oilseeds, cotton and sugarcane, up by 13.9 per the normal area (5 years average).
While keeping in mind the objective of growth, the foot must remain on the brake as we chart our future trajectory.
I believe that monetary policy is no longer the right instrument to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic whose economic effects (as opposed to its health effects) have diminished greatly and become more concentrated in narrow pockets of the economy.
Commercial vehicle sales growth remained robust in September-October, despite some deceleration Railway freight traffic improved markedly in October to touch a five-year high growth.
The first is that the ongoing transition to green energy worldwide poses a significant risk of creating a series of energy price shocks similar to that in the 1970s.
nominal income growth, although reserve money growth varied widely over the pandemic and demonetization periods.
This is expected to further boost rural consumption, as_ evidenced by the growth in consumer non-durables.
With the exception of a few product groups, the high rate of price rise was widespread.
The global macroeconomic environment is, however, characterised by deceleration in global demand in 2022, with increasing headwinds from financial market volatility induced by monetary policy normalisation in the systemic advanced economies (AEs) and inflationary pressures from persisting supply chain disruptions.
These risks are not imminent at this point.
It remains to be seen if the strength of that momentum is able to offset strong, pandemic-induced unfavourable base effects.
The business expectation index of the latest growth is expected to recover gradually in 2017-18.
The output of core industries was also dragged down by contraction in electricity, coal and fertiliser production in June, owing to excess inventory and tepid demand.
Global financial markets have been driven mainly by the changing course of monetary policy in AEs, generally improving economic prospects and oscillating geopolitical factors.
In the subsequent weeks, however, the surge in new infections turned severe and broad-based both in its spread across states and in the intensity of the increase, putting enormous pressure on the health system with heavy toll on human lives.
Moreover, if high cost of living conditions persists, the household inflation expectations could edge up feeding into wages in a broad-based manner and pushing up services inflation, which has been muted so far.
Household physical savings is measured as identical to household physical investment savings in India, so it is the net financial savings that affect the CAD.
Value of merchandise exports declined in October by 12.1 per cent in US$ terms, after a sharp deceleration in Q2.
Overall business situation is expected to improve in Q3: 2021-22 and remain robust in Q4 and Q1: 2022-23, particularly for manufacturing and services.
subdued and contact-based services, although catching up, are yet to recover fully.
In: Mankiw, N. G.
Turning to the external sector, merchandise export growth weakened in May and June from the April peak as the value of shipments across commodity groups either slowed or declined.
Only banks with strong balance sheets could be expected to support lending activity as and when credit demand picks up.
Taking all these factors into consideration, the real GDP growth projection for 2022-23 is retained at 7.2 per cent, with Q1 at 16.2 per cent; Q2 at 6.2 per cent; Q3 at 4.1 per cent; and Q4 at 4.0 per cent, with risks broadly balanced (Chart 2).
However, such rate cuts should be saved for when the economy starts reviving, and not when we are in a lock-down.
However, indicators of the construction sector, viz., consumption of steel and production of cement, continued to show healthy growth.
7 Report on Currency and Finance, RBI 2021-22.
Food inflation continued to surprise on the downside; widening of deflation in pulses, vegetables, and sugar, along with broad-based moderation in other food items moved the food group into deflation.
According to the assessment of in Q3 remained stable, with sustained optimism about production and exports.
The Business Inflation Expectations Survey (BIES) conducted by IIM Ahmedabad covering mainly manufacturing firms has reported a decline in the one-year ahead expectation of YOY consumer inflation to 4.91 per cent in December 2022 compared to 5.32 per cent in October 2022.
The weighted average call rate (WACR) traded 12 bps and 15 bps below the repo rate during October and November, respectively, as against 13 bps in September.
For the final descent of inflation to the target and its anchoring, monetary policy has to be watchful of spillovers from food price pressures to core inflation and inflation expectations.
In the recent months, the major drivers of inflation have been supply-chain disruptions resulting from localised lockdown; increase in excise duty and VAT on petroleum products; price pressures in protein rich items and vegetables; and impact of statistical imputations.
This is reducing exchange rate volatility, which can be too high in emerging markets under global shocks.
The MPC expects domestic growth to hold up on the strength of investment demand, steady urban consumption and rising rural consumption.
Taking into account the present trends and projections of major indicators, the real GDP growth YOY basis for FY2022-23 has been retained at 7.2 per cent as projected in April 2022 meeting.
Only a few cities show an increase that neutralizes the decline observed in majority of cities.
By contrast, net 1All India headline CPI was not released for April 2020 in view of limited transactions in non-food items due to investment under the voluntary retention route increased by US$ 0.7 billion during the imports.
High frequency indicators of investment demand remained weak, including consumption of finished steel, import of capital goods and capital goods production (as per the use-based classification of IIP), although the year-on-year contraction in cement production eased considerably in June.
Another upside risk arises from the one-off effects of the GST.
More than half of this divergence is due to a combination of retailer margins in food prices (amplified by its higher weight in CPI than in the WPI), the sharp increase in taxes on petroleum products and alcoholic beverages in the post-COVID period (which are not captured in the WPI), and high prices of non-traded services such as healthcare, transport and personal services.
Indeed, monetary accommodation appears to be stimulating asset price inflation to a greater extent than it is mitigating the distress in the economy.
Dr. Pami Dua, Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Dr. Janak Raj, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted for a reduction in the policy repo rate by 40 bps, while Dr. Chetan Ghate voted for a reduction by 25 bps.
The domestic inflation outlook presented in the February 2022 MPC meeting has undergone a significant upward shift since the start of the war on February 24, 2022, with the escalation of conflict and subsequent turmoil in global commodity markets.
There seems little scope for accommodation or for change of stance at the present juncture.
The primary objective of monetary policy enjoined by the RBI Act is challenged and the credibility of the MPC will be tested in the months ahead.
Unfortunately, the monetary policy statement of this meeting (as in the past several meetings) contains the line: fall within the remit of the MPC, then the announcement of this rate should be in the favour with the rest of the MPC.
This provides investment need to be stimulated.
In terms of demand components of GDP, barring Inventory Change and Statistical Discrepancy, all the others show negative year-on-year growth.
Funds raised for capex purpose by the private corporates 70.
On the growth front, the slowdown in the pace of global output growth has begun to impact external demand conditions.
Foreign portfolio flows turned negative in January 2019, after rebounding in November and December 24.
We have to remain vigilant and ready to act effectively in our journey towards 4 per cent inflation target.
Improving growth in the economy is also reflected in the rising capacity utilization of Survey (OBICUS) as well as acceleration of growth in cement and steel production, upward revision of agricultural growth and resilience of the services sector.
The Committee expects that the strong improvement in sowing, along with supply management measures, will improve the food inflation outlook.
Even so, rising rates may have prevented over-heating.
Since the MPC met in March 2020, global economic activity has remained in standstill under COVID-19 related lockdowns and social distancing.
These decisions are in consonance with the objective of achieving the medium-term target for consumer price index (CPI) inflation of 4 per cent within a band of +/- 2 per cent, while supporting growth.
The index of prices reflecting core inflation (excluding and that of transportation prices directly - increased by 5.4 per cent in April compared to 5.9 per cent in March 2021.
Indian Economic Journal, Special Issue in honour of Dr. Rangarajan, 72(5), October, forthcoming.
Accordingly, the MPC resolved to remain on high alert, given the prevailing environment of elevated global food and energy prices and global financial market volatility.
Inflation has moderated in the context of the continued pressure the cumulative monetary policy actions as well as supply side measures by the government in crucial consumption sectors have exerted.
It is worthwhile to note that households have current inflation perceptions and expectations three months ahead have declined, those for a year ahead remain flat amidst considerable uncertainty.
On the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic situation at its meeting today, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to: - increase the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) by 25 basis points to 6.25 per cent.
There are several factors contributing to uncertainty around this baseline inflation trajectory.
Since the last review, a comprehensive fiscal stimulus has been announced, part that increases discretionary spending via fiscal policy is however around 1% of GDP.
Real GDP growth is projected at 7.1 per cent for Q1:2023-24 and at 5.9 per cent for Q2 (Chart 2).
The Brazilian economy ended 2018 on a weak note; going into 2019, available economic indicators for Q1 suggest that economic activity remained restrained by both weak domestic and external demand.
Industrial sector GVA growth fell sequentially as well as on a y-o-y basis.
On the supply side, gross value added (GVA) rose by 12.7 per cent in Q1:2022-23, with all constituents recording y-o-y growth and most notably, services.
The fiscal stimulus under AtmaNirbhar 2.0 and 3.0 schemes of government will likely accelerate public investment, although private investment remains sluggish amidst still low capacity utilisation.
upward adjustments of domestic POL prices in response to the hardening of international crude prices, including catching up with withheld pass-through; imminent MSP increases; fiscal slippage; customs duty increases.
First, disentangling recent disinflation in terms of relative roles of structural and transitory drivers remains a challenge.
Secondly, market indicators of uncertainty in international crude oil prices remain high, reflecting the unexpectedly large gyrations in their movement this year and upcoming geo-political risks such as OPEC supply decision and trade war markets was around 25% per annum (p.a.)
Taking all these factors into consideration, inflation is projected at 4.0 per cent in Q2:2018-19, 1).
It appears to me that the steep yield curve reflects a lack of credibility of the MPC resolution is an attempt to solve this problem, and my only difficulty with this commitment of the MPC to respond aggressively to inflation shocks that lie well above the upper band of the fan chart (Chart 1 of the Monetary Policy Statement).
Adverse source of upside risk to food prices.
Small steps over a prolonged period could allow inflation to get entrenched and inflation expectations unhinged.
The FY 2021-22 CPI inflation is projected at 5.7 per cent.
In terms of the use-based classification, contraction in capital goods, intermediate goods and consumer durables pulled down overall IIP growth.
Headline inflation is projected to remain soft in the near term reflecting the current low level of inflation and the benign food inflation outlook.
Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia voted to change the stance from neutral to accommodative.
On balance, the Committee envisages a trajectory taking headline CPI inflation towards a central tendency of 5 per cent by March 2017, with risks tilted to the upside _albeit lower than in the second and third bi-monthly monetary policy_ statements of June and August respectively (Chart 1).
The magnitude and intensity of the price shock this time around was substantially higher when compared to earlier years.
There have been downward revisions in inflation projections during the course of the year, reflecting mainly the unprecedented soft inflation recorded across food sub-groups.
Non-food credit growth in November 2020 accelerated and moved into positive territory on a financial year basis for the first time in 2020-21.
While this sector had exceeded its pre-pandemic level by 1.7 per cent in Q4:2021-22 in a quarter marred by Omicron, it slipped below its prepandemic level by 15.5 per cent in Q1:2022-23 which was a relatively normal quarter.
This rise has been broad-based, consistent with the durability of a growth pick-up over this period, and also confirmed by input price pressures and selling price increases - The inflation trajectory over the entire twelve-month period is projected, despite the soft print in February, to remain above the MPC target rate of 4 per cent, on a quarter by quarter basis.
When headline inflation faces price pressures from perishables like vegetables, the standard operating procedure of monetary policy is to look through the transitory impact of their first round effects and await mean reversion.
Moreover, the deceleration of activity coursing through the year has had underlying drivers that have been in operation since Q2.
performance in Q3 of 2018 19 was stable; capacity utilisation absolute or seasonally adjusted has remained robust and close to or above 75 for past two quarters; PMI manufacturing and services continue to remain in expansion mode at healthy levels; and consumer sentiment surveyed by the RBI has improved.
On balance, I remain concerned about (i) the elevated level of inflation excluding food and fuel; (ii) upward risks that could emanate from oil prices and fiscal implications of sustained food deflation; and, (iii) lack of adequate and sustained downward adjustment in household inflation expectations over the past 12 months.
As inflation approaches their target, advanced economy (AE) central banks (CBs) have announced rate cuts in 2024 as they recognize a further rise in real interest rates as inflation falls would be an over-correction and nuanced actions are required for a soft landing.
Sovereign bond yields firmed up across maturities and equity markets entered correction territory.
Merchandise exports and non-oil non-gold imports remained in contraction in August, although the pace of decline eased.
As a result, the projection for medium-term headline CPI inflation has become firmer on the upside; it has moved closer to 5% and away from 4%, the latter being the mandated target of the MPC.
Now for quite some time, they have been borrowing directly from the market and their fiscal performance has a direct bearing on their interest costs.
The calibrated tightening by 250 basis points between May 2022 to February 2023 has achieved disinflation with minimal output sacrifice as growth remains strong.
The official estimate of GDP growth for Q1 came conditions in Q2 and subsequent two quarters in FY 2023-24, with relatively higher optimism in the manufacturing sector as compared to services and infrastructure sectors.
Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of an increase in house rent allowance (HRA) of central government employees (as per October, while CPI excluding food and fuel adjusted for the impact of an increase in HRA increased from 5.3 per cent in September to 5.9 per cent in October.
Rising profits and profit margins, improving capacity utilization and lack of new capacity additions create ripe conditions for the oligopolistic core to start exercising pricing power.
The NSO has, however, not provided inflation rates for April and May.
We expect this growth momentum to continue next year also.
In a country with volatile inflation and thin news sources a lot of attention is paid to central bank communication.
Global monetary policy tightening to contain inflation pressures has increased the potential for significant global growth deceleration and volatility in financial markets.
While the impact of our actions so far continues to play out in the economy, our job is not yet fully over.
As we had observed in the December 2023 meeting, the transmission of increases in policy rates effected up to February 2023 is still incomplete.
It is well recognized in the literature and reiterated by the Economic Survey 2018-19 that investment is a primary driver for economic growth and employment creation.
The projected inflation rate for FY 2022-23 is at 6.7 per cent, the same as in the June MPC meeting.
Second-round effects on funding costs due to portfolio outflows from debt and equity markets could be substantial if the central bank is not perceived as staying course on credible inflation targeting.
Accelerating growth in non oil non bullion imports is reflecting domestic demand, including substitution effects, impatient with the sluggishness in the supply response.
Employment rate worsened in January 2022 to 37.2% and was the lowest since August 2021 and LFPR was the lowest in last seven months.
I will continue to watch the incoming growth-inflation data carefully, and remain data dependent.
Two thirds of the change in the CPI since the war is reflecting the materialising of geopolitical risk.
Crude oil and commodity prices (including for food) have firmed up globally, thereby potentially raising risks to the headline inflation.
In April, however, supply disruptions took a toll and reversed the softening of food inflation, which surged to 8.6 per cent from 7.8 per cent in March.
If a similarly unforeseeable inflation shock were to hit the economy, I find it hard to believe that the MPC will remain accommodative.
We need to do whatever is necessary and under our control to restrain broadening of price pressures, anchor inflation expectations and contain second round effects.
In the past, food deflation has had strong seasonal patterns which have tended to rebound and with vengeance when rainfall disappoints.
Therefore, I vote for status quo on the repo rate and policy stance.
A normal south-west monsoon along with comfortable buffer stocks should help to keep cereal price pressures in check.
Services continue to be in expansion zone for several months, capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector has gone up sequentially in the last four quarters (76.1% seasonally adjusted in Q3), adjusted non-food credit grew by 14.8% in March 2019 compared with 11.3% in the last fiscal year, and there has been a sharp uptick in consumer confidence (a 39.
For example, reduction in precautionary liquidity hoarding leads to faster payments and unclogs the frozen economy.
Second, by showing continued commitment to inflation target, monetary policy seeks focused may get carried away by certain information-fraction and tend to form expectations, impacting prices, consumption and investment.
Services GVA growth also remained unchanged in Q3; while growth in construction activity accelerated, there was some loss of momentum in public administration, defence and other services.
Thus, there is a clear space for the rate reduction of at least 25 bps even without considering the output gap.
The baseline projections in the MPC resolution place growth at (-)9.5 per Q1:2021-22.
Statistical Institute; Dr. Pami Dua, Director, Delhi School of Economics; Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, former Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Shri Bibhu Prasad Kanungo, Deputy 3.
12 Some debt channels have also drawn back portfolio investment interest such as the Fully Accessible Route (FAR) which d US$ 229 2 illi d h V l R i R (VRR) hi h US$ 48 illi of the world.
The sharp changes in the broader global economic environment that have now unfolded require a reconsideration of the economic outlook and the policy responses.
The Reserve Bank has conducted market liquidity operations consistent with the liquidity management framework put in place in April 2016, progressively moving the system level _ex ante liquidity conditions to close to neutrality.
Delaying timely monetary policy response by two weeks, waiting for the bi-monthly MPC meeting schedule, could be costly and irreversible.
We have waited for one year to watch the impact of these shocks, now it is time to move on.
Household expectations of income, spending and employment appear to have weakened, but may be anchored to the past few months and need to be tracked in the coming months.
Rebalancing of liquidity began early.
With both inflation and growth outcomes being well within the range of expectations of the MPC, and short term interest rates being within the corridor defined by the repo and reverse repo rate, there is nothing to be done and there is nothing to be said as of now.
Going forward, the spike in vegetable prices, led by tomatoes, would exert sizeable upside pressures on the near-term headline inflation trajectory.
High frequency indicators of the services sector passenger vehicle sales, domestic passenger air traffic, railway freight traffic and commercial growth remained muted.
In view of the reasonable reliability of the forecasts in terms of direction, inflation appears to have troughed and is projected to rise from September, exceeding the target from the fourth quarter of 2018-19 and the first quarter of 2019-20 in an environment suffused with upside risks.
The Committee around various risks to the outlook.
This could unsettle expectations and eventually get reflected in higher inflation.
Consumer confidence in the price situation has deteriorated.
Firms polled in the Reserve Bank surveys expect expansion in production volumes and new orders in Q2:2021-22, which is likely to sustain through Q4.
Once the transmission mechanism is restored to better health, monetary policy will more pervasively touch different parts of the economy.
In this context, the revised GDP growth projection for FY 2022-23 is now at 7.0 per cent compared to 7.2 per cent in August.
Housing inflation continued to edge down as the impact of the house rent allowance (HRA) increase for central government much of the impact of lower inflation in petrol, diesel and housing.
On the whole, inflation in March and April has behaved more or less on the lines of the path projected in the April resolution.
Input cost pressures are rising and the corporates are gradually regaining some pricing power.
The QOQ momentum in Q2 in the manufacturing and construction sectors, two drivers of GVA growth, was above their decadal average (2011-12 to 2019-20) for the quarter, pointing to the significant growth momentum in these sectors.
There are also multiple financing options for the CAD.
Inflation in the fuel and light group continued to rise on the back of a significant increase in liquefied petroleum gas prices, tracking international product prices.
The second bi-monthly statement projected quarterly average headline cent in the second half.
The baseline looks like the Fed will consciously entail a significant growth sacrifice and go ahead with aggressive rate hikes in the rest of the year in a bid to tame high inflation.
At the same time, the mandate of the MPC is to achieve the target of CPI inflation (combined) of 4 per cent with the upper tolerance limit of 6 per cent and the lower tolerance bound of 2 per cent.
Professional forecasters all expect inflation to soften in H2 of this fiscal year.
The monetary policy transmission to lending rates of banks has also improved, with a 91 basis points decline in the weighted average lending rate (WALR) on fresh rupee loans between March and June 2020.
Nonetheless, the currently abundant liquidity with banks is likely to persist into the early months of 2017-18.
In EMEs, bond yields edged lower on more accommodative guidance by systemic central banks.
Leading indicators services moved into the expansion zone again in March.
The second meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the amended Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held on December 6 and 7, 2016 at the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai.
The partial roll back of Central excise and State Value Added Taxes (VAT) on petrol and diesel in November have eased retail selling prices and will have second round effects over a period of time.
While the full effects of monetary policy actions on economic activity are yet to be seen, increasingly it is becoming evident that inflation is weakening domestic consumption and investment as well as confidence.
Increased capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector also augurs well for investment activity, especially because bank credit growth has continued to accelerate.
Given the uncertain inflation outlook, we have to remain watchful to see that the momentum in inflation does not get entrenched, which is also dependent on effective supply-side measures.
potential output has been pushed down, and it will take years to repair.
The MPC has to focus on the 6 month to one year ahead real rate, as this is the horizon where monetary policy will have its greatest impact.
On June 1, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) has forecast a normal southwest monsoon, with rainfall at 101 per cent of the long period average (LPA).
Bond yields in major AEs have hardened on expectations of monetary policy normalisation, with German bunds reaching an intra-year high.
Some clarity is also required with respect to the imputation of the April and May prints.
This is not unique to India and term spreads have been higher and have widened much more during current pandemic in many other emerging markets due to pro-cyclical nature of fiscal policies that leave little counter-cyclical space.
On the other hand, it is most likely to be more than off-set by the implementation of GST in its present form.
Indian headline CPI inflation, however, is expected to soften after Q4.
We have been prudent in our approach using the flexibility imbedded in the framework to operate within the tolerance band in balancing macroeconomic priorities depending upon the need of the hour.
Even if the horizon is extended to incorporate the projections for the first half of 2019-20, real GDP growth is still expected to be sub-7 per cent.
The meeting was attended by all the members - Dr. Chetan Ghate, Professor, Indian Statistical Institute; Dr. Pami Dua, Director, Delhi School of Economics; Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Dr.
Third, the focus of government spending, both by the Centre and the States, will also be on revenue expenditure than on capital expenditure.
Third, various proposals in the Union Budget should stimulate capital expenditure, rural demand, and social and physical infrastructure all of which would invigorate economic activity.
IIP for capital goods and infrastructure/ construction goods rose sharply in November 2022, on YOY basis, after a weak growth in October.
In the case of construction and Trade, Hotels, Transport, Communication and Broadcasting related services, which experienced a decline of close to 50% in Q1, the rate of decline in GDP in Q2 was less than 16%.
estimates of national income accounts for Q4 of 2016-17, provisional estimates for 2016-17 and revisions for the preceding five years.
With the inflation outlook looking benign and headline inflation expected to remain below target in the current year, it becomes necessary to address the challenges to sustained growth of the Indian economy.
Short term rates have risen to the reverse repo rate reducing risks, US Treasury bill rates are also moving up yet Indian long term rates, more important for demand, remain low and plentiful liquidity continues to sustain activity.
There is already some reversal of remissions given in the pandemic times.
GVA growth slowed down to 6.3 per cent in Q3 due to a deceleration in agriculture output from the record level achieved in the previous year.
Real-time activity indicators have been volatile over the last two quarters and do not yet paint a clear picture.
Even as past rate cuts are being gradually transmitted to the real economy, the benign inflation outlook provides headroom for policy action to close the negative output gap.
In the second half of 2021-22, monetary policy was complacent about inflation, and we are paying the price for that in terms of unacceptably high inflation in 2022-23.
Private consumption has remained robust and is likely to be sustained even as the recent rise in oil prices may have a bearing on disposable incomes.
Thus, the April reading has imparted considerable uncertainty to the evolving inflation trajectory, especially for the near months.
There can also be a bad t i 2009 10 h h ith ti l b ild f d ti i fl ti pressures and inflation expectations occurred on the back of surging food prices in the backdrop of a failed monsoon, and it spilled over into other components.
It is hard to believe that deflation of 15.9 per cent in the prices of pulses and 8.6 per cent in the prices of vegetables is the steady state that will define the medium-term food inflation path.
There are also large shocks from foreign flows, government cash balances and currency leakages.
Recent data on production of capital goods, imports of capital goods and flow of credit to industry indicate the weak state of investment demand.
If we consider more realistic estimates of the sacrifice ratio for India, the policy rate cut could be even higher.
The pace of vehicle loans in April-June 2024 has declined, compared to the previous year but remains in double digits.
After a modest increase in May, imports also contracted in June, impacted by falling prices of petroleum products and reduced imports of pearls and precious stones, transport equipment, machinery, metalliferous ores, chemicals and fertilisers.
Merchandise exports and non-oil nongold imports remained in contraction mode in April while services exports sustained a robust expansion.
Economists call this hysteresis.
Stabilising inflation expectations is progressing, as reflected in forward-looking surveys; anchoring them is crucial for achieving the inflation target.
Business sentiment is also upbeat, particularly among services sector firms.
Similarly, OECD projects world trade to grow by 2.3 per cent during 2024 as compared to 1.0 per cent in 2023.
That inflation exceeds the MPC target when demand has crashed much below potential output suggests lockdown related shocks have pushed up the supply curve.
The output performance of the various sectors in Q2: 2020-21, measured in terms of gross value added (GVA) in constant prices, indicates broad based recovery.
Moreover, the gap between the household perception and their expectations about inflation is narrowing over recent rounds.
Vegetable prices that have exhibited persistence at elevated levels due to weather-related disturbances should also correct starting December.
If we exclude the pure statistical effect of revisions in the house rent allowance by the 7th Pay Commission for the government employees, the range of the RBI forecasts of both the headline and CPI excluding food and fuel show the relevant inflation rate hovering around 3.9 to 4.3 per cent over the rest of the year.
6 The CPI diffusion index, a measure of dispersion of price changes, categorises items in the CPI basket according to whether their prices (seasonally adjusted) have risen, remained stagnant or fallen over the previous month and aggregates them to show whether the month-on-month (m-o-m) increase overall has been expansionary or contractionary.
Even so, they are a small and therefore a manageable share of Indian markets.
More importantly, the assumption of sustained low momentum in food prices leads to a consideration of the risk of agrarian distress.
Interest rates in the money markets have aligned with the policy repo rate, reflecting the stance of calibrated withdrawal of accommodation.
Should the inflation trajectory turn out as expected, some more policy space may open up, going forward.
Along with adequate buffer stock of foodgrains, these factors should help to keep cereal prices range bound.
Precipitation is uneven, however, and extreme weather has caused unprecedented spikes in key vegetable prices.
Even the turnaround in net exports is fragile and heavily dependent on the strength of the vaccinationpropelled revival in external demand, which may be partially offset by the terms of trade loss on account of the rise in international commodity prices, particularly crude oil.
On the other hand, there is increasing evidence of inflation becoming persistent in the upper region of the tolerance band, though it is projected to remain within the band.
States have now started forming a larger proportion of the public expenditures and having a clear idea on their fiscal deficits is important for the monetary policy.
This, however, does not mean that monetary policy should no longer support growth.
In the initial period when inflation targeting was introduced, causality was thought to be from headline to core inflation[2].
High frequency indicators of services sector activity for May-June indicate signs of a modest resumption of economic activity, especially in rural areas, although at levels lower than a year ago.
The reverse repo rate under the LAF remains unchanged at 3.35 per cent and the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate and the Bank Rate at 4.25 per cent.
Indeed, India has done better than expected and in comparison to many countries under the pandemic and Ukraine war shocks.
It is one of the tasks of monetary policy to ensure that this opportunity is not squandered by excessively high real interest rates.
The international commodity prices have remained low in 2023 relative to the peaks of 2022; however, the volatility has increased for some of the agricultural commodities and there is hardening in the case of energy in the recent period.
In the context of the latter, it is paradoxical that weak aspects of economic activity are shows that it is expected to accelerate in 2017-18!
Although registered an increase of 17.6 per cent and within Miscellaneous, CPI inflation for Household Goods & Services, Health, Transport & Communications, Recreation & Amusement sub-categories exceeded 6 per cent for the two-month period.
Available high frequency indicators suggest some weakening of demand in January 2022 reflecting the drag on contact-intensive services from the fast spread of urban demand indicators, consumer durables and passenger vehicle sales contracted in November-December on account of supply constraints while domestic air traffic weakened in January under the impact of Omicron.
As a result, there has been changes to the quarterly path of inflation projections with Q2 projections being revised upwards, even as full year CPI inflation projection has been retained at 4.5 per cent.
The First Advance Estimates of_ _Kharif point to_ substantial increase in output of crops like pulses, oilseeds and sugarcane that can have a salutary effect on food and processed food prices and leave enough margin of error for possible subsequent downward revisions in data.
The FAE for 2018-19 featured an acceleration in gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) and a slowdown in consumption expenditure (both private and government).
These risks can magnify if climate changes cause a repeat of weather disruptions as has often happened of late with unseasonal rains affecting some horticulture crops.
There is, however, uncertainty about the sustainability of this softening in inflation in fuel items.
A review of wide range of indicators of the recent economic activity point to a mixed outlook for growth.
Accordingly, I vote to increase the policy repo rate by 50 basis points to 5.4 per cent.
Commodity prices remain elevated, and consequently, inflationary pressures have accentuated in most advanced economies (AEs) and emerging market economies (EMEs), prompting monetary tightening by a few central banks in the former group and several in the latter.
The MPC has decided to remain accommodative as long as it is necessary to revive growth and mitigate the fallout of COVID-19.
Currency in circulation expanded steadily during this period.
This increase in growth has been underpinned by a significant upward revision in private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) due especially to improved rural demand on the back of a seven quarters.
In the financial sector, credit conditions remain strong even as the cost of funds tightens.
Net foreign direct investment doubled in April-May 2017 over its level a year ago, flowing mainly into manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade and business services.
Core inflation softened further since the last policy.
Sharp tightening of monetary policy in several major advanced economies has also adverse implications for capital flows, financial markets and exchange rate for 2022 in the major urban areas shows weaker optimism in the general economic conditions for one-year ahead, with overall household spending expected to increase 22.
Accordingly, I vote for status quo on rate and monetary policy stance in this policy.
It is important to break this recessionary loop, shore up the erosion in confidence, incentivise banks to invest and lend, and people to spend.
During April-July 2023 period, index of industrial production (IIP) data reflects strong YOY growth of cautious optimism.
Accordingly, this transient supply shock, however favourable it might be, has to be looked through while setting monetary policy so that the focus is on the real risks to food inflation looming over the horizon from (a) increases in minimum support prices announced in the union budget; and (b) the shortfall in wheat output and the implications for prices of cereals.
Wage pressures in the rural sector moderated; however, those in the organised sectors remained firm.
While the debt segment of the domestic capital market attracted foreign portfolio investment of US$ 14.4 billion, there were significant outflows in the equity segment in August-September on account of geo-political uncertainties and expected cent in the second half of 2017-18.
To some extent, government expenditure made up for weakness in private consumption and capital formation.
The Reserve Bank has also been proactively managing liquidity to ensure that funds flow to all productive sectors of the economy.
However, both global and domestic financial conditions have tightened, which may dampen investment activity.
Inflation remains highly vulnerable to food price spikes, as the spurt in momentum in daily data on key food items for the month of November and early December reveal.
For sub-sectors such as infrastructure (especially public transportation, railways etc.)
Trimmed mean measures of inflation remained elevated.
Much of this weakness seems to have continued into moved into expansion zone in March after three months of contraction.
Considering a range of factors influencing the inflation pattern in the short-term, the headline inflation is projected at 5.6% and 5.2% in Q3 and Q4: 2023-24, respectively, and 5.2% in Q1: 2024-25 followed by 4% in Q2 and 4.7% in Q3.
The war-induced price spikes in food, oil, gas, fertiliser and several key industrial inputs, together with continued supply chain bottlenecks, are posing major upside risks to inflation which has already scaled multidecadal highs in several countries.
Fourthly, the unusual spike in the prices of health and education needs to be closely watched.
Food inflation rose to 8.6 per cent in April from 7.8 per cent in March.
Even if one excludes the direct HRA impact, one has to be vigilant about the second order effects, especially on inflation expectations as States would also start implementing revision in salary and allowances.
However, recovery remains vulnerable to political uncertainty, which has dampened consumer confidence.
The consumer optimism is accompanied by caution as the survey indicates that the expectation of increase in overall spending - _i.e., the percentage of respondents_ expecting increased spending - is yet to reach levels of pre-pandemic period.
The calibration and timing of a monetary policy response and preventing build-up of financial stability risks are very important in such an uncertain environment.
CPI inflation excluding food and fuel also increased in December, partly due to housing inflation driven by the effects of house rent allowance for government employees under the 7[th] central pay commission.
With the inflation outlook remaining benign as lockdown-related supply disruptions are mended, the policy space to address growth concerns needs to be used now rather than later to support the economy, even while maintaining headroom to back up the revival of activity when it takes hold.
Private sector capex remains sluggish even though pre-conditions for its acceleration have been engendered by increasing capacity utilisation, deleveraging of balance sheets and improved profitability of corporates.
PMI for services registered a sharp uptick in November, driven by new business.
Therefore, excess outflows or a temporary balance of payments deficit requires some of these reserves to be used to moderate excess rupee volatility.
In April last year, I expressed a preference for a pre-emptive policy rate increase, sensing that inflation is rising out of the demonetisation trough.
In the past few reviews, I have flagged four such risks: (i) increases in minimum support prices (MSP), (ii) staggered implementation of the pay commission award by the States, (iii) slippages in the fiscal deficit in an election year, (iv) a sustaining of the price of oil at a high level.
Other developments on increase of USD 5 per barrel in crude oil prices, exchange rate appreciation, energy price revisions and monsoon expectations have all together led the RBI next 12 months.
Fuel inflation has eased due to a drop in international Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) prices.
As the supply side restrictions are lifted, revival of demand in terms of consumption, investment and exports is needed to sustain economic recovery.
Investment activity production of capital goods declined on a year-on-year (y-o-y) basis in November.
While strong domestic fundamentals and healthy level of foreign exchange reserves shall bode well for the external sector, the speed of domestic vaccination drive will be key in containing short-term risks to domestic economic recovery and mitigating spillovers from global shocks.
Gold prices have risen, underpinned by safe haven demand in response to geo-political uncertainty and volatility in equity markets.
These have been the positive developments as far as inflation scenario is concerned.
I would have preferred a smaller rise of 25bps, but 6.25% works well as a focal rate.
At the current juncture, however, the gains in output stabilisation are being threatened by the incidence of sporadic supply shocks which elevate the general level of prices instead of dissipating at the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC 9 f S ( ) through relative price adjustments within the budget constraint.
The discussion on terminal rate in monetary policy is clouded by the uncertainty on the strength and direction of growth and inflation impulses.
The thirty second meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held from December 6 to 8, 2021.
All other rates in the system firmed up in sympathy, with term premia getting restored gradually.
Growth is picking up.
The reality, however, is that in terms of the policy responses, the biggest economies in the world are pulling in opposite directions.
High inflation erodes purchasing power, especially for those least protected against the higher costs of essentials like food.
economy in Q4 of 2020 have persisted, although recent arrivals of high frequency indicators suggest that a gradual but uneven recovery may be forming.
The demand conditions are expected to improve steadily in the next two quarters of the current financial year.
Viral V. Acharya voted to keep the policy rate unchanged.
Accordingly, I vote for raising the policy repo rate by 50 bps.
But in this meeting, it is appropriate for the MPC to pause.
This resulted in a sharp upward revision of food inflation for the month of April and May.
Economic activity in India is evolving broadly in line with the baseline projection.
The twenty eighth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held from April 5 to 7, 2021.
The fight against inflation is complicated by the global outlook.
The negative deflator (around -2.5% for July-August) and base effects will also extend support to the real GVA growth in the manufacturing sector in Q2.
The future trajectory will be conditioned by a number of factors like lower area sown under pulses, dip in reservoir pressures but marginally lower growth in selling prices in Q3 compared to the previous quarter.
While the vaccinations are making progress in the Advanced Economies, there has been a rise in Covid infections in the winter months.
A variety of high frequency indicators look fairly weak which nowcast a loss in growth momentum.
While government borrowing to finance the fiscal deficit is at a high level, government spending to support investment and consumption are needed at this juncture.
While weak external demand is a drag on our merchandise exports, growth of remittances and exports of services is robust.
There is also evidence of the time varying trend of food inflation increasing, negating the gains made through core disinflation.
On balance, therefore, it is prudent to wait and watch how these factors play out and impinge upon the outlook.
Retail inflation, measured by the consumer price index, moderated for the second consecutive month in March 2020 to 5.8 per cent after peaking in January.
The momentum is expected to pick up in H2:2021-22 and there are upside risks and stickiness of core that warrant attention.
The domestic economy is experiencing strong momentum.
The dollar is weakening especially as other advanced economy central banks also raise rates.
The inflation trajectory going ahead would be shaped by both global and domestic factors.
Future course of action should depend on how the scenario on growth and inflation develops.
Although the YOY growth in Q2 is well below 13.5 per cent registered in Q1, it reflects a strong sequential momentum with QOQ growth at 3.6 per cent.
However, with capacity utilisation rate currently at 63 per cent in Q2:2020-21 and likely to be about 70 per cent by end of the year, capex funding need of private sector are currently limited and the monetaryfiscal coordination to support a larger public investment that can crowd-in private investment can work so long as it is followed by an unflinching commitment to strong fiscal consolidation thereafter.
Accordingly, GVA growth for 2017-18 is projected at 7.4 per cent, with risks evenly balanced (Chart 2).
stands 30 bps higher than its last forecast based on CPI data up to February 2018.
The Indian economy has been treading a trajectory that diverges from the global situation.
Railway freight and port traffic, and motor spirit sale show YOY growth rates of less than five per cent but E-way bills and toll collections continue to register double digit growth.
The latter is less affected by transient shocks and measurement issues.
Svensson had warned long ago that flexibility (P5) in inflation targeting (IT) is very important for its social acceptance.
Why then would higher real policy rates be required now to fight inflation that is lower?
Capacity utilisation by manufacturing firms increased significantly in Q4:2017-18 as revealed in the latest round of output of eight core industries accelerated in April on account of a sharp expansion in coal production, which reached a 42-month peak.
On the other hand, food inflation has remained muted over the past few months and the usual seasonal pickup delayed, softening the projections in the short run.
Headline inflation is expected to remain above or close to the upper threshold in Q3 and Q4:2022-23.
Fuel inflation was driven up by a rise in LPG and kerosene prices.
If at all some guidance is needed at this stage, it has to be a soft one; with the Reserve Bank preparing markets that while policy stance is likely to remain accommodative till growth is revived on a durable basis, liquidity levels will be adjusted dynamically to appropriate lower levels that are still consistent with accommodative stance.
The YOY growth of GDP in Q4:FY2021-22 is 4.1 per cent, 6.7 per cent over the previous quarter.
On the domestic front, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth surged to a nine quarter high of 8.2 per cent in Q1:2018-19, extending the sequential acceleration to four successive quarters.
Despite the large inflation spikes to vegetable and crude oil prices, there is favourable news on inflation.
First, after an initial extreme reaction, cross border flows discriminate on a country basis.
There is some consensus growing around a milder slowdown than earlier feared, although geographical disparities complicate the prognosis.
Concerns on elevated food inflation, however, is a major source of uncertainty for the inflation outlook.
The MPC reiterates its commitment to achieving the medium-term target for headline inflation of 4 per cent on a durable basis.
In IT services where share of wage cost is above 50% wage growth is reducing as export demand slows.
Apart from the unidirectional loss of speed in real GDP growth, monetary conditions are also reflecting the fragile state of demand.
The policy rates were left unchanged in October with Repo rate at 4 per cent and continuation of the accommodative monetary policy stance into the next year.
As the system turned into deficit again in the fourth week of January, the 17.
Taking all these factors into consideration, real GDP growth for 2023-24 is projected at 6.5 per cent with Q1 at 8.0 per cent; Q2 at 6.5 per cent; Q3 at 6.0 per cent; and Q4 at 5.7 per cent, with risks broadly balanced.
With the present growth momentum, GDP in 2021-22 is expected to exceed the level achieved in 2019-20.
Persistence of negative output gap imposes severe social costs on the economy that is largely borne by the poor and the unemployed.
Given the uncertain outlook, it may engender a situation where we may find ourselves striving to do a catch-up through stronger policy actions in the subsequent meetings to ward-off accentuated inflationary improvement in the inflation outlook.
Fourth, the statistical impact of an increase in HRA for central government employees under the 7[th] CPC will continue till mid-2018, and gradually dissipate thereafter.
Accordingly, (1) I vote to increase the policy repo rate by 35 basis points and also (2) I vote to remain focused on withdrawal of accommodation to ensure that inflation remains within the target going forward, while supporting growth.
High food inflation would therefore hit growth adversely as it affects consumption and require restrictive monetary policy to soften core inflation, especially when faced with significant spillovers of persistent food price pressures to core components.
Fourth, it is a no-brainer that the fiscal impulse needs to be factored in our monetary policy calculations.
That is not yet achieved; any faltering from this commitment could undermine the prospects of the Indian economy.
It worked well in the last few years also reducing core inflation to historic lows.
On the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic situation, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at its meeting today (February 10, 2022) decided to: - keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) unchanged at 4.0 per cent.
Markets have priced in a possible pivot, although communication shocks continue to create volatility.
of 50 per cent.
Brazil appears to be emerging out of recession, although growth dynamics remain fragile due to worsening labour market conditions and political turmoil.
The drag on aggregate demand from net exports also moderated in Q3 due to a marginal acceleration in exports and a sharp deceleration in imports led by a decline in crude oil prices.
The economy needs to be opened up smartly.
Second, if the general moderation of price increases in CPI excluding food and fuel continues, it will contain upside pressures on headline inflation.
Although there is substantial fiscal slippage by the Centre, the fiscal performance of major states needs to be watched.
Third, the CAD will rise, especially if negative real rates persist and impact domestic savings.
Meanwhile, economic activity has held up well and is expected to be resilient, supported by domestic demand.
The data shows that consumers have incurred financial liabilities and reduced net financial savings to support consumption.
The survey of enterprises indicates expectation of increased growth in output prices in Q2:2024-25 in the case of enterprises in the service and infrastructure sectors as input cost pressures also rise.
During Q1:2020-21, the economy faced its deepest contraction ever, which was also the worst amongst G20 countries.
Although the sequential month-on-month momentum has moderated in June in the case of food and fuel and declined in the core components, the inflation rate remains elevated.
However, it has still not started exercising any pressure on unemployment and wage scenario and thereby on inflation.
There are indeed factors that may change this scenario, particularly the impact of geopolitical tensions affecting international commodity prices and trade, and the impact of macroeconomic policies of the advanced economies.
Excluding vegetables, both food and headline inflation edged up during November-December 2022.
Input costs relating to both industry and farms remain benign tracking international prices.
Global inflationary trends have remained on the upside too.
The official GDP growth estimate for Q2: 2023-24, YOY basis, turned out to be surprisingly strong at 7.6%, following the growth of 7.8 per cent in Q1.
After several years of high inflation in the run-up to 2014, the March 2018 CPI headline inflation (ex-HRA) rate of 3.9% is a testimony to the successful conduct of monetary policy given its consistency with the 4 +/- 2 percent target recommended by the Urjit Patel Committee report in 2014 and enshrined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 in 2016.
While we had moved towards calibrated exit from extra-ordinary supportive measures to mitigate the impact of Covid-19 as the curve was flattening, we have already made considerable adjustments in exit dates for these measures.
The median YOY CPI inflation rate in 2024-25 estimated from the survey is 4.5 per cent, the same level as CPI excluding food, fuel and pan, tobacco and intoxicants is below 4 per cent.
- The MPC also decided to remain accommodative while focusing on withdrawal of accommodation to ensure that inflation remains within the target going forward, while supporting growth.
The MPC observed that CPI inflation has risen by around two percentage points since its last meeting.
In all the three major production sectors, YOY growth rates are the same or higher in the PE as compared to the SAE for 2023-24.
5 In trimmed mean measures, CPI items which are located in the tails of the inflation distribution for every month (indicating highly volatile inflation movements) are excluded.
Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Ashima Goyal, Dr. Mridul K. Saggar, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted to continue with this accommodative stance at least during the current financial year and into the next financial year, with Prof. Jayanth R. Varma voting against this formulation.
Economic growth has on the other hand proved resilient in the face of an adverse global environment.
There are fewer mitigating factors to rising inflation compared to two months ago.
The MPC notes that inflation is currently projected to remain within the target over a 12 month ahead horizon.
On the domestic front, the growth of real gross value added (GVA) accelerated sequentially in Q2 of 2017-18, after five consecutive quarters of deceleration.
Moreover, Indian structural reform has reduced the cost of doing business and this time Indian inflation is less than international.
Countercyclical taxes may not raise the fiscal deficit because of buoyancy of taxes under high nominal output growth.
Senior Advisor, National Council of Applied Economic Research, Delhi; Dr. Ashima Goyal, Emeritus Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai; Prof. Jayanth R. Varma, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Dr. chaired by Shri Shaktikanta Das, Governor.
High frequency indicators, after impressive sequential improvements during June-October 2021 lost momentum in November but bounced back in December.
Dr. Shashanka Bhide, Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 6.50 per cent.
There are more indications of the expected turnaround in private investment.
Exports for the survey of Order Books, Inventories and Capacity utilisation in companies conducted in January-March 2022, reveals increase in capacity utilisation rate in the manufacturing sector in Q3:2021-22, moving closer to its long-term average.
In such an environment, continued policy support remains necessary.
The increased dependence on fossil fuels can structurally lift energy inflation and its passthrough to general price level.
After that second order effects will take effect.
Households reacted to the recent hardening of food inflation adaptively and raised their inflation expectations survey of households.
Higher investment and income would reinforce higher savings as we have seen in Q4:2022-23 when the net household financial savings normalised to its long-term average of 7.0 per cent from a low range of 4.0 to 4.6 per cent in the first three quarters of 2022-23.
The monsoon is likely to be normal and may help to sustain the low food inflation trajectory.
Indicators of fixed investment have tanked: finished steel consumption has declined by -90.9%, and IIP Capital goods (which proxy for machinery and equipment) have also fallen by -35.6%.
vi) Thus, there is enough policy space to cut the policy repo rate to correct the high real interest rate in the economy.
Dr. Pami Dua, Dr. Ravindra H. Dholakia, Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra and Shri Shaktikanta Das voted in favour of the decision to reduce the policy repo rate by 25 basis points.
More recently, the appetite for risk has returned in AEs, buoying equity markets and hardening bond yields as a response to the growing likelihood of further increases in the Federal Funds rate during the year.
Increasingly, financial markets have shown resilience to geo-political events and have swiftly priced them in.
The realisation of the projected growth will translate to only a meagre average growth rate of 0.85 per cent in two years following 2019-20.
This makes inflation management challenging.
It is the depreciation in NEER that affects headline inflation.
We must, therefore, remain unwavering in our commitment to bring down inflation to ensure a decisive and durable moderation in inflation towards the target of 4 per cent over the medium term, while being mindful of growth.
The economic impact of the rise in Omicron variant of the coronavirus appeared limited.
In this scenario, the important point to note is that the terminal rate is time varying and has to be discovered based on incoming data and evolving situation.
For all practical purposes the reverse repo rate is now the effective policy rate.
This implies that the overall savings of households is expected to hold steady with compositional shift in favour of physical savings.
The baseline inflation path faces several uncertainties, viz., (i) the outlook for oil prices; (ii) continuing volatility in global financial markets; (iii) the risk even as the pass-through to output prices has remained muted so far; (iv) the impact of the likely revision in the MSP formula; and (v) second round impact on inflation on account of the staggered impact of HRA revisions by various state governments, though the direct statistical impact of HRA revisions will be looked through.
Overall, the economy presently reflects the impact of strong drivers for growth despite the unfavourable conditions in some respects.
Note that this is the case even after excluding the HRA impact.
Indian growth has outperformed expectations once again, suggesting it has strong roots.
However, this should not lull us into assuming a goldilocks scenario.
The Committee is of the view that the persistence of inflation excluding food and fuel could set a floor on further downward movements in headline inflation and trigger secondorder effects.
Turning to Q3, the Committee felt that the assessment is clouded by the still unfolding effects of the withdrawal of specified bank notes (SBNs).
So, I vote for keeping repo rate unchanged and continuing the accommodative stance.
Inflation excluding food and fuel has turned down in three readings now, but it is still not generalized and projections still run ahead of headline inflation in the rest of 2017-18.
Inflation in major countries has eased in recent prints but remains significantly above their respective targets.
Among advanced economies (AEs), output in the US and the Euro area underwent a deeper contraction in Q2:2020 than in the preceding quarter.
In India, however, market expectations at present seem to be closely mile of disinflation process when beliefs are consistent with the policy regime contributing towards anchoring of long-term expectations.
This requires further significant decline in inflation expectations, especially since the services component of inflation that is sensitive to wage movements has been sticky.
Low for long interest rates will certainly bring in macroeconomic imbalances and it is expedient that policy rate should be raised as soon as growth is judged to recover on a durable basis or inflation is seen to be turning endemic.
_Fourth, since the last review, a variety of high frequency indicators have_ declined sharply.
As the resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets out, an exceptional configuration of factors is obscuring a clear assessment of the outlook.
We do not need such a high real policy rate.
Importantly, non-food non-fuel inflation has remained sticky, notwithstanding the transitory impact of demonetisation on consumption demand.
The GDP growth rate for FY 2023-24 is projected at 7.1 per cent for Q1 and 5.9 per cent for Q2.
With persistently high food inflation, it would be in order to continue with the disinflationary policy stance that we have adopted.
The forty fourth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under Section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held during August 8 to 10, 2023.
A low positive repo is also called for since it balances (P6) these differing interests.
I vote for status quo on the policy rate at this juncture and to maintain the accommodative mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
I also vote for the present stance to continue since at present liquidity is in surplus and policy needs to signal continuing watchfulness towards bringing inflation to the target.
Various indicators of service sector activity, however, present a mixed picture.
For all sectors together, GVA in Q2 increased by 19.4% over Q1.
The latest assessment by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) for Q4 indicates a loss of momentum in global trade due to declining export orders.
Thus, while high inflation continues to be the major concern, revival of economic activity remains steady and is gaining traction.
Headline inflation excluding food and fuel has moderated somewhat due to a fall in crude oil past three prints, with inflation in health and education components showing a spike in December due to unexpected rise in prices of medicines and private tuition costs.
The Second Advance Estimates by the National Statistical Office place the GDP at constant prices lower by 8 per cent in 2020-21 over the previous year, slightly steeper decline than decline of 7.7 per cent as per the First Advance Estimates.
Moreover, India is subject to large negative liquidity shocks from rise in currency holding, government cash balances and foreign capital outflows[1].
Merchandise exports clocked double-digit growth for the fifteenth successive month in May 2022, despite heightened global uncertainty.
It is supported by rising sales growth, an uptick in seasonally adjusted capacity utilization, drawdown of finished goods inventories and upbeat business confidence even as the regaining of pricing power is helping to shore up profit margins.
This is precipitating diverse monetary policy actions which are accentuating the fissures in the global economy.
In each of the last four months, WPI prices have increased for larger number of commodities than ever in any of the months since October 2013.
Between mid-June to end-July 2017 tomato prices increased to touch Rs.
Mark-ups tend to be countercyclical, falling as capacity utilization rises and fixed costs are spread.
In my opinion, the neutral policy stance needs to be seriously reconsidered in favour of the accommodative stance given the above arguments.
The uneven feature of growth points to vulnerabilities.
2 [The implicit GDP growth projection in the 6th bi-monthly monetary policy statement was 7.4 per cent for 2018-19](https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=43078) 26.
Fuel price deflation is likely to deepen in the near term following the recent cut in LPG prices.
GDP growth projection for 2019-20 has been successively revised down from 7.4 per cent (in February 2019) to 7.2 per cent (in April 2019), 7.0 per cent (in June 2019) and to 6.9 per cent in the 3rd bi-monthly policy of August 2019.
Hence, I vote for keeping the policy repo rate unchanged and retaining the stance of monetary policy as basis in the coming months, there is possibility of space opening up for policy action in due course.
The global economy now is on a more difficult tangent of slowing growth momentum with entrenching inflationary tendencies.
Surplus durable liquidity can help to absorb and counter these, especially as the US Fed exits accommodation.
A monetary policy reaction in the inflation target over a medium term horizon but the persuasive pull of the transient weakening of growth in the interregnum potentially undermines this commitment.
On the domestic front, the real gross value added (GVA) growth as per the first advance estimates (FAE) released by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) is estimated to decelerate to 6.1 per cent in 2017-18 from 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 due mainly to slowdown in agriculture and allied activities, mining and quarrying, manufacturing, and public administration and defence (PADO) services.
Five members were in favour of the monetary policy decision, while Dr. 26.
While fuel inflation surged, core (CPI excluding food and fuel) inflation moderated in April across most sub-groups barring housing and health, mainly due to base effects.
Further, the strength in leading indexes of U.S. economic growth signal higher economic growth.
An increasing number of high frequency indicators are moving into positive territory, construction is boosted by policy initiatives, and public administration, defence and other services will be supported by the pay commission award.
This was the period of highest fear and uncertainty that very likely affected consumer responses.
Vegetable prices, a major source of inflation volatility, have remained contained in the year so far and are likely to remain soft, assuming no disruption due to unseasonal rains.
In June, I warned against declaring victory based on the inflation prints of just a couple of months, and expressed discomfort with the self-congratulatory tone of the MPC statement of that month about inflation having come inside the tolerance band.
Commodity prices, especially crude, have been volatile and so has the exchange rate.
Bond yields in major AEs have been largely range-bound.
marked by an increase in selling prices.
A significant portion of this liquidity has been parked back at central bank window.
The significant increase is over a decline of 10.4 per cent in the previous year highlighting again the need for sustaining this momentum.
As the transitory impact of demonetisation recedes and remonetisation sets in, the environment, the real neutral rate of interest in India seems to be higher than the one for most of the developed countries.
Average Indian inflation is lower and trending down.
With marked increase in area sown under foodgrains, alongside the buffer of food stock at double the norms, prices should soften.
Though the pipeline investment from last year is weak, there is anecdotal evidence of new projects that are or can soon get into financial closures.
International crude oil prices keep surging as Iran sanctions approach, creating a difficult choice between pass-through to the pump prices and fiscal or quasi-fiscal absorption through excise cuts.
Available forward industrial outlook survey and the consumer confidence survey do not suggest much risk of immediate demand pressures.
However, lack of contestability and collusive behaviours have been seen in the past and the price rises can follow to protect margins.
While the real repo rate is a useful guide to actions, and has theoretical clarity, it is difficult to estimate the neutral rate precisely.
[5 ] Third, investment activity is picking up as witnessed from improving capacity utilisation, pick up in investment intentions, and continued buoyancy in steel consumption and capital goods imports.
International crude oil prices remain volatile and elevated, with considerable uncertainties surrounding global supplies.
Fourth, services sector is particularly vulnerable.
Assuming a normal monsoon next year, CPI inflation for 2024-25 is projected at 4.5 per cent with Q1 at 5.0 per cent; Q2 at 4.0 per cent; Q3 at 4.6 per cent; and Q4 at 4.7 per cent (Chart 2).
The distribution of given the close connection between sovereign yields and funding conditions in the economy.
Excluding food and fuel, CPI inflation moderated for the third month in succession in June, falling to 4 per cent as price momentum moderated inter alia in respect of education due to delay in fee revision cycles, and also in respect of health, clothing and footwear.
The outlook is grim; even when it improves, the expectation is one of slow, hesitant recovery, with the situation likely to worsen before it gets better.
EME currencies largely remained stable and have traded with an appreciating bias.
Amidst all these, the Indian economy presents a picture of resilience with macroeconomic and financial stability.
These developments certainly have two major takeaways for central bankers.
Meanwhile, the deceleration in external demand on account of trade and geopolitical tensions has muted exports and sunk imports into contraction.
If States choose to implement salary and allowance increases similar to the Centre in the current financial year, headline inflation could rise by an additional estimated 100 basis points above the baseline building up in vegetables and animal proteins in the near months.
Crude outlook is fast changing with the changing perceptions on demand supply in line with the geopolitics and developments in the middle east, which is on the edge.
We cannot let down our guards against inflation at this juncture, when supply shocks are proving to be so persistent.
iv) The household survey rounds for inflationary expectations carried out in May and July 2020 provide very interesting results.
But in EMs communication has more impact.
Moreover, though the Indian economy has been highly resilient to geopolitical and commodity price shocks so far, the weakening of exports in July indicates that India would not be immune to growth shocks emanating from the rest of the world.
Headline CPI, therefore, is widely predicted to remain within the 30.
The sustained economic recovery leading to a projected positive year- on- year GDP growth in Q3 and Q4 reflects the rising momentum of economic activities built up by the relaxation of restrictions on movement of goods and commerce as the Covid cases have reduced.
Merchandise exports and imports including non-oil non-gold imports have registered negative YOY growth rates in the recent months.
This should also be supported by the fall in international crude oil prices observed towards end-November, albeit to the extent that it is passed on to the retail pump prices.
Going forward, upside risks include expectations of high international prices of crude Rent Allowance and likely fiscal slippages may also continue to push inflation up.
sharply in Q4FY23, input costs have fallen, wage pressures are not there, and since demand is slack they are unlikely to raise prices.
The IMF update also notes that the risks to the projections are on the downside, with lower growth and higher inflation, but more moderate than its October 2022 assessment.
The overall situation needs to be monitored carefully, both in the sides of growth and inflation.
Tightening global financial conditions and recessionary fears in advanced economies are acting as drags on the domestic economy as well.
While there are positive drivers such as FDI, the uncertainty surrounding the relief from the pandemic and global growth scenario are the other factors affecting caution in investment decisions.
Then durable liquidity must be adjusted.
There is thus room for a policy repo rate cut by 25 basis points.
The government have helped in reducing the potential impact of price impulses from external markets.
Headline inflation, measured by CPI inflation, rose to 3.2% in June 2019 from 3% in May.
The latest agreement within the Organisation of Petroleum Countries (OPEC) plus to raise oil production for a likely restoration of output to the prepandemic levels by September 2022 imparted transient softening to spot and future crude prices from the recent peak in early July.
(v) Implementation of the revisions in HRA for employees of different states and related organizations (like universities, research institutes, municipal bodies, etc.)
Global crude oil prices have been highly volatile of late and can move in either direction from here.
Discretionary consumer demand, which got impacted in the immediate aftermath of demonetisation, is expected to bounce back.
The second wave amplified the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on contact-intensive activities and the informal sector.
Turning to the stance, I find that with every successive meeting, this stance is becoming more and more disconnected from reality.
On the domestic inflation front, headline CPI inflation fell from 6.6 per cent in February 2020 to 5.8 per cent in March.
The recovery in domestic economic activity is turning increasingly broad-based, with the expanding vaccination coverage, slump in fresh COVID-19 cases and rapid normalisation of mobility.
In my opinion, these indicators are foretelling a revival of business and consumer confidence.
Quick implementation of various reform measures can also inject growth impulses into the Indian economy in the medium to long term.
Non-food credit growth September and November 2022 point to a gradual improvement in sentiments relating to overall economic conditions, employment and income.
A good example of forward-looking time-consistent monetary policy is the monetary in October 2016, the MPC took monetary policy action that was consistent.
The fourteenth meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), constituted under section 45ZB of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, was held 2.
Notwithstanding these developments, inflation is well below target in most AEs and is subdued across most EMEs.
Domestic economic activity is starting to recover with the ebbing of the second wave.
Central banks worldwide are taking such actions.
In the agricultural sector, a pick-up in rabi sowing (6.4 per cent higher than a year ago on December 2) is supported by the good progress of the north-east monsoon and above average reservoir levels.
Moreover, the which allowed the play of base effects.
Our approach can be a good template for the future.
Since the August meeting, the risks to inflation have increased, but only slightly.
It is uncertain if domestic demand will sustain after the festival spike.
After the MPC meeting of April 2017, the two monthly readings of the CPI combined inflation turned out to be more consistent with my forecast stated in the Minutes of the previous meeting than of the RBI forecast.
The rate declined in December 2020 to 4.6 per cent.
ii) On the other hand, the RBI surveys show that consumer confidence on income, employment and overall economic environment is very low and declining in recent times.
With this, inflation expectations have declined cumulatively by as much as 160 basis points for the three-month ahead and 170 basis points for one-year ahead horizons in the last four survey rounds.
The world is changing in many important ways.
Fiscal space is more or less exhausted but the space for the monetary boost has fortunately been available now for a relatively long period.
The outlook for aggregate demand is progressively improving but the slack is large: output is still below pre-COVID level and the recovery is uneven and critically dependent upon policy support.
registered price rise of below 6%.
Taking into account these factors, and assuming a favourable monsoon rainfall, the average headline inflation rate for 2024-25 is projected at 4.5 per cent, the same as in the MPC meeting of June.
In M. Greenberger (Ed.
Since the adoption of flexible inflation targeting in India (de facto in 2014 and de jure accomplishment.
The high flux in elevated international crude prices remains a risk to inflation and to the terms of trade.
However, agricultural prices must become more resistant to possibly more frequent weather shocks.
The global outlook becomes increasingly uncertain and tilted by downside risks.
Capital flows to emerging market economies (EMEs) remain volatile and global spillovers pose risks to growth prospects.
Growth in money supply (M3), however, was contained at June as government spending slowed.
There has been significant improvement in the progress of the monsoon and _kharif sowing in July; however, the_ impact of the uneven rainfall distribution warrants careful monitoring.
The Japanese economy is gradually recovering and an accommodative monetary policy stance is expected to buttress domestic spending.
Food inflation is the main factor behind the grudgingly slow pace of disinflation.
The combination of OPEC supply cuts and strengthening global demand appear to be keeping international oil prices at a relatively high level, and the volatility of prices around the high level has been relatively low in the past three to six months.
especially as the US fiscal deficit continues to rise.
Manufacturing, services and infrastructure firms prices to harden.
The adverse risks on the price front are also emerging from the supply side considerations.
The impact on fertiliser and other input supplies add to the cost of supply across the agricultural sector.
Continued policy support with a focus on revival and sustenance of growth is indeed the most desirable and judicious policy option at this moment.
IGIDR Working This could change as the recovery gathers steam, and the MPC must be sensitive to the risk that inflation expectations could become entrenched if inflation remains elevated for too long.
Therefore, liquidity needs to be kept in sufficient surplus to absorb these shocks even as the excess is reduced allowing the reverse repo to rise gradually and arrangements for non-banks remain in place.
Manufacturing firms participating in the industrial outlook survey expect output prices to ease in Q2.
The rise in projected inflation rate above the 4.5 per cent mark in H2 of the financial year reflects the underlying price pressures, which if not addressed would not meet the policy goal.
Industrial GVA growth remained unchanged in Q3, with manufacturing GVA growth slowing somewhat.
Real GDP in 2023-24 is expected to grow at 7.3 per cent on top of a growth of 7.2 per cent recorded in 2022-23.
Keeping in view these factors, the projection of real GVA growth for 2017-18 has been retained at the June 2017 projection of 7.3 per cent, with risks evenly balanced (Chart 2).
GVA growth in 2018-19 is forecast at 7.2 per cent, which will be a significant improvement over the current year.
Most indicators of the output gap suggest that it is closing.
Let me now cover the growth and inflation assessment and the trade offs involved.
Several high frequency indicators for May-June also suggest weakening of services sector activity.
Global financial instability on account of monetary policy normalisation in advanced economies also implies risks to inflation.
The outlook for growth in the current year, therefore, has both the positive features that may help maintain the momentum of 2023-24 and downside risks associated with both domestic and external factors.
However, the passthrough to output prices remains muted presently.
Economic activity in Russia recovered further, supported by strengthening global demand, firming up of oil prices and accommodative monetary policy.
The scenario, however, has been reshaped by the Russia-Ukraine war, the economic fallout of which has affected the overall global growth and price conditions sharply.
Cargo carried by sea, rail and air also registered higher growth in November, but showed mixed performance in December.
Inflation is gradually trending down, but the pace is slow and uneven.
These developments should work towards keeping the current account deficit within sustainable limits.
Services imports declined YOY basis in July and August with exports growing at a modest 8.4 per cent in August.
Second, inflation excluding food and fuel has been unrelenting.
On the other hand, core inflation remained elevated.
Considering the above, I vote for leaving policy rate unchanged and for staying accommodative, while focusing on withdrawal of accommodation as indicated in the resolution.
Successive meetings that promise to withdraw accommodation while actually keeping rates unchanged do not enhance the credibility of the MPC.
The expectations of a red piping-hot recovery have been belied.
The service exports and imports also rose in April-June this year YOY basis, although there was a decline in exports and imports in June over May.
Even for June, the sample was not satisfactory to prepare the estimates for different states.
Business expectations of headline inflation as well as input costs are showing similar trends, rising steadily in RBI's and other surveys.
It is in this context that the MPC has decided to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and to continue with an accommodative stance as long as necessary to revive and sustain growth on a durable basis and continue to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Liquidity in the system may also be seen in totality taking into account all moving variables including excess CRR and SLR holdings of banks, and revenue and expenditure pattern of the government.
As the central banks navigate the last mile of disinflation, financial markets are responding to changing perceptions on the timing and pace of monetary policy trajectories.
World trade volume growth is expected to have been robust in Q1, as gauged from the data on container trade throughput, air freight and export orders.
Given the likely short-term nature of the vegetable price shocks, monetary policy can look through the first-round impact of fleeting shocks on headline inflation.
All the upside risks to inflation cited in previous resolutions are materialising.
As expected, this has happened.
Excess capacity and unemployment continues to be high.
This should be a crisis that is not wasted.
These indicators represent a wide range of sectors that are maintaining their pace, which we had noticed in the previous round of MPC deliberations as well.
India is being lashed by global spillovers.
In the revised inflation trajectory for the first half of 2017-18, the near term inflation outlook is admittedly benign.
On the domestic front, the growth of real gross value added (GVA) in Q2 of 2016-17 turned out to be lower than projected on account of a deeper than expected slowdown in industrial activity.
Activity in cash-intensive retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transportation and unorganised segments has largely been restored.
Honorary Senior Advisor, National Council of Applied Economic Research, Delhi; Dr. Ashima Goyal, Emeritus Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai; Prof. Jayanth R. Varma, Professor, Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; Dr. Rajiv Ranjan, Executive Director (the officer of the Reserve Bank nominated by the Central Board under Section 45ZB(2)(c) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934); Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Deputy Governor in 3.
In the case of services also, PMI rose from April to June but fell in July.
The contribution of supply shocks from food and fuel prices account for 71 per cent of inflation deviations in the first half of 2020-21, followed by 28 per cent from unanchored inflation expectations (deviations of trend inflation from target).
The slower output growth is also production of passenger cars and the travel restrictions affecting the aviation sector and the related businesses.
India is being impacted by the global inflation crisis as recent outcomes have shown.
In my view, a phased normalization of the corridor would increase the ability of the MPC to keep the repo rate at 4% for a longer period, and this should in my view be a greater priority for the MPC than maintaining an ultralow reverse repo rate for some more time.
The large divergence between gross value added (GVA) and GDP growth is expected to narrow down substantially in the current fiscal as central government subsidies are budgeted to contract moderately compared to a large contraction seen in the previous year.
Inflation targeting anchors inflation if policy rates rise one for one with expected inflation, so the expected real rate is positive and close to the equilibrium rate.
Looking ahead, agricultural production and rural demand are expected to remain resilient.
Moreover, high new investment.
Research shows commodity price shocks and credible RBI guidance to be major determinants of inflation expectations.
Household inflation expectations have become much less volatile in the post-pandemic period, falling slowly along with inflation itself.
Domestic demand conditions are expected to benefit from the sustained buoyancy thrust on capex, and healthy balance sheets of banks and corporates.
The infection containment efforts this time around were localised and calibrated, which allowed manufacturing and industrial activity to operate in varying degrees across states during this period.
Aggregate demand conditions are facing similar conflicted pulls.
Monetary policy clearly can do little about the first-round effect of a supply side shock emanating from say vegetables.
At 7.3 per cent, it is also higher than any of the previous four quarters of 2021-22.
As economic activity further normalises and supplies are restored, cost push price pressures faced by firms are likely to dissipate.
Real rates remain positive for firms with respect to WPI inflation but are negative for households with respect to CPI inflation.
Further, core inflation has also likely bottomed out in June, primarily as the impact of the mobile-tariff revision is likely to get reflected in CPI core inflation numbers in July.
The lower _rabi sowing reflects a deficient north-east monsoon (44 per cent_ 2019) was marginally higher than in the previous year.
The above assessment gives me the comfort to vote in favour of a cut in the repo rate by 25 basis points.
These survey of May 2021.
This, in turn, may act in narrower with falling external demand acting to dampen price pressures that have turned elevated from the supply-side.
On inflation, food inflation may ease with the usual winter softening, but core inflation will keep us awake, especially with the likely cost push from recent upward revisions of telecom tariffs and GST rates on clothing and footwear, the safe haven upswing in gold prices and the increasing likelihood of selling price revisions in respect of consumer durables, lags and semi-conductor shortages cannot last indefinitely and should certainly improve in the second half of 2022, as predicted by the IMF.
The highest priority now is to revive growth along a sustainable trajectory that becomes compatible with the inflation target as the pandemic recedes.
The sharp decline in Q2: 2024-25 corresponds to the period when inflation rate was a high 6.4 per cent in 2023-24.
Indeed, growth in the Indian Leading Export Index, a predictor of the direction of exports growth maintained by the Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI), New York, remains in the doldrums, indicating an unfavourable Indian export growth outlook.
We are also in an advantageous position in terms of contribution to potential output through labour and total factor productivity (TFP) channels.
Economic activity remained robust in emerging market economies (EMEs) in Q1:2018.
Oil prices have continued fluctuating within the range I had mentioned in my earlier statements.
Although equity markets have made gains in EMEs in general, they faced risk aversion in some economies.
The minutes of the 28.
In July, the PMI declined into the contraction zone with a decrease in new orders and a deterioration in business conditions, reflecting _inter alia the roll out of the GST; however, both new export_ orders and the future output index rose, reflecting optimism in the outlook.
While a favourable south-west monsoon and lower inflation rate may support higher personal consumption growth, sustained momentum of GFCF and export growth would also be crucial for the high growth in 2024-25. economic growth at 3.2 per cent, projected previously in April.
The liquidity position is expected to return to the normal level consistent with the neutral stance soon.
[4] With less budgeted market borrowings and bond inclusion driven flows expected in 2024, the fisc has vacated space for the private sector on the one hand, while on the other hand taken steps to crowd in private investment through its continued focus on capex and other long term sustainable growth initiatives in areas like solar energy, health, innovation and renewables.
Furthermore, low interest rates create space for and liquidity accommodation.
are however sensitive to the assumed momentum on food inflation.
Traditional measures of the output gap suggest some opening up, i.e., realised output below the potential output; however, my preferred measure, the finance-neutral output gap, remains positive, i.e., realised output is slightly above the potential output, as it captures the healthy aggregate credit growth and stable stock market performance.
In the external sector, merchandise exports contracted in the first two months of Q2.
Inflation in many key EMEs has risen on surging crude prices and currency depreciations, caused by a firm dollar and domestic factors.
With medical solutions yet to be found, it is difficult to anticipate the output loss that might occur from further waves of infections even as path to normalisation has begun.
Friend shoring has begun[10].
It is therefore best to pause and wait and watch while maintaining a vigil on inflation.
Protein based food items could also emerge as a pressure point, given the tight demand-supply balance in the case of pulses.
Domestic economic activity is holding up well, supported by domestic demand in spite of the drag from weak external demand.
Considering these additional developments, I strongly plead for at least a 25 basis points (bps) cut in the policy rate.
Recent data arrivals point to a pick-up in seasonally adjusted momentum of real GDP growth into positive territory in the second quarter of 2022-23.
On the downside, international crude prices have been easing recently and their pass-through to domestic prices of petroleum products should alleviate pressure on headline inflation.
Economic crosscurrents however make it difficult to diagnose precisely the underlying damage because of the virus over the next year.
In the case of private investment, that includes corporate and household sector investment, the favourable policy incentives emerging new opportunities in the economy and spending.
Acceleration in the vaccination program and availability of health care would be a key to boost the confidence of the consumers, workers and producers in the resumption of their economic lives.
We need to undertake forward-looking assessment of the evolving inflation-growth outlook and stand ready to act, if situation so warrants.
The weighted average lending rates on fresh rupee loans of commercial banks declined by 43 bps in March 2020 alone.
However, if the seasonal pick-up does manifest in the first half at some point, then the headline prints will have little abatement from any of its constituents.
Inflation in rural fuel items such as firewood and chips and dung cake also moderated.
If that turns out to be the case, why not stay on hold now, watch the shape and slope of the upturn and if it is benign, deliver credible monetary policy that supports the economy?
Spreads widened for 10-year G-secs, although rates fell to their lowest in many years.
Domestic economic activity is maintaining resilience.
As in the case of aggregate GDP, PFCE and GFCF are below their pre-pandemic levels in Q1: 2019-20.
On the other hand, there is considerable uncertainty about demand conditions.
These decisions are in consonance with the objective of achieving the mediumterm target for consumer price index (CPI) inflation of 4 per cent within a band of +/2 per cent, while supporting growth.
Indian oil majors turned profitable in the summer last year and are showing large profits.
Also, the global manufacturing Purchasing a deepening cyclical downswing, suggesting that Indian export growth will remain in a 41.
This is intuitive because consumer durable and housing loan demand is interest elastic and induces demand for working capital and investment funds.
The result is supply bottlenecks in goods producing sectors and spare capacities in services.
Core inflation remained elevated.
Vegetables and edible oils are contributing to the sequential momentum and going forward, prospects of Kharif output would affect the price pattern.
Inflation rose back to 5.0 per cent in February after receding close to target at 4.1 per cent in January 2021.
For instance, the lower growth numbers for Q4 FY17 not being in line with several high frequency indictors for this period is puzzling.
After a spike, daily new infections are now back at the levels that prevailed at the time of the last MPC meeting.
Reflecting incomplete pass-through to domestic petroleum product prices, inflation in transport and communication remained muted in December.
RBI consumer headline inflation estimate for the year is raised to 5.7 per cent, which implies the real rate has fallen further and is now too negative.
To speak to these questions, the baseline projection of growth is subject to downside per cent in the second half of 2018-19, not 7 per cent.
Indicators such as railway freight, motor spirits consumption show improvement YOY basis and remain above 2019-20 levels or catching up with them.
On the other hand, consumer confidence turned more demand is expected to remain anaemic under the weight of the global recession and contraction in global trade.
The weak external demand conditions have also meant favourable input prices in the international markets.
Overall, out of the 59 high frequency indicators that have become available for October out of 67 that I track, 88 per cent of the indicators exhibited month-on-month improvement after a somewhat weak August and September.
The Committee believes that the environment for timely transmission of policy rates the banking sector is hastened; and, (iii) the formula for adjustments in the interest rates on small savings schemes to changes in yields on government securities of corresponding maturity is fully implemented.
Policy making in the real world cannot be based on an abstract, theoretical and model specific construct which is unobservable and time varying.
On the growth front, with GDP growth at 7.8 per cent for Q1:2023-24 and our nowcast of around 6.5 per cent for Q2, it seems to be tracking our projection of 6.5 per cent for the full financial year.
Oil prices have declined by more than 30 percent since its peak in early October mainly reflecting increases and prospective increases in global supply.
The likelihood of lower interest rates has spurred rallies in equity markets, although uncertainty about the timing of interest rate reduction is reflected in bidirectional movements in the US dollar and sovereign bond yields.
The climate change activism that is partly responsible for current spikes will also reduce oil demand in the future.
Forward-looking actions are aiming to be state-contingent, carefully calibrated to the evolving situation and to incoming data.
The supply side measures taken by the government would help to alleviate some cost-push pressures.
Households are telling us that their inflation outlook has moved palpably upwards.
We can continue to support growth for now as the flexible inflation targeting framework allows temporary deviation from the target so long as inflation is expected to be within tolerance bands.
The governments will be required to maintain their spending levels to meet the extraordinary demands to support livelihoods and lives in the present conditions.
However, given the buoyancy in oil, and the risks of imported inflation from movements in the exchange rate, both variables need to be carefully watched.
Food inflation dropped from 4.5% in July to 1.8% in October 2021.
The prevailing macroeconomic conditions point to a continuation of the strong growth momentum into 2024-25, particularly as a normal monsoon brings relief to the outlook for agricultural sector.
The rise in global energy prices had clear impact on the domestic prices.
The near-term inflation outlook is expected to improve on the back of vegetable price correction and the recent reduction in LPG prices.
Nevertheless, headline CPI inflation in Q4 of 2016-17 is likely to be below 5 per cent.
Going forward, the combined effects of the observed moderation in food inflation in January-February and the expected further softening in March are likely to result in lower will be despite the likely seasonal reversal of food prices in the first half.
This is also supported by RBI consumer confidence surveys showing worsening sentiments for income, employment and overall environment.
Cushioned by government spending and rural of services, such as passenger vehicles and railway freight, have gradually recovered in Q2.
Headline inflation adjusted for the estimated impact of HRA for central government employees moderated significantly from 4.6 per cent in June 2018 to 3.8 per cent in July and further to 3.4 per cent in August, reversing the trend of previous three months.
During the same period, merchandise import growth accelerated sequentially with over one-third of the growth emanating from petroleum Pearls and precious stones, electronic goods and coal were major contributors to non-oil non-gold import growth.
Global growth is expected to fall in FY24 but a turnaround is possible in FY25.
Even as the supply side is expected to ease gradually as the lockdown related restrictions are phased out, it is the demand side, which will continue to weigh heavily on economic activity for some time to come.
When rates are below neutral because of excess crisis related accommodation, the initial rise only takes them towards neutral.
Services exports have expanded YOY basis in October but declined relative to September.
In the services sector, domestic air passenger traffic, e-way bills, toll collections and diesel consumption exhibited buoyancy in April-May, while railway freight and port traffic registered modest growth.
Accordingly, I vote for the continuance of the stance of withdrawal of accommodation.
Output gap is especially difficult to measure under distress as well as pull out of a decade long investment slowdown.
However, the pattern has been uneven across sectors and also over time.
Global growth picked up modestly in the second half of 2016, after weakening in the first half.
On the supply side, industrial growth has weakened as reflected in deceleration in the growth of index of industrial production (IIP) for January; the growth of core industries for February remained sluggish.
I voted, however, for holding the rate unchanged through the June and August meetings to allow transitory effects to fully pass.
Fourth, should the monsoon turn deficient temporally and/or spatially, it may have a significant bearing input and output prices to rise, going forward.
The next meeting of the MPC is scheduled during August 6 to 8, 2024.
That, in itself, will put downward pressure on prices and neutralize several upside risks to inflation.
The fall in prices was also observed in other food components such as eggs, sugar, meat and fish, oils, spices, cereals and milk.
Greater credibility makes disinflation less costly, helps hold down inflation once it is low (Blinder, 2000[8]).
Yields in the US traded sideways on weaker than expected inflation pressures and the anticipated rate hike by the Fed.
One of the factors that has led to the upward revision is the increase in average crude oil price for the year also affecting trade balance.
These price pressures in food and fuel resulted in a pick-up in CPI inflation in October despite large favourable base effects.
It will also depend on the impact of the combined stimulus from fiscal, monetary, social and administrative measures that have been implemented to create conditions conducive to survival in the crisis, as well as for revival in growth.
Growth is resilient, and that is also encapsulated in upgrade in growth forecasts for Q2, Q3 and Q4 of 2022-23.
Disconcertingly, global risks to inflation from crude prices and financial market turbulence are materialising on an ongoing basis.
I vote in support of the resolution to keep the policy repo rate unchanged at 4 per cent and the impact of COVID-19 on the economy, while ensuring that inflation remains within the target going forward.
Consequently, the standing deposit facility (SDF) rate stands adjusted to 5.15 per cent and the marginal standing facility (MSF) rate and the Bank Rate to 5.65 per cent.
Private corporate investment is also gaining steam with capacity utilisation reaching its highest level in 11 years.
The demand outlook as reported by firms polled in the Reserve policy, and for H1:2019-20 at 7.5 per cent, with risks somewhat to the downside (Chart 2).
Monetary policy has more space to affect demand, while high debt and interest payments constrain fiscal spending.
Economic activity in Russia lost pace, with soft oil prices posing a downside risk to growth.
Inflation has moderated into the tolerance band but is not yet firmly on the path to target, particularly in view of monsoon related uncertainties.
Lead indicators for the hotels sub-segment, _viz., foreign tourist arrivals and air passenger traffic, point to softening in_ contracted in October-November, while that of broadband continued to expand in October.
Headline inflation increased to 5.0 per cent in February after having eased to 4.1 per cent in January 2021.
manufacturing sector continued to improve with the latest round of the RBI industrial outlook survey (of 1095 manufacturing companies) showing strong sentiments on production and order seasonally adjusted increase in capacity utilization at a 20-quarter high.
Although housing and personal care inflation softened marginally, the steady rise in inflation in respect of education, medical and health services, and transport and communication has imparted stickiness to inflation in this category.
As per the baseline projections, inflation is likely to remain above 6 per cent till Q3:2022-23.
This warrant continuing policy support till it is set on a firm trajectory of self-sustaining expansion.
In the deliberations of the MPC, my view is that the threats to growth have to be addressed frontally and aggressively or risk a more dire outlook 64.
The renewed jump in COVID-19 infections in several parts of the country and the associated localised and regional lockdowns add uncertainty to the growth outlook.
A rate cut can amplify it if the central bank is seen as encouraging risk-taking.
On the expenditure side, the growth of gross fixed capital formation improved for the second successive quarter.
Cumulative rainfall has been 9 per cent above long period average with its temporal and spatial distribution satisfactory.
By end-September, reservoir levels at 80 per cent of the full reservoir level were above the decadal average which 10.