The member continued that significant progress therefore had been made toward achieving the target.
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent.
It expected the Bank to continue conducting appropriate monetary policy.
On this point, a different member commented that the effects of deleveraging by European financial institutions in Central and Eastern European economies had so far been less serious than previously anticipated.
Interest rates on term instruments showed the following developments.
As for fiscal 2015 through fiscal 2016, they shared the view that a virtuous cycle of economic activity would be maintained -- supported by (1) a firm increase in domestic private demand reflecting accommodative financial conditions and heightened growth expectations, as well as (2) an increase in exports due to an improvement in overseas economies -- and that the economy was likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, while fluctuations in demand stemming from the scheduled second consumption tax hike were anticipated.
Many members said that a downward revision in the CPI might affect the public's view on prices.
This member continued that the authorities should take measures with this point in mind.
Together with the timetable for these reforms, the government would formulate a concrete plan by the middle of 2011, aim to secure public consensus, and subsequently carry out these reforms.
(3) The government and the Bank had released a joint statement on January 22, 2013.
The staff proposed that the Bank make necessary amendments to its Guidelines on Eligible Collateral and the principal terms and conditions for repo operations and securities lending in view of the results of the Bank's annual review of appropriate margins reflecting recent developments in financial markets.
One member said that real GDP was likely to remain more or less unchanged, or that its growth rate would remain at a considerably low level for the time being.
Nevertheless, regarding the outlook, they shared the view that exports were likely to increase moderately again, as the growth rate of the global economy was starting to increase again and inventory adjustments in IT-related goods seemed to be making progress underpinned by steady final demand.
The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) showed that it had been somewhat weak, mainly due to the earlier decline in international commodity prices, and it was expected to remain so for the time being.
This member continued that negative wealth effects stemming from these developments could bring about a further decline in household consumption.
Many members said that price rises had been observed not only in energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items, as evidenced by the fact that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for February 2014 had marked 0.8 percent.
A different member commented that, in a situation where wages rose due to labor shortages, it was necessary for firms to boost their productivity through, for example, fixed investment to promote labor saving.
A different member was of the opinion that, given, for example, that risks concerning the outlook for economic activity had tilted to the downside and early achievement of 2 percent inflation could not be envisaged, it was necessary for the Bank to further strengthen monetary easing instead of persistently continuing with the current policy.
Against the background of improvement in consumer sentiment, private consumption had been increasing moderately due to the effects of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles.
On the other hand, a different member pointed out that sales of online shopping seemed to be recovering steadily after hitting a bottom in April 2014.
[6] The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.
Some financial institutions had been making use of this facility close to the maximum amount that could be provided to each of them -- namely, 150 billion yen.
Some members expressed the view that the purchasing of various financial assets through the program discussed at this meeting should only be a temporary and extraordinary measure.
On this basis, the member pointed out that, when conducting yield curve control, it was important to consider in a flexible manner such factors as the range of yield movement and the target maturity of JGBs, while maintaining the framework of monetary easing.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be negative for the time being, mainly affected by COVID-19 and the past decline in crude oil prices.
Many members pointed to the following as the background to this view: (1) the rate of increase in exports slowed to the extent that it had become more or less flat due to the deceleration in the pace of recovery of the world economy; and (2) a planned reduction in fiscal spending, coupled with the deterioration in household and business sentiment, was starting to exert downward pressure on economic activity.
Meanwhile, they shared the recognition that, although the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike on economic activity were likely to be smaller than those in fiscal 2014, when the last consumption tax hike took place, these effects were highly uncertain and varied depending, for example, on the income situation and price developments.
Meanwhile, public investment has been increasing and housing investment has been more or less flat.
The long-term interest rate: The Bank will purchase a necessary amount of JGBs without setting an upper limit so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.
Some members noted that business performance had been favorable and the effects had been seen in the rise in stock prices.
A few members expressed the view that, among these factors, downside risks to developments in overseas economies appeared to be waning on the whole, as emerging economies had become firm and the uncertainty regarding such issues as those concerning the financial sector in Europe had lessened.
A few members then referred to the fact that the government recently had laid out measures such as tax cuts for firms that raised wages proactively.
Some members pointed out that, given, for example, post-pandemic changes in the economic structure, it was possibly becoming difficult for statistics to accurately capture developments in consumption of services and online consumption.
Meanwhile, some members said that developments in business fixed investment and private consumption would be affected partly by the timing of the elimination of supply-side constraints and the consequences of the crisis at the nuclear power plant.
As background to the outlook for price developments, members discussed the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations, both of which were the main factors that determined the underlying trend in inflation.
(2) The government also regarded Japan's economic conditions as severe, and had announced economic measures amounting to about 75 trillion yen in total.
One member expressed the recognition that, for the time being, the Bank should maintain the current stance of monetary policy and carefully examine the positive effects and side effects.
Since mid-September, credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds had widened and issuance of corporate bonds had declined.
With regard to the outlook, such investment was expected to continue on an increasing trend, mainly on the back of improvement in corporate profits and accommodative financial conditions.
Housing investment had increased and was expected to continue trending upward.
With regard to corporate bond markets in the United States and Europe, credit spreads had been more or less unchanged on the whole, and the issuance of high-yield bonds continued to be steady.
One member expressed the view that, with an increase in scheduled cash earnings, medium- to long-term inflation expectations would become more likely to rise since there would be a growing tendency among people to take action based on the expectation that prices and wages would increase.
Members concurred that private consumption was picking up partly due to policy measures.
Based on this discussion on upside and downside risk factors to the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices, members shared the recognition that there was high uncertainty regarding developments in overseas economies and medium- to long-term inflation expectations in particular, and that attention should continue to be paid to the effects of these developments on Japan's economic activity and prices.
Reflecting such developments in demand, the pace of growth in production had been slowing moderately.
As reasons for this, some members expressed the opinion that this might have been affected partly by the view that the U.S. economy was likely to remain firm and by the stable yield differential between Japan and the United States, as well as by the significant increase in currency-unhedged foreign direct investment.
The recent reading on production had been relatively weak.
In the outlook, private consumption was likely to continue to be pushed down by such effects as of the tax hike for the time being.
Mr. G. Kataoka expressed the opinion that further coordination of fiscal and monetary policy was important in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, and that it was necessary for the Bank to make a commitment to taking additional easing measures if it revised downward its assessment of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Many members noted that growth in employment continued, albeit at a slower pace, as evidenced by the upward revision of nonfarm payroll employment for August and the increase in September.
The rates in Russia and Brazil had been declining, primarily due to a pause in the depreciation of their currencies.
A few members expressed the opinion that the experience of the recent global financial crisis suggested that, in the conduct of monetary policy, it was necessary to make wide-ranging assessments of not only stability in prices measured by the price index but also accumulation of financial imbalances observed in, for example, asset prices and credit aggregates.
These members continued that, when deciding additional monetary easing, it was necessary to thoroughly explain that this commitment remained unshakable, in order to convey the Bank's unwavering determination to conquer deflation.
These members continued that, although a central bank consequently would face fluctuations in its profits in the short run, it would bring about seigniorage -- the profit generated by issuing banknotes as the sole issuer -- in the long run.
In this regard, some members said that recent surveys suggested that the inflation expectations of private economic entities might be changing, and any changes should be watched closely.
Many members raised the following as factors behind this outlook: (1) exports were likely to increase moderately again as the growth rate of the global economy was starting to increase again; and (2) the effects of the reverse following the sharp increase in demand for cars on consumption and production would wane.
Credit spreads between CP at issuance and T-Bills as well as yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs remained stable at low levels.
Some members said that they would continue to pay attention to developments in the U.S. economy since there was some uncertainty regarding the extent to which the adjustment in the housing market would affect private consumption and the risk of a further deceleration in the economy was not negligible.
Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T. Sato, Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of the firm growth in overseas economies.
On this basis, these members expressed the recognition that, with the implementation of measures to support financing, mainly of firms, the environment for external funding remained accommodative, as seen, for example, in the DI for financial institutions' lending attitudes maintaining its accommodative level.
At the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on May 15, the Prime Minister had given instructions to the Cabinet to set out in the Basic Policies a policy for further reform from the perspectives of both expenditure and revenue, toward the formulation of the budget for fiscal 2015, as well as a direction for initiatives to realign the structure of the corporate tax rate to one that was oriented toward growth.
These members concurred that the projected rate of increase in the CPI for fiscal 2016 was lower compared with that presented in the January 2016 Outlook Report, mainly reflecting downward revisions in projections for GDP growth and wage developments.
Excluding local public bodies, the proportion of projects - measured in terms of their number -- for which contracts were concluded with private firms and actual work started had risen further from around 61 percent in April 2013 to around 79 percent in May.
They shared the view that the sovereign debt problems in Europe in particular could result in weaker growth not only in the European economy but also in the global economy, especially through their effects on global financial markets.
Some members pointed to the possibility that, due to a decline in the competitiveness of Japanese products and to the progress in local procurement by Japanese firms operating overseas, the degree of increase in Japan's exports in response to the upturn in overseas economies and the depreciation of the yen had lessened.
One member said that, in an environment where the projected rates of increase in the CPI turned out to be lower compared with the previous projections, it was clear that interest rates would be maintained at low levels for a long term, and therefore there might be no significance in purposely introducing forward guidance.
Regarding the guideline for money market operations until the next meeting to be held on September 6 and 7, 2010, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.
Exports and industrial production were expected to continue decreasing for the time being and start picking up thereafter as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Production had declined significantly since the earthquake, particularly in certain industries, mainly because production facilities were damaged, the supply chain was disrupted, and electric power supply was constrained.
In addition, they shared the assessment that firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels.
Regarding economic developments, members noted the following points: (1) strains in global financial markets had intensified in the wake of failures and rescues of U.S. and European financial institutions; (2) there were downside risks to the world economy, reflecting sluggish growth in the U.S. economy and a clearer slowdown in European and Asian economies; and (3) weaker income generation in Japan reflecting the earlier deterioration in the terms of trade could potentially weigh on domestic private demand.
Meanwhile, U.S. and European stock prices increased somewhat in response to the announcement of financial stabilization measures by the U.S. authorities.
Although public investment continued to increase, as seen in the statistics on the amount of public construction completed, the value of public works contracted -- a measure that reflected public works orders -- remained flat in the July-September quarter from the previous quarter, which might suggest slower growth in future public investment.
A different member pointed out that, taking into account the current situation in which downside risks to economic activity and prices were significant, the Bank should continue to examine whether additional monetary easing would be necessary.
They added that, against this background, business fixed investment was expected to continue to improve and private consumption was expected to pick up again with the improving trend in the employment and income situation.
Most members expressed the view, however, that downside risks to the outlook for the U.S. economy had been increasing.
Some members said that they continued to hold a cautious view regarding the momentum in terms of bringing the inflation rate closer to the level of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Stock markets in Europe had been nervous due to concerns about the consequences and possible impact of the fiscal deficit problem in countries such as Greece, and stock prices had most recently declined sharply triggered by the downgrading of some sovereign debt.
Members shared the view that, in order to fully resolve the sovereign debt problems in Europe, the countries concerned should make steady progress with fiscal consolidation by making adjustments to their revenues and expenditures, and tackle structural reforms that would raise the medium- to long-term growth potential of these economies by, for example, enhancing industrial competitiveness.
With regard to Chinese stock prices, many members expressed the recognition that, although the significant decline in prices had paused, they remained highly volatile and future developments warranted close attention.
A different member commented that, given the current industrial structure in Japan, future economic recovery would continue to depend largely on developments in overseas economies, and therefore uncertainty regarding the outlook for Japan's economy was high.
Machinery orders -- a leading indicator of machinery investment -- had shown signs of bottoming out, mainly for manufacturing, reflecting increases in exports and production.
These members continued that this showed the resilience of Japan's economy against the slowdown in overseas economies.
Various actions continued to be taken by European governments and the European Central Bank (ECB), but the content and swiftness of these actions had not been enough to earn a positive response from the market.
Private consumption had been relatively weak, mainly due to sluggish growth in household income and the increase in prices of energy and food.
Regarding Japan's economy, members agreed that exports had continued to increase, reflecting the expansion of overseas economies, and were likely to continue to increase.
As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) had been slightly negative and was likely to remain so or be about With regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity, members shared the view that sluggishness was likely to remain in exports and production for some time, and the pace of economic recovery was likely to remain slow.
Against this view, as was the case when the April 2014 Outlook Report had been discussed, some members held a more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the forecasts in the baseline scenario, mainly because there seemed to be a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the view that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would reach around 2 percent around the middle of the projection period.
Another member said that it would be appropriate to adopt the auction method that would provide funds at a fixed rate, so that U.S. dollar funding in the Tokyo market would not be disadvantageous compared with funding in the U.S. and European markets.
One member, noting that China's producer prices had been on an increasing trend, expressed the recognition that it was necessary to examine whether this suggested that the worldwide disinflationary trend was changing.
This member added that a rise in the savings rate for households amid a decrease in the fiscal deficit suggested room for fiscal expansion.
It had turned upward -- albeit marginally -- in the January-March quarter of 2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in four quarters, and had increased moderately in the April-June and July-September quarters on the same basis.
(4) In Singapore and the Middle East, the government representative had recently explained the measures in Abenomics and the growth strategy; many investors had given favorable evaluations of reforms carried out in Japan, and had expressed positive expectations about the Japanese market.
The member also pointed out that such efforts played a role in consequently constraining price rises through an increase in labor productivity.
Meanwhile, members reaffirmed that the Bank would do its utmost to ensure that the European debt problem would not threaten the stable conditions in Japan's financial markets, and consequently financial system stability.
One of these members added that a_ clear increase was observed in the number of new job openings in manufacturing, which had been lagging behind.
With regard to the growth strategy, the government intended to submit over 30 related bills to the Diet.
The Bank of Japan announced that it would be considering the introduction of similar measures.
It deemed that the role the Bank's monetary policy had to play in overcoming deflation was extremely important, and welcomed that the Bank was strongly committed to pursuing bold monetary easing, particularly through the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing with the aim of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.
With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy, most members shared the view that it would (1) continue with QQE with Yield Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner, (2) continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target in a stable manner, (3) as for policy rates, maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019, and (4) examine the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy and make policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward achieving the price stability target.
The amount outstanding of bank lending, especially to large firms, had continued to increase at a relatively fast pace, although the pace of increase had slowed.
Economic activity in Brazil continued to decelerate, and that in Russia had become increasingly stagnant, particularly in domestic demand, reflecting a tightening of financial conditions due to the raising of policy interest rates and to capital outflow.
One of these members added that attention also should be paid to how an increase in financial institutions' provision of subordinated loans and the narrowing of spreads on these loans would affect their intermediation function.
Many members expressed the view that the sovereign debt problems in Europe -- which were spreading to large-scale economies such as Spain and Italy -- had caused a deterioration in the funding conditions of European financial institutions, and therefore concerns over the European financial system as a whole were intensifying further.
Members discussed the Bank's communication of its thinking concerning the conduct of monetary policy.
Reflecting these developments in demand at home and abroad, signs of stabilizing had been observed in production, although its growth momentum remained slow.
Many members, however, pointed out that there were still various uncertainties regarding developments in overseas economies.
On the other hand, a different member was of the opinion that the rate of increase in the CPI was likely to rise over the course of fiscal 2012 as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved, after deteriorating temporarily reflecting a decline in household sentiment.
That said, the rate of increase in the CPI had been in the range of 2.0-2.5 percent recently, mainly on the back of the fact that, despite waning, the effects of a pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the past rise in import prices remained, and services prices had increased moderately.
A different member expressed the view that expectations for economic measures to be taken by the new administration had been reflected in, for example, the recent improvement in firms' and households' sentiment.
Housing investment had leveled out.
Economic activity in Russia and Brazil had been recovering moderately, mainly on the back of stable inflation rates.
Members were in agreement on these points.
Some members pointed out that a significant increase in the number of corporate bankruptcies had not been observed thus far.
Some members expressed the view that the weakening of household and business sentiment had been spreading from peripheral countries to core countries recently.
Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, these economies had been picking up on the whole, but the pace still continued to be moderate in the corporate sector.
A different member expressed the opinion that, in a situation where there was no change in the trend of the positive output gap, it was appropriate that the Bank maintain the current monetary easing policy and carefully monitor economic developments.
Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend, aided partly by the restoration of disaster-stricken facilities.
On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead, members agreed that, given the assessment of economic activity and prices described above, it would be appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.
One member said that firms' attitude toward fixed investment was likely to improve further as exports would start increasing, and this would enhance monetary easing effects on business fixed investment.
The new lending rate on the operations would therefore be the prevailing U.S. dollar overnight index swap (OIS) market rate that corresponds to the lending duration, plus 0.5 percentage point.
In view of the need to dispel such misunderstanding and suspicions, thereby encouraging further permeation of monetary easing effects, as well as to influence market expectations, these members then raised the issue, as in the previous meeting, of whether it would be effective to change the current wording of the Bank's policy commitment -- namely, that the Bank aimed to achieve its goal of 1 percent for the time being in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit of powerful monetary easing, conducting its virtually zero interest rate policy and implementing the Program mainly through the purchase of financial assets, and would continue with this powerful easing until it judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight.
The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on September 14 and 15, 2015, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.
Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had risen somewhat.
Moreover, a different member commented that, in order to confirm whether the virtuous cycle between wages and prices had become more solid, the Bank needed to carefully assess the rise in services prices and the progress in the pass-through of cost increases to selling prices by small and medium-sized firms.
The number of housing starts -- a leading indicator of housing investment -- had continued to fall since the January-March quarter, mainly in owner-occupied homes and houses, but had virtually bottomed out recently.
As for the outlook, they shared the view that emerging economies would move out of their deceleration phase, mainly due to the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and economic stimulus measures both on the monetary and fiscal fronts, after continuing their deceleration phase for the time being.
Second, as for CP and corporate bonds, it would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.
In accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1 percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both of which were decided at the previous meeting on January 20 and 21, 2020, the Bank had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.3 In this situation, 10-year JGB yields had been at around 0 percent, and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been consistent with the guideline for market operations.
On this basis, they agreed that Japan's economy continued its moderate recovery trend.
A few members expressed the view that purchasing JGBs of various maturities would likely facilitate the Bank's smooth purchases.
Some members said that, in such situation, the amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings would remain at a high level and thus its easing effects would continue; however, it could be considered that the conduct of JGB purchases would not be regarded as an active monetary policy tool.
The staff reported that liquidity conditions in U.S. dollar funding markets had deteriorated significantly worldwide.
With this resumption, the economy was likely to follow a moderate improving trend through the materialization of pent-up demand and supported by accommodative financial conditions and the government's economic measures.
Meanwhile, one member said that the recent slight slowdown in emerging economies could be viewed as a downside risk factor in the short run but lead to a more sustainable expansion of these economies in the long run.
Many members expressed the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI would probably be at around 0 percent, potentially falling into slightly negative territory, for the time being.
A different member expressed the view that the tightening of labor market conditions observed across a wide range of regions, firm sizes, and industries had been underpinning an improvement in consumer sentiment.
In terms of risk management, it would be appropriate to (1) segregate assets purchased through the Program from those obtained through other money market operations; (2) set a purchase limit for each issuer and type of financial asset, as necessary; and (3) record, as provisions for possible losses on ETFs and J-REITs, the difference between the market and book values.
They concurred that there remained high uncertainties surrounding Japan's economic activity and prices, including developments in overseas economic activity and prices, developments in commodity prices, and domestic firms' wage- and price-setting behavior.
It was likely to continue increasing for the time being due to the implementation of various economic measures.
(4) Although there had been media reports that the government might fund rebuilding costs by issuing JGBs to be underwritten by the Bank, the government had never considered this to be an option.
(1) The real GDP growth rate for the January-March quarter registered a decrease of 3.7 percent on an annualized basis.
Yields on Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- continued to grow at a moderate pace, despite the slowdown in emerging economies.
A few members said that, in China, the monetary and fiscal policy stance had shifted toward stimulating economic growth, and this was expected to boost the economy.
These members continued that Japan's export environment had started to improve, as shown by, for example, the slight improvement in Japanese manufacturers' forecasts of future overseas supply-demand conditions for products in the March _Tankan, against the background that_ orders from China and the NIEs had increased and there had been progress in adjustments of Japanese firms' overseas inventories.
Members agreed that overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand and were likely to keep expanding.
With regard to the budget for general expenditures, for example, the government aimed to achieve both economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation by continuing to undertake expenditure reforms, including those needed to reach the benchmarks set in the New Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal Revitalization.
As for the outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely to maintain its expansion, partly underpinned by expansionary fiscal measures in a situation where the Federal Reserve conducted monetary policy while taking account of downside risks to economic activity and prices.
A few members said that it was becoming more evident that economic growth had been underpinned by domestic demand, including public investment, as suggested by increases in the amount of public construction completed and the value of public works contracted, which are the coincident and leading indicators of such investment, respectively.
During Phase with higher inflation expectations and lower nominal interest rates for both short- and long term rates.
One member pointed out that a rapid increase in unemployment and bankruptcy had been avoided and corporate financing seemed to have progressed; thus, it was appropriate to examine the policy effects for the time being.
Return to text Attachment January 21, 2020 Bank of Japan Statement on Monetary Policy At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided upon the following.
The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank amounted to 24,510.8 billion yen after the new loan disbursement.
Regarding housing investment, a different member expressed the recognition that, although some recent indicators had been relatively weak, it would return to an improving trend as interest rate developments stabilized, given that households' purchasing behavior with respect to housing was strong and the level of housing inventories was low.
The government therefore deemed it necessary to eliminate the deficit through expenditure reform as well as other measures and attempt to generate a surplus in the primary balance.
Some members noted that, in formulating a specific numerical expression, the Policy Board should continue to take three perspectives into consideration: (1) a measurement bias in the price index; (2) the safety margin that acted as a buffer against the risk of a vicious cycle of deflation and stagnation; and (3) the rate of inflation at which households and firms perceived price stability -- that is, the public's perception of price developments.
In many of these Asian economies, inflationary pressure continued to be strong, reflecting the earlier rise in food and materials prices and an acceleration in the pace of wage increases due to tight labor market conditions.
With regard to private consumption, members agreed that it had picked up gradually on the whole, although consumption of services, such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, remained at a low level.
A slowdown in the economy of the euro area had become somewhat more evident.
With regard to the baseline scenario for prices, many members expressed the view that there was considerable uncertainty, mainly in developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations, and risks on the price front were skewed to the downside, although a few members expressed the recognition that these risks could be assessed as being largely balanced.
Meanwhile, one member pointed out that future developments in the U.S. credit market warranted attention, since market participants had been actively conducting risk-taking activities.
First, the aggregate supply and demand balance (output gap, and the same hereafter) had been improving mainly on the labor front; it appeared to have reached around the past long-term average of about zero and was likely to continue improving.
They added, however, that attention should be paid to the risk that, depending on future economic developments, firms might postpone implementation of their fixed investment.
Markets in emerging economies had been calm on the whole because policy actions such as the raising of interest rates had been adopted to address current account deficits and high inflation, although markets in some emerging economies had shown nervousness, mainly reflecting the situation in Ukraine.
Although the pace of increase in exports seemed to be slowing recently, domestic demand remained firm overall as fixed asset investment maintained high growth.
This member commented that, therefore, it was likely that the rise in costs eventually would be passed on to firms' sales prices.
Members shared the recognition that developments in the 2024 annual spring labor management wage negotiations would be important when examining the intensification of the virtuous cycle between wages and prices.
They also agreed that the gradual increase in household income was likely to continue against the background that firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and corporate profits were expected to remain high.
Some members expressed the view that in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, economic conditions continued to be on a recovery trend as domestic demand stayed firm, although the pace of increase in production and exports had recently slowed, partly due to the effects of the disaster in Japan.
With regard to the cause of the rise in long-term interest rates, some members said that it was important to find out whether it reflected improved prospects of economic expansion or higher inflation expectations.
In many of these Asian economies, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had risen due to higher food and materials prices, reflecting the effects of the increase in international commodity prices, and to greater utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.
Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had gradually begun to wane -- particularly in components other than durable goods.
It also expected that the Bank would continue to cooperate closely with the government while sharing a sense of crisis, in order to bring about an early recovery of the Japanese economy from the impact of COVID-19.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items decelerated, reflecting the decline in energy prices, whereas the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat.
Machinery orders and construction starts in terms of planned expenses for private and nondwelling construction -- both of which were leading indicators of business fixed investment -- continued a moderate increasing trend, albeit with some fluctuations.
One member said that there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding the outlook for domestic and overseas demand, and distributors' inventories might increase if sales declined, and due attention should therefore be paid to the risk that inventory adjustment pressures might increase.
Regarding the outlook, members concurred that business fixed investment was likely to decelerate temporarily for the time being, mainly for machinery investment by manufacturing firms, due to the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies; however, it was expected to increase moderately from a somewhat longer-term perspective, mainly on the back of accommodative financial conditions.
A few members said that higher materials prices had been gradually passed on to prices downstream, and that some services prices had started to be raised.
The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.
Some members were of the view that this trend was likely to continue for the time being.
Another member commented that, while the current policy responses had had positive effects, it was still the top priority to ensure corporate financing and sustain employment.
Based on this discussion, most members concurred that, while the Bank was determined to achieve the 2 percent price stability target with a time horizon of about two years, it was appropriate to set the time frame for continuing monetary easing in relation to achieving the price stability target, rather than restricting it to two years at the outset.
However, many members expressed the view that, due partly to the effects of fiscal austerity, severe conditions continued in some peripheral countries that were facing fiscal problems, and disparities between these peripheral countries and core countries were becoming noticeable.
Taking this into account, they concurred that it was necessary to reexamine economic and price developments at the next Monetary Policy Meeting, when the October 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices would be compiled.
With regard to the first factor, one member said that inflation expectations for fiscal 2012 and 2013 had been relatively low at around 0 percent, although medium- to long-term inflation expectations remained stable at around 1.0 percent.
The government would continue to promote the integrated economic and fiscal reforms toward achieving the fiscal consolidation target by fiscal 2025, in line with the New Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal Revitalization.
Household income was likely to continue decreasing substantially for the time being, mainly due to the lagged effects of the earlier drop in corporate profits and production.
(1) The application of budget requests for fiscal 2018 was closed on August 31, 2017, and the government would proceed with the budget formulation toward the year-end.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average temporarily declined to some extent in response to the drop in U.S. stock prices and Japanese firms' somewhat weaker-than-expected corporate results for the July-September quarter of 2012, but had The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.
As for prices, members agreed on the following view: (1) global inflationary pressures remained high given the high commodity prices, particularly crude oil prices; and (2) in Japan, it was necessary to be mindful of upside risks to inflation due to changes in, for example, the inflation expectations of households and the price-setting behavior of firms in addition to developments in energy and materials prices.
Long-term interest rates in Japan had recently been in the range of 0.65-0.70 percent as the Bank proceeded with its JGB purchases, although they had risen somewhat, mainly against the background of a slight rise in U.S. long-term interest rates.
Based on this recognition, members concurred that, since the basic stance for the operation was set, it was appropriate to make a decision regarding the operation at this MPM and accordingly make it public.
As for prices, members shared the recognition that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was at around 0 percent, mainly affected by the past decline in crude oil prices, and that in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) was at around 0.5 percent, while inflation expectations had weakened somewhat.
A few members expressed the view that the improvement in housing-related indicators, such as home prices and housing starts, had recently slowed and future developments warranted monitoring.
As for the outlook, industrial production was expected to pick up, reflecting developments in demand at home and abroad, as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Some members pointed out that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI might slow to around 0 percent in the immediate future, due to the effects of the decline in crude oil prices, but what should be considered in conducting monetary policy was the underlying trend in inflation, and there was no change in this trend.
A few members pointed to the fact that the Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity had been showing moderate improvement and there had been signs of a pick-up in consumer sentiment in Germany and France.
(2) The government confirmed the progress of the emergency economic measures at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on June 13, 2013; the proportion of national and local government projects -- measured in terms of their number -- for which actual work had started was around 81 percent.
On the other hand, one member expressed the view that, from a forward-looking perspective, the Bank should maintain the uncollateralized overnight call rate target at around 0.25 percent because there was significant uncertainty regarding the future pace of increase in prices, given that the relative weakness in wages and private consumption had not been dispelled and that there was a likelihood of a temporary pause in the growth of production in the future although adjustments might be marginal.
Exports remained on an increasing trend, but the pace had slowed somewhat.
Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented considering that, with a view to maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the short-term policy interest rate should be set at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level of a long-term interest rate was not appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to further increase the pace of its JGB purchases.
A few members said that, when increasing purchases of CP and corporate bonds, the terms and conditions should be relaxed with regard to, for example, the maximum amounts outstanding of a single issuer's CP and corporate bonds to be purchased.
As for the employment and income situation, members agreed that labor market conditions continued to tighten and the number of employees, particularly full-time employees, continued to increase steadily.
As for credit demand, firms' demand for working capital and funds for fixed investment had declined, and some firms had reduced on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated.
In the housing market, significant adjustments were still continuing.
The U.S. economy generally continued to recover at a moderate pace, particularly in the household sector, although signs of weakness were observed in the corporate sector.
(2) On December 8, the Cabinet decided the "Emergency Economic Countermeasures for Future Growth and Security."
By making such policy efforts in a seamless manner, the government would do its utmost to help the economy overcome deflation and achieve a self-sustaining recovery.
One member noted that it was necessary to closely monitor future developments in exports, as a sense of vigilance was intensifying among Japanese exporting firms, mainly reflecting a reignition of the U.S.-China trade friction.
As for prices, although the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items remained at a relatively high level, it had declined somewhat due to the effects of an earlier fall in international commodity prices.
As was the case when the October 2013 Outlook Report had been discussed, a few members held a more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the forecasts in the baseline scenario, mainly because it seemed highly uncertain whether changes in inflation expectations would lead to a rise in the actual rate of inflation.
One member said that continuing with monetary easing by conducting the three measures would support the economy, and thereby lead to achievement of the price stability target.
One of these members pointed out that the March _Tankan showed that this tendency in firms' outlook for future_ general prices was rather noticeable among small firms, which seemed to face difficulty in terms of passing on costs to prices.
Overseas economies have been depressed significantly, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
With regard to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate had declined slightly, and was in the range of 1.20-1.25 percent.
It was expected to continue its moderate declining trend, albeit maintaining a somewhat high level.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen had been more or less flat against both the U.S. dollar and the euro.
The government would also like the Bank to continue to support the economy by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, taking account of the downside risks to the economy and prices and also of the government's policy efforts.
This member said that it would still not be too late to raise the policy interest rate after explaining the Bank's projections for prices including that for fiscal 2008 through, for example, the upcoming Outlook Report.
A different member added that funding by firms and households was expected to become more active.
Based on the above discussion, most members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to increase gradually toward 2 percent as firms' stance gradually would shift toward further raising wages and prices and as medium- to long-term inflation expectations were projected to rise gradually.
A different member expressed the view that the main aim of the Bank's policy already had shifted from the quantitative to the interest rate aspect, and thus it was important for the Bank to conduct asset purchases in a flexible manner.
Some members referred to the fact that, according to high-frequency price-related indicators, moves toward sales price revisions had become widespread with regard, for example, to daily necessities and food since April 2015.
A few other members expressed the view that marginal demand for labor might be weakening somewhat, noting the fact that the pace of increase in the number of employees in the Labour Force Survey had been slowing recently and the ratio of job offers to applicants had continued to decline.
A few members noted that in credit markets the decline in the amount outstanding of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) was coming to a halt and credit spreads, such as those on corporate bonds, were narrowing somewhat.
Looking at real GDP for the April-June quarter of 2020 for each economy, which was released during the intermeeting period, many economies experienced record plunges, which reconfirmed that overseas economies had been depressed significantly due to the spread of COVID-19 and measures such as lockdowns.
The member continued that this was evidence that firms were beginning to take an active attitude toward carrying out fixed investment from a long-term perspective, amid the progress in the conversion of the deflationary mindset.
One of these members -- referring to the view that the year-on-year decline in the monetary base represented a weakening of the Bank's stance of maintaining the monetary easing -- added that this view was a complete misunderstanding.
One member noted, however, that financial institutions' lending attitudes toward construction and real estate firms had become cautious, and this had led to the recent increase in the number of bankruptcies.
A few members said that housing-related demand had been firm, owing in part to an expansion of teleworking.
Some members pointed out that, although a decline in exports, mainly of capital goods and IT-related goods, had pushed down production for January, firm domestic demand had been underpinning production as a whole.
With regard to the global standard, these members noted that major economies pursuing the same rate of inflation also would facilitate the stability of exchange rates in the long term.
Based on this discussion, members shared the view that the new measure would be consistent with the monetary policy mission stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act that the Bank should aim at achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.
Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that overall economic conditions had deteriorated as the negative feedback loop between financial markets and economic activity worsened.
They continued that such developments in inflation expectations were likely to have been influencing actual wage and price settings, as seen in a base pay increase that was likely to take place for the second consecutive year.
The CGPI was expected to remain more or less flat for the time being.
With a view to contributing to a further enhancement of discussions on monetary policy, the staff proposed that the Bank review the contents of the principal terms and conditions in order to avoid, to the extent possible, revisions that did not have policy implications.
It then declined for the October-November period as a result of a combination of factors such as weather conditions, in addition to the impact of high prices.
Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of change in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been positive.
[6] As for the Bank's conduct of nimble market operations, it had reduced the amount of its scheduled JGB purchases, for example, mainly taking into account interest rate developments and supply and demand conditions in the JGB markets.
Exports had recently been more or less flat, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies.
First, they agreed that the output gap had steadily followed an improving trend driven mainly by labor market developments, as the tightening trend in labor market conditions continued, albeit under some downward pressure partly from the flattening of exports.
Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the October 2018 Outlook Report (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background") and formed a majority view.
One of these members, however, was of the view that it was rather difficult to judge changes in the underlying trend in inflation expectations from these indicators, which therefore should be interpreted carefully.
A few members expressed the view that it was unrealistic to expect high growth in private consumption, taking into account the effects of structural factors such as demographic changes.
The employment and income situation remained severe, but supply and demand conditions in the labor market had been improving moderately.
Long-term interest rates in the United States had fallen, mainly reflecting heightened expectations for additional monetary easing, and those in Europe had fallen somewhat in response to the weakening of some economic indicators.
These members said that there was a view that the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy had recently declined, and added that they would take this into account as they watched developments in inflation pressures with close attention.
Attachment 2 Assessment of the Momentum toward Achieving the Price Stability Target [Note 3] The Bank of Japan judged, at the previous Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), that it was becoming necessary to pay closer attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target would be lost, given that, recently, slowdowns in overseas economies had continued to be observed and their downside risks seemed to be increasing.
A different member commented that it was highly likely that the mechanism behind price developments would continue to be consistent with the price stability target, although the inflation rate could fall below 2 percent, mainly due to temporary factors.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been in the range of had declined somewhat mainly in response to the drop in stock prices, and was in the range of 1.2-1.3 percent.
In the meantime, public investment has been more or less flat.
Meanwhile, a few members pointed to the risk that China could face electricity shortages this summer that might restrain its economic activity.
One of these members said that the optimal inflation rate should be considered by taking into account the future developments in economic activity and prices without depending too much on the general public's current perception of price developments.
Exports of capital goods had turned to a pick-up due to a global recovery in production activity and in demand for business fixed investment, mainly for machinery investment.
Overseas economies had recently shown clear signs of a slowdown due mainly to the impact of the outbreak of COVID-19.
Private consumption had picked up gradually on the whole, although consumption of services, such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, remained at a low level.
As for prices, in many of the NIEs and the ASEAN economies, core inflation rates were at relatively high levels, mainly reflecting the higher wage inflation caused by tight labor market conditions.
The member continued that it was desirable that market expectations about future monetary policy be formed based on an outlook for economic and price developments that was shared by the market and the Bank.
It also had been proceeding with discussions on reforms of the employment system and the agriculture industry.
On average, however, they had risen slightly in the January-March quarter of 2015, registering an increase for three consecutive quarters from the July-September quarter of 2014.
And fourth, the corporate sector as a whole was likely to continue to be firm, although somewhat cautious views were becoming more prevalent about the outlook for the manufacturing industry.
Some members said that private consumption and fixed asset investment continued to show high growth.
A few members added that the economies of commodity-exporting countries and grain-exporting countries such as those in the Middle East and Central and South America, as well as Australia, showed signs of recovery on the back of growing demand for commodities and food from China.
Some members referred to the fact that fixed investment plans for fiscal 2009 had been revised downward in survey results released in June, and commented that firms were being cautious about investing when the level of capacity utilization remained low and the outlook for the economy was highly uncertain.
A different member pointed to the possibility that the efforts toward increasing base pay would not spread sufficiently, in which case wages and prices might be weaker than expected.
The number of housing starts -- a leading indicator of housing investment -- had picked up from the start of the year onward, mainly in owner-occupied houses and apartments for rent.
Second, as for the long-term interest rate, it would purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields would remain more or less at the current level of around 0 percent.
Meanwhile, in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, stock prices had been more or less unchanged at high levels and currencies -- from a relatively long-term perspective -- had been on an appreciating trend in the foreign exchange markets, in a situation where capital inflow into these economies -- through investment funds in particular -- had been showing signs of an increase.
The funding conditions of European financial institutions had recently been even more stable.
The experience so far with the negative interest rate policy shows that a combination of the negative interest rate on current account balances at the Bank and JGB purchases is effective for yield curve control.
Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated a proposal to purchase ETFs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen and put it to a vote.
They added that problems such as the slowdown in private consumption could become more pronounced depending on developments in housing and stock prices, and there was increasing uncertainty with regard to developments in the U.S. economy.
Tensions in global financial markets regarding the European debt problem had abated somewhat compared with the situation around the end of 2011.
On the other hand, some members expressed the opinion that an overheating in emerging economies and the resultant rise in commodity prices might cause prices to become stronger than expected through an increase in import prices.
Prices for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) had been rising somewhat, albeit with fluctuations.
One member, referring to the fact that the Bank had conducted additional monetary easing half a year after the previous consumption tax hike took place in 2014, pointed to the possibility that it might become necessary to conduct additional monetary easing this time as well, depending on the underlying trend in consumption.
Some members commented that it was important for the Bank to be well prepared to take policy actions -- including measures to stabilize the financial system -- as the central bank, bearing in mind the risk that the sovereign debt problems in Europe could cause a serious shock to global financial markets and the global economy, thereby affecting the financial system and financial conditions in Japan.
A few members commented that the purchase of JGBs with a remaining maturity of one to two years was also effective in terms of ensuring stability in the foreign exchange market, considering the current situation where the correlation of the yen-dollar exchange rate with the two-year interest rate differential between Japan and the United States was high relative to its correlation with the interest rate differential of other maturities.
They said that it was important that the Bank explain carefully that the timing of any policy change depended on developments in economic activity and prices and that it had no predetermined view regarding the future path of monetary policy at this point.
Exports of motor vehicles and their related goods -- due in part to the effects of developments in foreign exchange rates -- had resumed an uptrend, assisted by a pick-up in those to China -- which had seen a significant drop -- while those to the United States and other regions had been steady.
However, the pace of the pick-up was expected to be only moderate for the time being while downward pressure stemming from COVID-19 continued, mainly on face-to-face services.
The government would swiftly implement the supplementary budget for fiscal 2012, which had been approved by the Diet on February 26, 2013, and steadily implement the fiscal 2013 budget and the fiscal 2013 tax reform.
The number of housing starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, had recently begun decreasing again.
Private consumption had increased clearly, supported by the rising trend in compensation of employees, as the effects of the past low crude oil prices and high stock prices remained.
Nevertheless, some members expressed the view that, even though the probability of the economy returning to a moderate recovery path had increased, subsequent economic developments remained uncertain.
The pick-up in business fixed investment had become increasingly evident as corporate profits had improved.
Many members expressed the view that private consumption had been firm in terms of the average of July and August, as seen in the following developments: consumption, which was sluggish in July due to adverse weather conditions, recovered in August due to the extremely hot weather; and sales of passenger cars, which previously were declining, increased in August.
A few members said that, as suggested by the current further increase in daily and weekly price indices based on the point-of-sale (POS) data, firms had recently taken an aggressive stance of setting higher prices on the sales front, and this was evidence that consumption was resilient.
(5) The maximum outstanding amount of each ETF to be purchased should be set so that the Bank's purchases would be roughly proportionate to the total market value of that ETF issued.
A different member added that if demand for services started to plunge, a possible consequent fall in services prices, which had remained stable for a long time, might cause households' medium- to long-term inflation expectations to fall considerably.
Production was expected to increase moderately as domestic demand stayed firm, and as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picked up gradually.
This member continued that, to this end, it was appropriate for the Bank to purchase JGBs so that yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer would broadly be lowered further.
Return to text Attachment October 29, 2020Bank of Japan Statement on Monetary Policy At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided upon the following.
As for the outlook, exports and production were likely to be at low levels for the time being, due mainly to the depression in overseas economies stemming from the impact of COVID-19; however, they were projected to stop declining and then head toward a pick-up as the impact waned worldwide.
Attachment December 20, 2016 Bank of Japan upon the following.
However, a few other members were of the view that home prices continued to be on a substantial decline on the whole, and there were no signs of the housing market bottoming out.
The government would, taking into account the opinions of people in all social groups, do its best to prevent further economic deterioration and to help the economy overcome the current crisis.
With respect to overseas economies, members agreed that advanced economies continued to recover, mainly in household spending, and that the spread of the effects of such recovery to the corporate sector had become more evident, as seen in further positive developments in manufacturers' business sentiment.
The member then expressed the view that close attention should be paid to future price developments, taking into consideration the possibility that both the natural rate of interest and inflation expectations would decline.
Many members said that it was important, first of all, to reaffirm the following principles.
Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that Section 2.
After the state of emergency was lifted, liquidity in the JGB market had shown some improvement, such as in trading volume, but remained at a low level in a situation where interest rates had been stable.
They shared the view that the outlook for the employment and income situation was clearly improving, considering that an increased number of firms had decided to raise base pay and, according to various surveys, summer bonus payments this year were likely to increase noticeably.
One member expressed the view that various leading indicators of business fixed investment suggested that it would likely continue to increase firmly for the time being, including Olympic Games-related investment and labor-saving investment to address the labor shortage.
Firms nevertheless had generally maintained their plans to increase fixed investment firmly in the March Tankan, and machinery orders continued to show a solid increase, albeit with some fluctuations.
As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that supply-demand conditions in the labor market remained tight, and that employee income had increased.
As for liquidity in the bond market, one member pointed out that the ratio of the daily price range to the transaction volume in the JGB futures market remained at a relatively high level.
With regard to European economies, many members said that the economy of the euro area continued to expand with domestic and external demand well in balance.
Although it was likely to be affected by the slowdown in overseas economies for the time being, it was projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend thereafter.
Business fixed investment continued to see movements toward a pick-up, particularly in Germany.
(5) At an intensive discussion regarding monetary policy and prices at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on January 30, the government had reviewed the progress toward overcoming deflation and promoting economic revitalization.
Regarding the future path of monetary policy, members said that the Bank would conduct monetary policy by carefully assessing economic activity and prices.
Exports and industrial production were expected to remain relatively weak for the time being and increase moderately thereafter as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Members shared the view that financial conditions, with some lingering severity, had continued to show signs of easing.
On this point, many members noted that, according to the June 2013 _Tankan, business sentiment was clearly improving across a wider range of_ industries.
One of these members expressed the view that it was premature to consider a so-called exit from those purchases.
Thereby, the Bank will do its utmost to provide U.S. dollar liquidity.4 (2) Measures to facilitate corporate financing a) Introduction of the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Corporate Financing regarding the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) The Bank decided, by a unanimous vote, to introduce a new operation to provide loans against corporate debt (of about 8 trillion yen as of end-February 2020) as collateral at the interest rate of 0 percent with maturity up to one year.
Following the above discussions, members discussed the description on the outlook for prices in the Outlook Report.
Although the pace was decelerating while the effects of fiscal stimulus measures were waning, exports were continuing to increase and business fixed investment was rising moderately.
(3) The government, taking into account the effects of the disaster, would do its utmost to achieve stability in the normal routines of people's living situation and of economic activity.
They agreed that it would be appropriate for the Bank to reduce the maximum amount outstanding of the fixed-rate operation by about 5 trillion yen and instead increase outright purchases of T-Bills as similar short-term assets, by the same amount.
Members shared the view that housing investment had recently leveled out, mainly in the Tokyo metropolitan area, and was likely to gradually head for a recovery.
Private consumption was likely to weaken temporarily mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot weather and the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, but was expected to pick up again thereafter.
A few members said that firms still saw the number of their employees as excessive - although to a lesser extent, according to the results of the December Tankan -- and it would take time for employment to recover even with a continued pick-up in the economy.
One member expressed the view that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target had to be judged as being lost temporarily, and thus it was appropriate to revise the forward guidance for the policy rates to relate it to the impact of COVID-19.
The euro had depreciated against the dollar in light of further monetary easing by the European Central Bank (ECB).
Many members expressed the view that the upward pressure on prices stemming from the rise in firms' costs had continued to increase, partly due to a continued clear uptrend in hourly scheduled cash earnings of part-time employees and a rise in input prices.
In relation to this, one member expressed the view that it was also necessary to pay attention to the impact that price rises due to the yen's depreciation had on costs for small and medium-sized firms and on household sentiment.
Members agreed that sentiment in global financial markets had improved, partly due to the end of the U.S. presidential election and progress in the development of vaccines.
Meanwhile, one member pointed out that the sluggish increase in wages was partly attributable to the prevailing practice in which wage increases were determined based on the previous year's inflation rate, and that one method for accelerating wage growth -- as argued by a U.S. economist -- would be for the public sector to take the lead in revising such practice.
They also agreed that, in a situation where the output gap was likely to remain more or less at the same level, it seemed likely that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) would be around 1.0 percent on average, reflecting the rise in the prices of petroleum products and food products.
Third, with the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank would conduct monetary policy as appropriate, in response to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions, from the perspective of sustainable and stable achievement of the target.
Based on these discussions, members shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective.
Exports had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace.
Moreover, the Bank continued to conduct U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral and on January 8, 2009 started to conduct special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing.
Members shared the recognition that business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend with corporate profits and business sentiment improving in a wider range of industries.
Members concurred that the following thinking on the monetary policy stance for the future remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections materializing as well as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would implement appropriate policies in an accordingly flexible manner.
One member, however, expressed the view that if the recovery of advanced economies was delayed, growth in overseas demand would remain weak, making it unlikely, for the time being, that the Chinese economy would recover fully enough to return to its past rates of high growth.
Some members pointed out that the adverse feedback loop in some peripheral countries among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and economic activity had continued, and that its negative effects had been spreading even to core countries such as Germany.
These members continued that, according to reports at the July 2019 meeting of general managers of the Bank's branches, for example, business fixed investment had been underpinned by demand for medium- to long-term strategic investment and for investment by the nonmanufacturing sector, both of which are relatively unsusceptible to changes in overseas demand and the business cycle.
(3) As stated in the basic policies for economic and fiscal management presented in the government would overcome the restrictions brought about by the disaster in a sequential and steady manner, as well as strengthen the initiatives for achieving new growth and restore the growth potential of the Japanese economy.
Many members pointed to the fact that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for October 2013 had risen to 0.3 percent and that the number of items for which prices had risen had exceeded those for which prices had declined.
As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy would likely continue to grow stably, albeit at a somewhat slower pace, as authorities carried out stimulus measures while progressing with structural reforms.
Regarding the corporate sector, members agreed that, although the pace of increase in exports had slowed, partly due to the effects of the appreciation of the dollar, business sentiment and the momentum in production activity had been solid on the back of firm household spending, and business fixed investment continued to recover.
The government would like the Bank to implement effective monetary policy that was consistent with the government's policy efforts and with its outlook for the economy while paying due consideration to developments in financial markets, and to support the economy from the financial side responsibly, taking into account downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices.
Private consumption continued to be on an increasing trend, albeit with a somewhat clearer slowing of the pace of increase.
A different member expressed the opinion that it was appropriate for the Bank to decide at this meeting to continue with the negative interest rate policy, considering that terminating the yield curve control framework and the negative interest rate policy simultaneously should be avoided from the perspective that the Bank should avoid the risk of bringing about discontinuous changes in financial conditions.
A few members added that, although the functions of these two facilities overlapped each other to some extent, they would have value in playing their different respective roles.
A different member pointed out that, as often happens at the beginning of the first and second halves of the fiscal year, revisions in services prices had been confirmed in April 2024, the beginning of the fiscal year.
Facility'" was put to a vote.
The government would accelerate preparations for submitting related bills, primarily those on fundamental reform of the tax system, to the Diet by the end of fiscal 2011.
With regard to the working-style reform, the government would aim to compile a concrete action plan within the fiscal year.
The euro had generally been more or less level against the dollar.
Some members, referring to the increasing number of items for which prices had declined, expressed the view that attention should be paid to the possibility that the impact of the deterioration in the supply-demand balance on prices might be gradually growing.
In this situation, long-term interest rates in the United States and Germany were rising marginally, although they remained at low levels.
A few members expressed the opinion that the policy effects of boosting consumer spending had been decreasing, as evidenced by the decline in car sales.
The government expected the Bank to continue to thoroughly and actively explain the situation of its monetary policy management, including the proposals presented at this meeting.
Members discussed what level the loan rate for the complementary lending facility should be.
It decreased in the January-March quarter, but the decline was largely due to a reaction to the high growth in the previous quarter.
As for housing investment, members shared the recognition that it continued picking up on the back of accommodative financial conditions.
In the Economic and Fiscal Projections for Medium- to Long-Term Analysis released by the Cabinet Office, the national and local governments' primary balance-to-GDP ratio for fiscal 2015 was projected to be approximately minus 3.3 percent, indicating that this target could be achieved.
Regarding the outlook, they concurred that it was likely to be affected by the slowdown in overseas economies for the time being but was projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend thereafter, with overseas economies growing moderately on the whole.
Private consumption had shown a moderate recovery, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve, although the employment and income situation remained severe.
Interest rates on Euroyen futures, particularly those with distant contract months, had fallen further.
Some members expressed the view that, although the number of COVID-19 cases in Japan had been fewer than experienced in other countries, it would take some time until COVID-19 subsided.
The government expected the Bank to continue powerful monetary easing until the exit from deflation was ensured.
(3) With the aim of acting preemptively against the downside risks to the economy and the risks of hollowing out of domestic industries, both stemming mainly from the rapid appreciation of the yen, the government would swiftly finish compiling the mitigating the pain caused by the appreciation, building a robust economy that was resilient to risks, and making the maximum use of merits of the yen's appreciation.
Regarding the direction of the Bank's monetary policy responses to recent developments, members concurred that it was appropriate for the Bank to enhance monetary easing, with a view to doing its utmost to ensure smooth corporate financing and maintaining stability in financial markets, thereby preventing firms' and households' sentiment from deteriorating, given the following facts that reflected the outbreak of COVID-19: financial markets had been unstable, as seen particularly in significant fluctuations in the stock market; and concern over financial positions had become apparent, mainly among small and medium-sized firms.
Nevertheless, many members expressed the recognition that private consumption had been firm, supported in part by a favorable employment and income situation, and the economy maintained its resilience on the whole.
In the CP market, issuing conditions had been favorable: issuance rates on some high-rated CP had been below yields on government bills, and those on low-rated CP had been below their levels seen just before the failure of Lehman Brothers.
As for prices, although the effects of the rise in international commodity prices had been observed, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating due to slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods market and a decline in unit labor costs.
Nevertheless, it was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace, reflecting the effects of a range of policy measures.
Some members noted that effects of financial market turmoil in industrialized economies had spread worldwide, especially to emerging economies.
It was likely to weaken temporarily mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot weather and the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, but was expected to pick up again thereafter.
Regarding the "understanding," most members acknowledged that there was a view that it did not effectively communicate the Bank's policy stance, and recognized that one factor behind this view was that the Bank had provided the understanding of individual Policy Board members, which represented the level of inflation that each member considered to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the medium to long term, and that each member considered the Bank should aim to achieve.
As for the policy rates, the Bank expects short- and long-term interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels as long as it is necessary to pay close attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target will be lost.
With regard to the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the index for televisions turned positive in the CPI for the Tokyo metropolitan area for May, one member was paying attention to whether firms' price-setting behavior had started to change against the background of the rise in wages overseas and of the yen's depreciation since autumn 2012.
Although China's economic activity had gradually been picking up, its capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector had not returned to the level seen prior to the outbreak, and supply chain disruptions caused by a shortage of parts were yet to be resolved.
However, some of these members noted that, regarding the U.S.-China trade negotiations, uncertainty remained as there were issues on which the two countries differed with respect to the partial agreement and those on which an agreement had not been reached yet, as was the case with industrial policies.
Some members pointed out that private consumption in China remained firm except for that of automobiles, which saw a subsequent decline from the past increase in response to the reduction in the related tax cut.
One of these members added that, in order to achieve price stability on a sustainable basis, not only improvement in the negative output gap, but also strengthening the economy's growth potential -- through a rise in productivity, for example -- was important, and therefore it was deemed necessary for the Bank to share the same understanding with the government and the public regarding this point.
(1) The Japanese economy was moving steadily on its upward trend.
One member expressed the view that, considering the current economic and price developments, allowing eligible counterparties to borrow at a fixed rate of 0 percent for four years was too generous an incentive to encourage them to borrow funds.
Some members noted that the fact that yields on T-Bills had been negative at most times was indicative of the Bank's pursuit of aggressive monetary easing under quantitative and qualitative monetary easing.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was minus 0.3 percent in March mainly due to declines in airfares and mobile telephone charges in addition to a slightly increased negative contribution from petroleum products.
As for exports, movements toward a pick-up had been seen, although these had been somewhat weak.
They also agreed that, although business fixed investment had declined substantially and private consumption had remained generally weak, public investment had increased, exports and production had picked up, and business sentiment, especially at large manufacturers, had stopped deteriorating.
(2) As for prices, although the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food, or the core CPI, had been slightly positive for the past two consecutive months, the economy was still in a mild deflationary situation, as evidenced, for example, by the continued fall in price trends.
As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year maturity, declined slightly, staying in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent.
On the price front, commodity prices had fallen back.
Many members said that global financial markets remained unstable.
A different member said that rises in prices controlled by the government, such as the standard selling price for wheat, tended to lag a rise in market prices, and it was necessary to watch closely the effects of such delayed price rises.
Prices were also rising moderately.
One member said that, given the results of this year's annual spring labor-management wage negotiations to date, achievement of the price stability target seemed to have come in sight to some extent, mainly due to price rises accompanying wage increases.
On this basis, one member said that the combination of an increase in the size of the Program and the removal of the minimum bidding yield would generate more powerful monetary easing effects.
One member pointed out that investment was expected to accelerate further in light of moves such as the shifting of production sites back to Japan and the expansion of investment in research and development.
Such signs were expected to gradually become more evident as the improvement in corporate profits continued.
The member continued that, despite this acceleration, the pace of increase in the money stock (M2+CDs) was decelerating partly due to the ongoing shift of funds from bank deposits to other types of financial assets in a situation where the rate of return on financial assets other than bank deposits was improving and the Japanese financial system had regained stability.
A few members noted that attention should be paid to the point that some market participants had renewed concern about the size of the outstanding amount of government debt in Japan.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had remained slightly over 2 percent.
One of these members, however, said that wage growth had not accelerated as much as expected, compared to the high level of corporate profits.
In relation to the fact that fixed investment for large manufacturing firms had turned positive for the first time in eight quarters in the _Financial Statements Statistics of_ shared the recognition that favorable movements were beginning to be observed in manufacturing, which had been lagging behind.
In this situation, stock prices in the United States and Europe had been declining.
b) With regard to debt of companies that have not obtained an external credit rating, the companies should be classified as "normal" borrowers in the self-assessment by financial institutions.
Industrial production continued to move down in October relative to the July-September quarter, after having declined for two quarters in a row since the April-June quarter.
Members concurred that overseas economies on the whole still had not emerged from a deceleration phase, but some improvement had been observed, including the continued recovery, albeit at a moderate pace, of the U.S. economy.
In global financial markets, while investors had remained somewhat less risk averse on the back of the European debt problem, particular attention should be given to developments in these markets.
Economic activity in the euro area had been sluggish.
One member, however, noted that it showed signs of improvement, as seen in the fact that the number of female employees in the area of medical and nursing care exceeded the level seen before the Lehman shock, and that the number of part-time workers was increasing.
As for the employment situation, according to the Labour Force Survey, the year-on-year rate of decline in the number of employed persons for the July-August period was almost the same as that for the April-June quarter, mainly due to a decrease in non-regular employees in the face-to-face services industry.
Most members said that financial conditions remained generally tight, as evidenced by the fact that the polarization of funding conditions continued between firms with high and low credit ratings, and uncertainty in the pace of future economic recovery might be preventing firms from becoming optimistic about future funding conditions.
Some members said that, although the overall economy had continued to recover moderately, uncertainty regarding the outlook remained high, given the need to proceed with fiscal consolidation and balance-sheet adjustments at financial institutions.
A different member said that it was possible that it would take some time to achieve the price stability target, and therefore ensuring the sustainability of the policy was likely to become increasingly important.
Meanwhile, private consumption had been firm, especially in the ASEAN countries.
The year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had accelerated, mainly due to the prices of petroleum products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier, in addition to the substantial slack persisting in the economy as a whole.
As for the employment situation, a decline in the number of new job offers and sluggish growth in non-scheduled hours worked had recently been seen, mainly in the manufacturing sector.
On this basis, they shared the recognition that, although these risks were judged as not significant at this point, mainly because financial institutions had sufficient capital bases, it was necessary to pay close attention to future developments given that developments in financial institutions' profits had a cumulative impact on their financial strength.
Also, details such as the total amount of the loans and the deadline for new applications for the loans should be determined, taking into account financial institutions' plans for such lending and investment.
On Asian economies, members concurred that the economic slowdown had intensified, due to a decrease in exports reflecting the economic downturn in the United States and Europe and to deterioration in financial conditions mainly caused by a capital outflow.
A few members pointed to the recent bond issuance by firms that had previously deferred issuance in view of the instability in global financial markets stemming from the heightened sovereign risks in Europe, and also noted the increase in the number of firms issuing bonds.
In relation to this, a different member said that the background to the outflow of deposits from Greek banks was not the solvency problem of individual banks, but rather concern about the currency system -- specifically, the potential exit of Greece from the euro area.
Some members expressed the recognition that the pace of economic growth was highly likely to recover through the second half of 2019, partly because the effects of stimulus measures gradually would materialize and progress in adjustments in IT-related goods was anticipated.
In relation to this, one member said that the Bank should continually examine whether the level of the policy interest rate was appropriate, employing various methods, for instance, assessing the relationship between the real interest rate and the potential growth rate.
A different member said that the effects of monetary policy could be constrained if market participants began to question the Bank's stance toward overcoming deflation.
It was likely that production would remain on a downtrend reflecting weaker domestic and overseas demand, but the pace of decline was expected to moderate as adjustment pressures on inventories waned.
Exports had picked up with the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies diminishing.
Members also agreed that risks to the outlook were still tilted to the downside and uncertainty surrounding the outlook for the global economy remained high.
With regard to firms' price-setting stance, one member pointed out that, in a situation where an increasing number of firms were beginning to raise prices, due mainly to labor shortages, there were cases where the profitability of firms in some industries -- such as food services as well as beer and related beverages -- had improved owing to price increases, and that this had led to rises in their stock prices.
Exports and production had shown signs of stabilizing but growth in business fixed investment, particularly in the NIEs, had been sluggish as business sentiment remained cautious.
The slack in supply and demand conditions and the slow growth in wages continued to exert downward pressure on prices, while there was inflationary pressure from the impact of the increase in the value-added tax rate in Italy and the rise in prices of goods, including processed food, due to the continuing pass-through of the earlier increases in international commodity prices.
Some members then pointed out that real exports on a GDP basis for the July-September quarter had turned positive on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and said that signs of recovery in exports had been observed.
One member noted that attention should be paid to the fact that, from a macroeconomic perspective, growth in business fixed investment and wages was slow relative to that in corporate profits.
These factors could push the Bank closer to the realm of fiscal policy.
They then shared the recognition that exports and industrial production would probably remain relatively weak for the time being; however, although domestic demand was likely to remain resilient, mainly supported by reconstruction-related demand, a substantial increase in such demand, which would thereby compensate for the weakness in exports and industrial production, could no longer be expected.
Members shared the recognition that global financial markets remained volatile, as uncertainties surrounding overseas economies had increased against the backdrop of the United Kingdom's vote to leave the European Union (EU) and the slowdown in emerging economies.
Private consumption had been relatively weak as a whole, while production had been picking up as exports increased and the pace of decline in business fixed investment moderated.
With respect to yield curve control, members shared the view that, since the previous meeting, the JGB yield curve had been formed smoothly in a manner consistent with the guideline for market operations.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of an improvement in the output gap and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Members expressed the view that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, as Japan's economic and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts presented in October On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets' anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years, this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a buildup of financial imbalances.
Some members -- noting that small firms, particularly very small ones, regarded their financial positions as having deteriorated - commented that differences in funding conditions according to firm size were widening.
Regarding the consumption tax hike, a few members expressed the recognition that its effects on private consumption were expected to be smaller than those of the previous hike in 2014, mainly because the government would implement various measures to smooth out demand prior to and after the hike.
On the expenditure side, the government had recently compiled and released the fiscal 2014 budget requests based on requests submitted by ministries and agencies in accordance with the guidelines for budget requests for fiscal 2014 compiled in August 2013.
Regarding the outlook, as overseas economies grew moderately, exports were projected to return to an uptrend, mainly due to a pick-up in global demand for IT-related goods.
Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike.
On this basis, they shared the view that it was becoming more important for the Bank to continue to strive to ensure smooth settlement of funds and maintain market stability, taking into account the recent developments among U.S. financial institutions and their impact.
However, some members including this member were of the opinion that, although it was likely that the policy measures in individual countries would produce positive effects, it would be some time before they would be seen clearly and it was very uncertain how great they would be.
In this situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had climbed somewhat, mainly because the year-on-year rate of change in energy prices had turned positive.
The government would make the most of its negotiating power and pursue the best path to suit Japan's national interests.
It welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting of the principal terms and conditions for purchases of these assets as a swift response.
Many members expressed the opinion that the rate was likely to reach around 2 percent -- the price stability target -- in or around fiscal 2015, on the assumption that crude oil prices would rise moderately from around the recent level.
Regarding the special rules for small-lot investments and loans, many members noted that, although the amount of loans at the first disbursement was relatively small, the breakdown by area of loans provided by financial institutions that had received the Bank's loans showed that the proportions were large for areas such as "medical and nursing care," "business reorganization," "setting up a new business," "agriculture, forestry, and fisheries business," and "business serving the needs of senior citizens."
Thereafter, it was expected to remain more or less flat at a high level underpinned by Olympic Games-related construction, although the positive effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures would diminish.
On the other hand, services consumption such as dining-out and travel had been increasing firmly recently.
Funding conditions for firms and households had deteriorated further.
Based on this discussion, some members said that full attention should continue to be paid to developments in China's macroeconomic policy, including monetary policy, and their possible effects.
Judging from interviews with firms, production was projected to increase markedly in the April-June quarter of 2013. detecting large fluctuations after the Lehman shock as outliers (estimation by the Research and Statistics Department, Bank of Japan).
Another member said that uncertainty with regard to the outlook for economic activity and prices for fiscal 2013 and 2014 was considerably greater than that in previous projections.
In the commodity market, crude oil prices had risen amid concern in particular over geopolitical risks in the Middle East.
On the price front, international commodity prices declined in the period from the summer to the early autumn, but remained high in a situation where global demand was on an increasing trend.
Some members expressed the view that the undersubscription that had recently occurred in the Bank's outright purchases of corporate bonds and T-Bills under the Program, as well as a decline in the bid-to-cover ratios of the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral with a six-month term, indicated that the effects of the Bank's significant monetary easing had been spreading to financial markets.
The financial positions of firms had continued to be favorable as a whole, although those of small firms had deteriorated somewhat.
Real exports posted a solid increase in the January-March quarter from the previous quarter, after exhibiting high growth throughout the second half of 2007.
A few members pointed out, for example, that the Chinese authorities had been making a very strong commitment to underpinning the economic growth rate, and that Japanese-affiliated firms in China were generally less pessimistic about developments in the Chinese economy than their headquarters in Japan.
Nominal wages per worker, however, had remained somewhat weak.
Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom was picking up.
Third, with regard to the risk balance, he proposed a new expression that "risks to both economic activity and prices are likely to be generally balanced for the time being."
As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy would gradually show signs of bottoming out -- triggered by an improvement in economic entities' sentiment and the pick-up in exports -- as additional downward pressure from the fiscal side was reduced.
Some members expressed the opinion that attention should be paid to the effects of the recent instability in stock prices on private consumption.
(2) Faced by the current severe economic conditions, the government, with the aim of overcoming deflation and ensuring economic recovery, would carry out the emergency economic countermeasures and steadily implement the budget for fiscal 2010, and would also draw up concrete plans for the "New Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and implement the plans.
On this basis, many members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would accelerate as the base effect of the falling crude oil prices dissipated, and was likely to reach around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015, given that the output gap and inflation expectations -- both of which determined the underlying trend in inflation -- were likely to improve steadily and increase, respectively.
In addition, one member said that, in order to encourage firms' efforts toward creating value-added, it was important to develop and enhance direct financing through, for example, creating a deep corporate bond market so that more investment funds for growth would be provided to firms, and that the Bank should encourage their activities toward sustainable growth.
A few members expressed the view that the demand-boosting effects of various policy measures targeted at durable goods consumption -- which had supported the pick-up in the economy -- were likely to wane upon completion of the policy measures in fiscal 2010.
It was expected to remain firm as the employment situation gradually headed toward improvement.
Exports remained on an increasing trend.
As for the outlook, some members were of the opinion that, amid the waning of the effects of inventory restocking and fiscal spending, the pace of U.S. economic recovery was likely to remain moderate, constrained by households' excessive debt.
The upward trend was expected to continue as overseas economies continued to grow and domestic demand kept expanding.
Many members referred to developments in import prices as a risk factor for the outlook for prices, and pointed to the need to closely monitor the degree to which the recent appreciation of the yen exerted downward pressure on consumer prices.
The general collateral (GC) repo rate had remained relatively high due to lenders' cautious stance on trading.
As for the employment and income situation, household income had continued rising moderately, reflecting improvements in employment and wages, in a situation where various indicators for labor market conditions had been improving.
Members shared the view that the pace of growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN economies was likely to gradually rise since exports were expected to continue picking up, particularly those to Europe and the United States, on the back of recovery in advanced economies.
Some members, referring to varied market speculation about the Bank's conduct of monetary policy, said that monetary policy should be conducted in light of its objective to achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability.
As for prices, there were differences by country and region.
Members agreed that, although overseas economies taken as a whole had continued to expand, the pace of growth was slowing and downside risks remained elevated, mainly reflecting the increasing tensions in global financial markets, sluggish growth in the Members shared the view that tensions in global financial markets had been increasing against the background of the recent developments among U.S. financial institutions.
Moreover, some members expressed the view that, in addition to manufacturers, firms in nonmanufacturing industries seemed to be gradually starting to lead the current economic growth, noting the following facts in relation to large nonmanufacturing firms.
Members shared the recognition that exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of the growth in overseas economies.
Many members shared the assessment that services prices continued to increase moderately, partly due to the moderate wage increases thus far.
In India, the economy had been growing steadily, particularly in domestic demand, partly in reflection of expectations for structural reforms and of monetary easing effects.
The European economy was likely to gradually move out of its deceleration phase as adjustments in the manufacturing sector, which had shown some weakness, progressed.
Private consumption was expected to remain resilient, supported in part by improvement in the employment situation.
One of these members referred to the fact that there was an ongoing polarization of real estate prices between metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas as well as within metropolitan areas.
As background to this, these members noted the following two points: (1) firms' stance was likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices with the steady improvement in the output gap, and (2) medium- to long-term inflation expectations, which had been more or less unchanged recently, were likely to rise steadily as further price rises came to be observed widely.
One member pointed out that, if side effects materialized as a result of additional easing, it was necessary to consider methods to mitigate them.
A different member said that international commodity prices had bounced back recently, and such upward pressures on upstream prices warranted attention because they might affect consumer prices eventually.
Members shared the recognition that factors such as U.S. economic policies, negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU), and geopolitical risks continued to be regarded as risks to developments in overseas economies.
Based on this discussion, members concurred that it was appropriate to properly communicate the following consensus views to the public.
Business fixed investment was projected to continue to see a moderate increase for the time being on the back of the high level of corporate profits.
Meanwhile, a few members stated that risks regarding economic activity at home and abroad remained significant, and it was necessary to carefully assess, for example, the propensity to consume after the consumption tax hike, sustainability of favorable developments in financial markets, and developments in the decoupling of the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors.
In addition, the Bank decided to make the following adjustments in accordance with the measures described above.