However, members shared the view that the outlook was attended by a significant level of uncertainty, given that economic activity was likely to be strongly affected by developments in overseas economies and global financial markets.
This operation has been renamed to the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19).
They concluded that developments in private consumption warranted conservative forecasting.
However, slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages continued to exert downward pressure.
In relation to one of the purposes of the policy -- that is, to influence longer-term interest rates -- some members were of the view that it was important for the Bank to secure market confidence in its policy time horizon, and in doing so, explain consistently to the public that it would maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judged that price stability was in sight.
(2) At the Council for the Realization of Work Style Reform, the prime minister had asked the industrial sector to (1) conduct wage increases of at least the same extent as those for 2016, (2) implement base pay increases for a fourth consecutive year, (3) discuss wage increases that took inflation expectations into consideration, and (4) improve transaction terms for subcontractors and other small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Economic activity in Russia remained severe but had generally bottomed out, mainly due to a halt in the decline in commodity prices.
(3) The subprime mortgage problem, which had begun to be resolved, still required careful monitoring.
As mentioned earlier, each country had responded to the spread of COVID-19 in consideration of sustaining economic activity.
Voting against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
The consumption activity index (CAI; real, travel balance adjusted) had declined for the January-March quarter of 2024, due to the effects of mild winter weather and suspension of production and shipment at some automakers.
Thereafter, it was projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting the recovery in emerging economies and the effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures materializing.
Some members expressed the opinion that, with a view to promoting the transition from the first stage to the second stage of the transmission mechanism of monetary easing, the Bank had been making contributions as the central bank through, for example, the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth.
Members also agreed that consumer prices in both fiscal 2007 and 2008 were likely to evolve broadly in line with the projection in the April Outlook Report.
A few members noted, however, that attention should be paid to upside risks in the Chinese economy.
Most members pointed to the fact that Japan's economy had recently shown signs of a pick-up and was in an important phase of returning to a moderate recovery path, and that the government had announced that it would formulate measures for strengthening the growth potential of Japan's economy and promote them strongly.
Some members pointed out that the Bank's Opinion Survey on the General prices.
(2) The Japanese economy was recovering at a moderate pace and was expected to continue to do so.
They shared the recognition that business spending, such as business fixed investment, was expected to decrease, mainly in industries affected strongly by substantial declines in exports and consumption, and that thereafter it was likely to pick up as the impact of COVID-19 waned.
They concurred that it was appropriate to increase the total size of the Asset Purchase Program by about 10 trillion yen, in order to make financial conditions for economic entities such as firms and households even more accommodative by further encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and a reduction in risk premiums.
A few members expressed the view that overseas economies were unlikely to recover in the short run, given that adjustments in the U.S. housing market, which had caused financial system disruptions in the United States and Europe, had not made progress and a negative feedback loop was already operating between financial markets and economic activity.
Long-term interest rates in the United States and Germany had risen temporarily due to the reduced expectations for further monetary easing but were recently on a declining trend, mainly reflecting relatively weak economic indicators and concerns over the European debt problem.
Members then concurred that a positive output gap had taken hold, given the recent tightening of labor market conditions and the increase in capacity utilization rates, with the latter reflecting a rise in production.
However, the issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds had been favorable, and the lending attitudes of private banks had continued to be accommodative.
With respect to overseas financial markets, along with aggressive macroeconomic policies conducted by each country and region, market sentiment had been improving, reflecting, for example, the easing of preventive measures against the spread of COVID-19 followed by a resumption of economic activity and expectations for the development of medicines and vaccines.
A few members expressed the view that firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend.
They continued that, nevertheless, as these developments would lead to an increased tightening of labor market conditions during the course of the economic recovery, wage growth was expected to increase as a trend, partly reflecting price rises, and employee income was projected to continue increasing.
As for the employment and income situation, one member said that deterioration in the employment situation had been evident, as seen, for example, in the number of employed persons not at work remaining high and a rise in the unemployment rate.
In relation to this, a few other members commented that, since European financial institutions were currently reducing their assets only at a moderate pace, other financial institutions were able to partly offset the reduction in some way.
With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment was picking up as a whole.
Many members said that the forecasts of Policy Board members and the Risk Balance Charts were merely reference materials supplementary to the written explanations of the mechanisms behind developments in the economy and prices, and this should be understood by the public, including market participants.
With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members concurred that the U.S. economy had been on a recovery trend, assisted by firmness in the employment and income situation and in household spending, although the industrial sector had lacked momentum, mainly against the background of the slowdown in emerging economies.
(3) The government would like the Bank, based on its economic assessment above and taking full account of the government's policy efforts, to continue to support the economy by conducting monetary policy in a flexible and timely manner.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator for all items excluding food and energy had been in the range of 1.0-1.5 percent.
Exports were expected to continue to rise against the background of the expansion of overseas economies as a whole.
The issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds was favorable, and the lending attitude of private banks had continued to be accommodative.
One member added that there was a risk that extreme trade protectionism would disrupt established global supply chains and bring about a contraction in global trade, which finally had been recovering.
These members then expressed the recognition that it was therefore important for the Bank to continue to engage in careful communication.
The government had convened the first Zone Council for the Okinawa Prefecture zone, which meant that it had convened Zone Councils in all of the six special zones it had identified.
With regard to the recent weakness, many members pointed to the effects of (1) the deceleration in overseas economies, (2) recent developments in the relations between Japan and China, and (3) the ending of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars.
On this point, a few members said that some of the factors that underpinned the current firmness in private consumption were likely to dissipate: for example, the budget allocated for subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars would run out and pent-up demand following the earthquake disaster would wane.
On Asian economies, members concurred that China and India continued to show high growth.
The member continued that it would therefore be appropriate to increase the amount of the Program by about 5 trillion yen.
One member was of the opinion that firms' wage- and price-setting behavior had been changing to behavior that assumed a continuous rise in prices, and this provided evidence that the deflationary mindset was starting to be dispelled.
A few members said that the recent growth in exports had been stronger than assumed in the projection in the April 2010 Outlook Report.
One member said that corporate bond issuance and public offering of stocks had subsided amid reduced demand for funds among firms.
One member, however, noted that there were signs of an improvement in consumer confidence reflecting the recent decline in crude oil prices and this might provide impetus to car purchases, for example.
In relation to this point, one member expressed concern that the June Tankan indicated that the diffusion index of business sentiment in the accommodations as well as the eating and drinking services industries remained significantly negative, not only for the current situation but also for the outlook.
With regard to economic activity, members agreed that the economy had been on a moderate expanding trend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating, although exports, production, and business sentiment had shown some weakness, mainly affected by the slowdown in overseas economies and natural disasters.
It was expected to turn upward, albeit marginally, in the October-December quarter.
Sales at department stores and supermarkets, which primarily sold nondurable and semi-durable consumer goods, had been more or less unchanged, with fluctuations caused by the weather.
The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of January 22 and 23, 2018 for release on March 14.
(1) The government greatly welcomed the Bank's decision at the previous meeting to implement drastic measures.
In a situation where reconstruction-related demand was likely to persist, in order to continue supporting the efforts of financial institutions in disaster areas toward rebuilding, the staff considered it appropriate for the Bank to extend the deadline for new applications for loans under the operation by one year, to April 30, 2014, while keeping the existing 1 trillion yen ceiling for the outstanding balance of loans.
(3) Third, it would be appropriate for the Bank to integrate loan durations -- which were currently "3 months" or "6 months" -- into "within 6 months" under the fixed-rate operation, in order to respond flexibly to financial institutions' liquidity demand.
Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective; that is, they assessed the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices considered to be the most likely through fiscal 2012.
In addition, one member noted that, although the momentum toward 2 percent inflation was maintained, it likely would take a certain amount of time to achieve the target.
Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the October 2016 Outlook Report (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background") and formed a majority view.
(4) With regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), considerable progress had been made at a ministerial meeting held recently in Hawaii, in that agreement had been reached on various issues; however, it was agreed that further discussions were required for some specific issues.
In terms of global financial markets, members agreed that some nervousness had been seen in some parts of the markets in particular, due to heightened uncertainty over the political situation in Italy and the European situation regarding the support package for Cyprus.
Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the decision should be made public.
The government was highly concerned that the appreciation of the yen and increased evidence of sluggishness in overseas economies, due to the anxiety over debt problems in Europe, continued to pose significant downside risks to the Japanese economy.
Some members noted that relatively weak developments had been observed in indicators of consumer sentiment, but these indicators had recently shown signs of bottoming out.
The government had been holding the Government-Labor-Management Meetings for Realizing a Positive Cycle of the Economy.
As for long-term interest rates, yields on government bonds with short-term maturities had been more or less unchanged and those with medium- to long-term maturities remained in a similar situation, although they exhibited developments that followed yields on government bonds in the United States.
Many members commented that the Bank needed to further exchange views with financial institutions based on the preliminary framework to be made public immediately after the meeting, and draw up concrete plans for the measure that included operational details.
This member continued, however, that these changes did not reflect an economic downturn.
Fifth, with regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, he proposed a new expression that "the Bank will, with the aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term, continue to provide consistent support from the financial side.
Yield differentials between their sovereign bonds and U.S. Treasuries, which had fluctuated widely, had expanded recently.
It also expected the Bank to conduct appropriate monetary policy while carefully monitoring the impact of COVID-19 on the economy as well as developments in financial and capital markets.
One of these members added that, according to the aggregate results of wage negotiations compiled by the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo) so far, movements toward wage increases were expected to spread even among small firms.
In this situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been at around 3.5 percent.
As for domestic demand in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while the rate of increase in business fixed investment seemed to be slowing, private consumption remained firm.
Industrial production had bottomed out, due in part to the progress in inventory adjustments.
This operation would be renamed to the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19).
On this basis, many members expressed the view that, although some indicators -- such as machinery orders for May -- had shown some weakness, firms were maintaining a positive attitude, as the June _Tankan indicated that firms were_ planning to steadily increase fixed investment in fiscal 2014.
The chairman first provided the following explanation for calling an unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting.
As for housing investment, the pick-up had paused since the middle of 2015 but resumed recently, underpinned by accommodative financial conditions.
The pick-up in indicators related to consumer sentiment was also becoming evident.
Many members expressed the view that the scenario presented in the April 2011 Outlook Report -- that the economy would return to a moderate recovery path from the second half of fiscal 2011 -- remained intact, and growth prospects for fiscal 2012 would likely remain broadly unchanged from the April forecasts.
Based on their assessment of the economic and financial situation, members agreed that their basic thinking remained unchanged on the future path of monetary policy: the Bank would adjust the level of the policy interest rate gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and prices, while maintaining the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates for some time.
One member said that, due to the tightening of labor market conditions, an increasing number of firms would raise wages of regular employees with the aim of securing the labor force and improve labor productivity through IT investment and the working-style reform.
By promoting these measures, the government would raise the attractiveness of Japanese firms and encourage the expansion of domestic and foreign investment, boosting economic growth and strengthening the competitiveness of the Japanese economy.
The supplementary budget would thoroughly incorporate, for example, measures that should be urgently implemented -- taking into account the Urgent Policies to Realize a Society in Which All Citizens are Dynamically Engaged and the Comprehensive Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)-Related Policy Framework -- while firmly maintaining the target of halving its primary balance deficit relative to GDP for fiscal 2015.
Members also shared the recognition that, on the price front, careful attention should be paid to the responsiveness of prices to the aggregate supply and demand balance as well as future developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations and international commodity prices.
Based on this discussion, the chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy and put it to a vote.
On this basis, a few members said that the outlook for the economy was highly uncertain and that the risk of it slowing for longer than expected warranted attention.
Many members commented that, although risk aversion among investors had temporarily eased following the announcement of financial assistance to Spain by the Eurogroup, the likelihood that tensions in the markets could further intensify was not small, as there remained a high degree of uncertainty about the European debt problem -- including how fiscal consolidation and economic structural reforms in Greece following its election in June would develop -- and consequently the global economy.
A few members added that, in Europe, progress had not been made among countries in terms of seeking agreement on the conditionalities for financial assistance to peripheral countries or with regard to identifying the direction to be taken in the euro area integration, thereby leading to the repeat of a situation where the motivation to take coordinated policy actions weakened and a conflict of interests among European countries surfaced whenever markets more or less regained stability.
As for the outlook, they continued that the growth rates of these economies would increase as the virtuous circle of production, income, and spending was likely to gradually strengthen.
They agreed that it would be appropriate for the Bank to substantially increase the total size of the Program, by about 10 trillion yen, from about 70 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen.
(1) The Japanese economy had been exhibiting signs of upward movement recently, as seen in the steady restoration of supply chains and improvement in consumer sentiment.
One member said that exports to the United States had continued to be on an uptrend as a whole, although the economic slowdown had had some effects, for example, a slowing of growth in exports of automobile-related goods and a decline in those of construction machinery.
Exports were increasing moderately.
The government expected that, with the funds-supplying operation decided at this meeting to support financial institutions in the disaster areas, restoration and rebuilding in these areas would be fully supported from the financial aspect.
Economic growth in India had decelerated, and that in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been sluggish.
One member noted that, looking at price movements in October by item, the number of items whose price change from a year earlier turned positive exceeded the number of items whose price change turned negative.
A different member expressed the recognition that it was essential for the Bank to aim to achieve the price stability target while gaining the public's understanding on the importance of overcoming deflation, so that a shift in firms' stance toward raising prices would not be interpreted in a negative manner.
Regarding international commodity prices, while prices of industrial metals had risen, those of crude oil and agricultural products had declined.
Thereafter, they were projected to continue increasing moderately, as the growth rates of overseas economies were likely to rise, albeit with fluctuations resulting mainly from the subsequent decline in IT-related demand following the current increase.
Exports and industrial production had declined due to the slowdown in overseas economies since last year, as well as the decrease in external demand, mainly from China, and the effects on the global supply chain of stopping production, also mainly in China, reflecting the outbreak of COVID-19.
Based on the discussion, members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective, that is to say, they assessed the most likely outlook for economic activity and prices.
As for the outlook, the diffusion index was projected to deteriorate, mainly in view of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase; nevertheless, it was still projected to be in "favorable" territory to a marginal degree.
Members concurred that the first provisional aggregate results for the wage growth rate agreed in the revealed a high figure that clearly exceeded the rate for 2023.
These members then expressed the view that, by establishing a program on its balance sheet through which the Bank would make the purchase, the Bank would be able to clearly distinguish and treat the purchase separately from conventional purchases of long-term government bonds, which were conducted in accordance with the long-term trend of increase in banknotes.
One member added that the rate of change for all items less fresh food and energy had been stagnant at slightly above 0 percent, and this was due to the effects of the earlier sluggishness in private consumption and the yen's appreciation appearing with a time lag.
Regarding the staff's proposal on forward guidance, many members expressed the recognition that it was appropriate from the viewpoint of strengthening the Bank's commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, and of ensuring public confidence in its policy conduct.
Members discussed the economic and financial conditions abroad, and shared the view that overseas economies were still recovering at a slower but moderate pace, led by high growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and would continue to recover.
(2) In order to prevent the hollowing out of domestic industries, the government deemed it important to promptly proceed with the following, by utilizing such means as the third supplementary budget for fiscal 2011: (1) mitigate the pain caused by the appreciation of the yen by further expanding financial support to small firms; (2) take such measures as a decisive increase in location subsidies to firms, to prevent the hollowing out of domestic industries and build a robust economy that was resilient to risks; and (3) make the maximum use of merits of the yen's appreciation through Japanese firms' acquisitions of foreign firms and interests in natural resources.
Members shared the view that, although the pace of decline in the CPI was likely to continue moderating as the supply and demand balance improved, downward pressure on prices was likely to persist for an extended period because the pace of economic recovery would probably be only moderate.
As for employment and income, in a situation where firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor, household income had continued rising moderately.
Industrial production has been more or less flat as a trend, but it has declined recently, partly due to the effects of a suspension of production and shipment at some automakers.
Members concurred that overseas economies had been depressed significantly, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These members said that, in addition to successive monetary easing measures implemented in response to the recent decline in inflation rates, future infrastructure investment plans were being brought forward and measures to stimulate consumption had been taken, and that, together with improvement in households' real purchasing power, these measures were likely to gradually produce policy effects.
Many members shared the view that financial conditions in Japan had remained tight as a whole despite improved issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds.
In relation to this point, a different member said that it was also important for the Bank to continue to explain thoroughly that its JGB purchases were not conducted for the purpose of financing the fiscal deficit.
As for the employment and income situation, members concurred that household income had continued rising moderately in a situation where various indicators had continued to show tighter labor market conditions.
Meanwhile, regarding the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019, one member stated that the negative impact on Japan's economy likely would be limited compared to the previous hike in 2014, due partly to the effects of various measures to be taken by the government.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen continued to move within a narrow range of around 76-78 yen against the U.S. dollar.
Reflecting these developments in demand, the decrease in production was coming to a halt.
Some members, however, said that the deceleration of overseas economic growth seemed to be starting to affect Japan's exports, and therefore due attention should be paid to the degree of the deceleration.
As for the interbank market, interest rates on term instruments had been at high levels, reflecting concerns about counterparty risk.
Regarding risks to the financial system, members shared the recognition that, if COVID-19 had a larger impact than expected, there was a risk that deterioration in the real economy would affect financial system stability, thereby exerting further downward pressure on the real economy.
One member -- while noting the relatively weak developments in consumer confidence since October 2013 -- said that this might be attributable to consumers' awareness of the consumption tax hike, and future developments warranted attention.
The number of housing starts, which was a leading indicator of housing investment and had been more or less flat from January 2008 until recently, had dropped.
As for prices, international commodity prices had been more or less level.
One member said that, in order to increase income, including base pay, an arrangement involving the government similar to the one made last year might also be necessary this year.
A different member emphasized that the Bank's expansion of the QQE was necessary as a preemptive action, given that in Japan, where inflation expectations had not been anchored, a decline in the actual inflation rate affected inflation expectations.
Private consumption continued to increase against the background of a moderate recovery in the employment situation; nevertheless, in a situation where balance-sheet adjustments continued to weigh on the economy, the pace of increase had been slowing recently due to a decline in real purchasing power brought about by the earlier rise in crude oil prices.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently dropped to the range of 15,000-15,500 yen.
Some members pointed out that this reflected to some extent structural factors such as the shift of Japanese manufacturers' production sites to overseas.
Some members said that business fixed investment on a real GDP basis and shipments of capital goods continued to increase in the January-March quarter.
Another member noted the possibility that downward pressure on scheduled cash earnings would remain, reflecting the rising trend in the ratio of part-time workers.
The member continued that, therefore, with regard to the purchases of the super-long-term JGBs, an adjustment should be considered in such a way that it would not be incorrectly taken as being part of an exit strategy.
These members then commented that this situation partly enabled firms to absorb cost increases and take a cautious price-setting stance.
Many members said that corporate profits continued to improve, despite the slowdown in emerging economies, due in part to the effects of the yen's depreciation as well as the decline in crude oil prices, and that these profits had increased to a record-high level.
At the Meeting of the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy, initiatives regarding a variety of sectors were being discussed -- such as next-generation administrative services, regional revitalization, and human capital investment -- in view of the formulation of the basic policies on economic and fiscal management and reform to be completed this summer.
Meanwhile, the deceleration of economic growth in India had come to a halt.
Some members commented that the growth in demand for some IT-related goods was slowing around the world.
Business fixed investment had been depressed substantially, mainly reflecting the decline in corporate profits.
Regarding the direction of the Bank's monetary policy responses to recent developments, members concurred that it was appropriate for the Bank to further enhance monetary easing, given that, due to the impact of the spread of COVID-19 at home and abroad, Japan's economy had been in an increasingly severe situation and financial conditions had been less accommodative in terms of corporate financing, as seen in deterioration in firms' financial positions.
As for the effects of the sovereign debt problems in Europe, a few members noted that it was also necessary to pay attention to the risk that increased risk aversion among investors would lead to a rapid outflow of funds from the capital markets in emerging economies.
Meanwhile, a different member commented that, although the unemployment rate remained on a declining trend, the number of new job openings was decreasing, suggesting somewhat of a slowdown in economic activity.
A few members said that consumer sentiment had become more cautious due to deterioration in consumers' view of the economy and the rise in prices.
In response, some members expressed a more cautious view on the outlook for prices.
Based on this, most members shared the view that, as for policy rates, it would expect short- and long-term interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels.
A few members, however, said that it was necessary to pay attention to whether private consumption would be dampened by the following factors: (1) the budget allocated for subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars would run out before long, (2) the cuts in the salaries of government employees were likely to exert negative effects, and (3) the level of summer bonus payments in 2012 was projected to be somewhat weak.
On this basis, some members noted that there were signs of weakness in some indicators, reflecting the waning effects of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars and somewhat low bonuses in the summer.
Production, while remaining more or less flat, had shown some signs of picking up.
A different member expressed the view that while the rate of increase in the CPI would definitely rise gradually as a trend, there remained some uncertainty about the precise pace of its rise.
However, with firms' persistent sense of excessive capital stock, the pace of improvement in business fixed investment was likely to remain moderate.
Consumer sentiment had been improving recently.
The member then added that, in order to proceed deliberately along the path of monetary policy normalization in response to developments in economic activity and prices, the Bank needed to decide on the termination of the negative interest rate policy at an appropriate timing as a first step toward the normalization.
The government was of the view that the Bank's measures proposed at this meeting aimed to steadily increase the amount outstanding of the Program.
Some members expressed the view that, by working on risk premiums, the Bank would encourage risk-taking activity within the overall economy, which would in turn increase the economy's productivity and strengthen competitiveness, thereby further enhancing the effects of monetary easing.
In this situation, the Bank had actively injected liquidity into the money market through both same-day-start and future-day-start operations to ensure market stability.
They had recovered, however, due to the announcement of financial assistance to Spain by the Eurogroup and heightened expectations for additional monetary easing.
In such a case, the Bank should increase the amount for each asset category as follows: about 0.5 trillion yen for JGBs; about 1.0 trillion yen for T-Bills; about 1.5 trillion yen for CP and corporate bonds, respectively; about 0.45 trillion yen for exchange-traded funds (ETFs); and about 0.05 trillion yen for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs).
However, some members noted that the pick-up in overseas economies had been only moderate and uneven.
Some members, noting that households' and firms' short-term inflation expectations were susceptible to actual price developments, expressed the view that attention should be paid to the possibility of heightened expectations that prices were unlikely to rise, given that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI had remained at a low level for a long time, and this in turn could lead to a slower pace of increase in prices than that suggested by the improvement in the negative output gap.
Housing investment had also been showing clear signs of picking up, albeit at a depressed level.
Members first discussed recent developments in global financial markets, and confirmed that, reflecting the further worsening of the Greek problem, strains in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets in Europe reemerged after the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, and there were concerns that these might spread to other markets and financial centers.
Some members said that, in the June 2010 _Tankan, fixed investment plans of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing_ firms for fiscal 2010 were revised upward and the aggregated amount of all industries' plans exceeded the previous year's level for the first time in three years.
A different member pointed out that, as Japanese firms had long been exposed to intense competition, they had improved their production efficiency to secure high international competitiveness.
(2) Although there were no particular concerns about Japanese financial institutions' funding in foreign currencies, it would be appropriate for the Bank -- with the aim of facilitating money market operations as well as ensuring the smooth functioning and stability of the financial markets -- to extend the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangement as proposed, as part of the coordinated central bank actions, together with the effective period of the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral, through August 1, 2012.
A few members noted that the effects of the sovereign debt problems in Europe were observed in some emerging and commodity-exporting economies not only through international trade but also through European financial institutions' reduction of their assets.
As for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, producer prices were rising moderately relative to three months earlier.
Some members expressed concern about a slowdown in private consumption in major countries such as Germany, where it had been rising moderately.
However, members continued that, with the aim of operating the Program more smoothly, it would be appropriate to reduce the maximum outstanding amount of the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral by about 5 trillion yen and instead allocate that amount to the purchase of JGBs.
In response, a few members, noting that central banks sought to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate manner with a view to stabilizing economic activity and prices in their own countries, expressed the recognition that the Bank needed to do likewise while taking account of developments in Japan's economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.
Private consumption had been generally picking up.
A different member said that the pace of increase in the number of employees in the Labour Force Survey had been slowing recently, and thus this as well as the ratio of job offers to applicants, which had declined, continued to warrant close monitoring.
Looking at an indicator that represented the difference between the share of items in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for which prices had risen from the previous year and that for which prices had declined in order to capture trend changes in the CPI, this had risen markedly.
The amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued was somewhat above the previous year's level.
They were expected to continue increasing as supply-side constraints eased further, against the background of the improvement in overseas economic conditions.
Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the following proposal on the guideline for money market operations and put it to a vote.
Therefore, the government deemed it necessary to pay due attention to price developments and the downside risks to the economy stemming from the slowdown in overseas economies.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) had been around zero percent, mainly due to the past drop in crude oil prices.
One of these members expressed the view that, although there did not seem to be any problem with the financial system and the functioning of financial intermediation by financial institutions at this stage, due attention needed to be paid to the changes in the market environment at home and abroad, such as the flattening of the yield curve for U.S. Treasuries and the rise in funding costs for foreign currencies, as well as to their impact on financial institutions' profits and the financial system.
Regarding prices, some members commented that the inflation rate was trending down.
Housing The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.
Private consumption was expected to remain resilient as a trend, although it would show some weakness for the time being, mainly since car sales had fallen back.
However, some members noted that the effects of QQE continued to be substantial, given that interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels across the entire yield curve despite the rise in overseas interest rates.
In response to the staff's explanation, members concurred that it was appropriate to change the amount of each ETF to be purchased, as proposed by the staff.
On the other hand, with corporate profits staying at high levels on the whole, business fixed investment has continued on an increasing trend.
The government would thoroughly fulfill its role specified in the joint statement, such as promoting measures to strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of the economy and those aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure.
A few members pointed out that the in business fixed investment for the January-March quarter of 2016, and that various surveys revealed that firms also planned to steadily increase fixed investment for fiscal in the global economy and turbulence in the financial markets, firms had maintained their positive fixed investment stance, supported in part by the further decline in real interest rates brought about by Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate.
The European economy continued to recover steadily, albeit at a moderate pace, mainly in the household sector.
Some members, however, expressed the view that risks had heightened in financial markets again with rising expectations about debt restructuring in Greece, as witnessed by the recurrence of the widening of the yield spreads of government bonds issued by some peripheral European countries over those issued by Germany.
Meanwhile, members reaffirmed that (1) it was extremely important to ensure the credibility of fiscal management; and (2) it was for this reason that they expected the government to steadily promote measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure, in line with the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan.
Some other members commented that uncertainty about corporate financing had decreased as Japan's economy had started to pick up.
As for the outlook, members shared the recognition that, due in part to the effects resulting from the set of economic measures, the tightening of labor market conditions was likely to continue, accompanied by a decline in the unemployment rate, and capacity utilization rates also were likely to increase again as exports and production would probably pick up.
One member said that the member was previously concerned about the possibility that the recovery in production might slow in summer 2009, but acknowledged that production had turned out to be slightly stronger than previously anticipated, reflecting the pick-up in iron and steel production, which had lagged behind.
As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of change in the CGPI had become negative and the CGPI was likely to continue decreasing for the time being, mainly due to the fall in commodity prices.
The Bank, in accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1 percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both decided at the previous meeting on April 26 and 27, 2017, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.
Regarding the Bank's JGB purchases, they reconfirmed that, under the current policy framework, the Bank had been conducting the purchases so as to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline for market operations, and therefore the amount of such purchases varied to some extent depending on financial market conditions.
(1) On January 22, 2018, the government submitted the budget for fiscal 2018 and the supplementary budget for fiscal 2017 to the Diet.
One member said that no concrete evidence had been presented to suggest a buildup of financial imbalances.
Some members said that, while the money market had remained stable, stock prices and long-term interest rates had declined reflecting increased uncertainties regarding the outlook, and risk aversion in financial markets could heighten further.
The government aimed to secure smooth financial functions, particularly in the disaster areas, working in concert with the Bank.
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is around 1 percent.
One of these members added that this point was particularly important because the period around the year-end and early next year was a critical one when firms formulated business plans and conducted wage negotiations.
Regarding fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020, they concurred that the pace of increase in private consumption was projected to be moderate, mainly because it was likely to temporarily turn to a decline due to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike in October 2019.
A few members, however, were of the opinion that the growth in summer bonus payments was likely to be relatively small reflecting the leveling-off of corporate profits.
It was meaningful that an agreement had been reached on the framework to hold full and constructive discussions led by the deputy prime minister and the vice president, both of whom were in responsible positions.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had increased moderately, and was moving at around 16,500 yen recently.
As for durable consumer goods, sales of passenger cars had marked a somewhat large decline, reflecting movements in those of small cars with engine sizes of 660cc or less.
(3) With regard to the subprime mortgage problem, central banks had taken measures, including measures to provide liquidity to address elevated pressures in U.S. and European short-term funding markets, and the problem continued to require careful monitoring.
(1) The Japanese economy had been showing weakness recently due to the effects of the disaster, and this was expected to continue for a while.
As for employment and income, in a situation where labor market conditions had continued to tighten, household income had continued rising moderately, supported by the increase in the number of employees.
The Bank will continue with "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control," aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner.
Some members were of the view that the decline in housing investment had been coming to a halt, as evidenced by the fact that the number of housing starts had picked up, albeit remaining at a low level, and inventory adjustments of condominiums in the metropolitan area had been progressing.
The government considered that these commitments had been received very positively so far by the market in each of the G-7 countries.
A few members, however, said that domestic car sales had recovered somewhat at the 2010 year-end, and the effects of the reverse following the sharp increase in demand were gradually becoming less pronounced.
Members shared the view that the European economy had picked up from a state of significant depression.
As for the outlook, members concurred that overseas economies as a whole were likely to moderately increase their growth rates, as it was likely that advanced economies would continue to see firm growth and emerging economies would move out of their deceleration phase on the back of the developments in advanced economies.
Japan's economy, with the impact of COVID-19 waning gradually, is likely to follow an improving trend, supported by accommodative financial conditions and the government's economic measures.
As for the outlook, members agreed that Japan's economy was likely to evolve broadly in line with the projection presented in the April Outlook Report.
In relation to economic activity, they were (1) the ongoing financial crises in the United States and Europe and their impact, (2) developments in emerging economies and commodity-exporting countries, (3) developments in energy and materials prices, (4) firms' expectations of future growth, and (5) developments in financial conditions.
The member then expressed the recognition that, if the current pace of purchases continued, however, the Bank could not avoid a situation where JGB purchases would become more difficult through 2018.
Members concurred that the following thinking on the monetary policy stance for the future remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections materializing as well as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would conduct monetary policy in an accordingly flexible manner.
On this basis, the member commented that, if the real GDP growth rate rose even slightly from the current level, the unemployment rate would decline and the inflation rate would rise, and this might bring forward the timing of the shift in the Federal Reserve's monetary policy stance.
In the ASEAN economies, economic recovery seemed to have paused as external demand had been affected by the earlier decline in international commodity prices and production adjustments in China, and as domestic demand had been impacted by the accumulation of household debt and the delay in implementation of government expenditure programs.
With regard to prices, both the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items and that for all items excluding energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco had been at around 1 percent.
Many members expressed the view that due attention should be paid to downside risks to the global economy, in the case where growing tides of protectionism were observed.
With regard to the purchases of JGBs, one member commented that it might be necessary to communicate more clearly to the public the relationship between purchases under the Asset Purchase Program and those conducted in terms of money market operations.
On the other hand, exports remained more or less flat, mainly due to the intensified and prolonged U.S.-China trade friction, and business fixed investment continued to show relatively weak developments, mainly against the backdrop of a deterioration in business sentiment of manufacturing firms.
In relation to this, some members expressed the recognition that, with regard to private consumption, it was important to examine household income more broadly and give due attention to differences between households.
Meanwhile, firms retained their recovered financial positions on the whole.
As for upside and downside risks to prices, members pointed to the following three factors: (1) developments in firms' and households' medium- to long-term inflation expectations; (2) the fact that there were items for which prices were not particularly responsive to the output gap; and (3) developments in foreign exchange rates and international commodity prices going forward.
This member considered these facts to be a positive development.
Nevertheless, most members shared the recognition that it was necessary to keep paying close attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target would be lost, given that downside risks to overseas economies remained significant.
As for the outlook, members shared the view that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- would continue to recover moderately.
It expected that this new framework would further enhance deliberations on monetary policy at the Monetary Policy Meetings and secure transparency, and that the Bank would maintain a thorough dialogue with the government.
The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on October 10 and 11, 2007.
(1) According to the first preliminary GDP estimates for the July-September quarter of real GDP had marked negative growth on the whole, reflecting the decline in business fixed investment and the progress in inventory adjustments, although private consumption had turned positive on the back of improvement in real wages.
The European economy had become depressed rapidly due to the impact of the spread of COVID-19.
Meanwhile, a different member expressed the recognition that, while consumption of durable goods and services had been increasing, albeit with fluctuations, that of non-durable goods including food, beverages, and clothes continued to be sluggish; therefore, vulnerability remained in private consumption.
Meanwhile, a different member said it was important to bear in mind that these measures to facilitate corporate financing were expected to perform the role of a safety net.
Under these circumstances, production had increased.
They continued that, on the other hand, the economy might also register lower growth, mainly due to fiscal problems.
Stock prices in emerging economies had also dropped significantly, due mainly to the rise in inflation.
Exports had been more or less flat.
A few of these members expressed the view that, even if those factors were excluded, the pace of increase in machinery orders might be decelerating.
To reflect the view of the members, the chairman formulated a proposal on "The Bank's View" and put it to a vote.
Members agreed that the tension in global financial markets had eased, mainly due to heightened expectations for recovery in business performance, particularly in the United States.
They shared the view that there had been no sign so far of excessively bullish expectations in asset markets or in the activities of financial institutions.
On the other hand, some members pointed out that goods consumption had been firm, owing in part to an expansion in stay-at-home consumption.
Based on their assessment of the economic and financial situation, members discussed the monetary policy stance for the immediate future.
Members first discussed the "understanding" -- that is, the level of inflation that each Policy Board member understood, when conducting monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term.
Some members said that production had recently been growing somewhat faster than expected on the back of steady growth in exports to Asia.
On this basis, some members expressed the opinion that, at this point, it was important for the Bank to examine the effects of the increase in the amount of the Program, including those of the aforementioned financial market developments on economic activity.
On this basis, members shared the recognition that the Bank's massive JGB purchases, through the reduction in risk premia, were restraining upward pressure on interest rates that stemmed from an improvement in perceived business conditions and a pick-up in expected inflation rates.
Exports had also been rising.
One of these members noted the possibility that the decline in U.S. long-term interest rates reflected a decrease in the expected economic growth rate.
Given the strict movement restrictions imposed to prevent the spread of the disease, labor force recovery after the Lunar New Year holidays had been sluggish.
Interest rates on CP with low ratings had been at relatively high levels as investors were highly selective about the issues they purchased, but those on CP with high ratings had declined, generally to below the TIBOR rates.
Thereafter, it had depreciated, albeit with fluctuations, partly reflecting speculation about the direction of monetary policy in Japan and the United States.
On the other hand, a different member commented that medium- to long-term growth expectations of firms and households were likely to have declined amid the prolonged economic downturn, and therefore the member was concerned that it might not be easy for the economy to return to a strong recovery path.
As for prices, there were some signs that prices had stopped decreasing across a wide range of items, indicating that deflation was ending.
With respect to overseas financial markets, stock prices in many economies had declined, including those in the United States, which had been considered to be overvalued to some extent.
As for employment and income, growth in household income had recently been sluggish.
Many members expressed the opinion that it would be appropriate to raise the rate to 0.4 percent when the uncollateralized overnight call rate target was raised to rate would be 0.5 percent.
It had then increased slightly for April relative to that quarter, with a pick-up in automobile sales.
Indicators related to consumer confidence -- which had continued to become cautious -- had slightly improved recently, mainly reflecting an increase in winter bonus payments for 2014 and a decline in the prices of petroleum products.
In order to make further strides toward developing an environment conducive to wage increases in small and medium-sized enterprises, the Government-Labor-Management Meeting for Realizing a Positive Cycle of the Economy had been held on April 2, at which time policies to pass on price increases and to improve the productivity of the service industry had been approved.
Housing investment had also been on a moderate pick-up trend.
Meanwhile, some members referred to the continued sluggishness in Japanese stock prices -- as seen in, for example, the Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX) temporarily falling to around the lowest level since the Lehman shock -- reflecting the further worsening of the sovereign debt problems in Europe.
In response, most members -- while noting that this was one of various options -- expressed the opinion that in the present situation it was appropriate to continue with the Bank's current stance on the operation of the Program.
As for the outlook, such expectations are likely to follow an increasing trend, with the output gap remaining positive.
However, they also agreed that the outlook continued to be attended by a significant level of uncertainty since it would be greatly dependent on the improvement in overseas economies.
One member expressed the view that consumers' acceptance of a rise in prices would gradually increase with the improvement in the employment and income situation.
One member, noting that exports for the April-June quarter of 2017 had decreased slightly on a quarter-on-quarter basis but had increased firmly again for the July-September quarter, expressed the view that no change had been observed in the increasing trend in exports as a whole, driven mainly by IT-related goods and capital goods.
Private consumption was likely to remain generally weak amid the severe employment and income situation, with the exception of durable goods consumption, which would be supported by the effects of various policy measures for the time being.
The members said that it was exceptional for a central bank to commit itself to continuing with monetary easing until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI exceeded 2 percent, considering that there was a time lag until monetary policy took effect.
The rates in Brazil and Russia remained at high levels but had been declining due to the earlier pause in the depreciation of their currencies.
As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on three-month treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had moved further into negative territory and had been at around minus 0.4 percent recently.
This member added, however, that the current rise in energy and materials prices was characterized by a long-term upward trend against the background of the worldwide growth in demand, especially demand from emerging economies, and that attention to the risk that possible changes in inflation expectations of firms and households would generate such effects should not be slackened merely because second-round effects had not emerged so far.
Housing investment has been more or less flat, and public investment has increased moderately.
Public investment was expected to continue increasing for the time being, albeit at a slower pace.
Japanese stock prices had risen, mainly reflecting strong expectations of upward revisions in firms' earnings forecasts.
A different member noted that one option was to reduce the Bank's purchase amount of JGBs based on the supply and demand balance of JGBs, with the aim of restoring market functioning.
In advanced economies, interest rates had generally been more or less flat, albeit with fluctuations, while stock prices as a whole had decreased.
In this situation, industrial production had been on a downward trend and the number of employees had been declining.
It would also implement in a full-fledged manner the "Comprehensive Package Responding to the Yen Appreciation," recently decided by the Cabinet, and thereby preemptively respond to the downside risks to the economy and the risk of a hollowing-out of domestic industries, both stemming mainly from the rapid appreciation of the yen.
Specifically, the Bank will adopt a three-tier system in which the outstanding balance of each financial institution's current account at the Bank will be divided into three tiers, to each of which a positive interest rate, a zero interest rate, or a negative interest rate will be applied, respectively.
The staff would like to propose that the Bank accept the DBJ's request and take the necessary steps.
In addition, a different member expressed the opinion that, in order to achieve the price stability target, it was essential, mainly for small and medium-sized firms, to implement reforms to raise productivity beyond cutting their costs.
On January 22, the budget for fiscal 2016 had been submitted to the Diet.
A few members expressed the view that the risk of inflation had increased further against the backdrop of the continued rise in real estate prices, wage increases in the coastal area, and the rise in food prices resulting from droughts in southwest China.
A few members expressed the view that attention was warranted on the impact that the vote of the United Kingdom to leave the EU would have on the global economy, particularly on the European economy.
(2) The government projected that the economic recovery supported by domestic private demand would continue, as resiliency in the corporate sector was extending into the household sector, and expected that the October Outlook Report would basically share this view.
With regard to the spring wage negotiations, a few members expressed the view that more firms were likely to raise wages in the new fiscal year starting April 2007 than in the previous year.
Some members were of the view that the euro area economy would likely recover only moderately, because economic activity would be constrained by balance-sheet adjustments and moves toward fiscal consolidation.
Sales at department stores and supermarkets, particularly of apparel, had continued to be susceptible to weather conditions, but in terms of the average for the months in the January-March quarter, they were firm.
Members shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective, although some market indicators and survey results had recently shown relatively weak developments.
One member said that, judging from information obtained from business contacts in particular, there seemed to be a risk that demand would decline through an adverse feedback loop between business and household sentiment.
However, signs of a possible pick-up in the coming period had begun to be observed as the production forecast index continued to increase toward March.
Home prices continued to be on a declining trend, and housing investment and business fixed investment had been contracting noticeably.
One member, however, said that wage increases and price rises resulting from supply-side constraints might not be sustainable.
A few members pointed out that the decline in housing investment following the front-loaded increase was partly attributable to the effects of labor shortages and a surge in prices of building materials.
Many members noted that labor market conditions remained tight, as evidenced, for example, by the fact that the active job openings-to-applicants ratio had maintained the high level that exceeded the peak marked during the bubble period while the unemployment rate remained at a low level of around 2.5 percent.
Exports would likely continue their increasing trend for the time being, as those of IT-related goods and capital goods were likely to be firm, and thereafter were expected to continue their moderate increasing trend, with the growth in overseas economies continuing.
As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had fallen slightly, and had been somewhat below the 0.1 percent level for all maturities.
The rate of increase for all items less fresh food and energy had registered 0.8 percent year-on-year for June.
And second, large nonmanufacturing firms' fixed investment plans for fiscal 2007 showed relatively high growth.
Members concurred that overseas economies had moved somewhat deeper into a deceleration phase.
One member noted that, if a series of upcoming political events in Europe passed without incident, momentum for economic recovery could strengthen from the latter half of 2017.
Regarding the Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices, members concurred that overseas economies, exports, production, and some areas of domestic demand had deteriorated further from that presented in September 2012 when the Bank decided to enhance monetary easing.
Growth in business fixed investment, particularly in machinery investment, had been sluggish, as business sentiment still remained cautious.
One member added that price developments in the past revealed that consumers in Japan had been relatively tolerant of the rise in import prices being passed on to sales prices.
Some members noted that the pace of recovery in the euro area economy was likely to remain moderate, considering that fiscal consolidation measures in each euro area country were likely to weigh on the economy.
Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had been in line with the forecast presented in the April 2011 Outlook Report and was likely to remain slightly positive as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved as a trend.
The number of housing starts -- a leading indicator of housing investment -- had picked up from the start of the year onward, mainly in housing for rent, albeit with fluctuations.
Firms' financial positions had been favorable on the whole, although weakness had been seen in those of some firms, mainly small and medium-sized ones, reflecting such factors as the outbreak of COVID-19.
As for employment, one member noted that, if unit labor costs continued to increase, in order to maintain the large increase in the employment level, the economy would need to grow at a higher rate.
Some members expressed the view that the emergence of the fiscal deficit problem in some European countries had directed market attention to fiscal conditions worldwide, including Japan, and it had become crucial for every country to maintain market confidence in the future course of fiscal consolidation in the medium to long term.
Meanwhile, a few members said that corporate managers -- who had not yet been able to establish a medium to long-term growth strategy, and had grown increasingly frustrated -- had come to attach their expectations to monetary policy.
Some members added that markets in these economies that had taken policy actions such as the raising of interest rates were starting to regain their calmness.
Mr. G. Kataoka expressed the following opinions: (1) the possibility of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI increasing toward 2 percent going forward was low at this point, and (2) further coordination of fiscal and monetary policy was important in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, and that it was necessary for the Bank to make a commitment to taking additional easing measures if it revised downward its assessment of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
With regard to the supply side, Japan's potential growth rate remained at a low level of around 0.5 percent.
A few other members said that, if the recent trend of the yen's depreciation continued, this could be expected to have positive effects on prices through an improvement in economic activity and a rise in inflation expectations.
It expected the Bank to continue taking decisive monetary policy actions while considering the effects of the disaster on the economy and markets, as well as the progress of rebuilding.
It expected the Bank to continue to steadily carry out the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas, and to underpin the economy through appropriate and flexible conduct of monetary policy while continuing to sufficiently exchange views and keep close contact with the government in order to overcome deflation.
As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.
They then decreased somewhat significantly in January 2014 from the October-December quarter, due in part to temporary factors such as the effects of a winter snowstorm in the United States and of the Lunar New Year holidays in East Asia, as well as supply constraints driven by the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike.
In this situation, industrial production had been on a downward trend and the pace of decrease in the number of employees had been accelerating.
In addition, due attention needed to be paid to the downside risks to the economy stemming mainly from developments in overseas economies and fluctuations in foreign exchange rates.
It will continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner.
Based on the above discussion, members shared the view that uncertainty regarding the possible effects of the disaster on Japan's economy was extremely high, and it was necessary to continue to closely examine the effects from various aspects, such as the process for eliminating supply-side constraints and developments in demand at home and abroad.
One member expressed the view that, although attention should be paid to, for example, the effects of the recent slowdown in overseas economies on consumer sentiment and other aspects, private consumption was highly likely to be firm for the time being, due mainly to steady improvement in the employment and income situation as well as to an increase in demand prior to the scheduled consumption tax hike.
Production was likely to decrease marginally in the January-March quarter of 2007 but was considered to remain on an upward trend, reflecting the rise in domestic and external demand.
As for services consumption, sales in the food service industry had continued to trend upward, and outlays for travel, especially overseas travel, had been firm.
Regarding funding conditions for long-term credit, while credit spreads of bank debentures were more or less unchanged, their issuance -- including by banks in some peripheral countries -- had been firm.
The rate of change in the producer price index (PPI) relative to three months earlier had been slightly positive recently, mainly due to the impact of the rise in crude oil prices since summer 2023.
(1) Yield curve control a) The Bank decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for market operations for the intermeeting period.
Members concurred that emerging economies as a whole maintained their moderate recovery trend, but some had decelerated due to country-specific factors, and the NIEs and ASEAN economies were under downward pressure, as evidenced by such factors as weak exports to China.
Second, the link between the impact of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve may change as firms explore new ways of raising funds such as issuing super-long-term corporate bonds under the current monetary easing, including the negative interest rate policy.
With respect to overseas financial markets, U.S. and European long-term interest rates had risen, mainly due to speculation about a reduction in monetary accommodation by the ECB.
In addition, the employment situation had been improving steadily.
Industrial production had been picking up, due in part to the moderate increase in demand both at home and abroad as well as to the progress in inventory adjustments.
A few members noted that, if the pace of growth in the Chinese economy were to decelerate noticeably, this would affect the Bank's economic outlook, which assumed a rise in overseas economic growth.
General collateral (GC) repo rates had been more or less unchanged, but they had remained sensitive to changes in the balance between supply and demand in the market.
Business fixed investment was projected to continue to see a moderate uptrend on the back of corporate profits at high levels and highly accommodative financial conditions.
As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy was at around 0.5 percent, partly because price rises by firms continued to be limited, while the rate of change for all items less fresh food was around 1 percent.
Members then shared the recognition that uncertainties regarding overseas economies had heightened further including (1) protectionist moves such as the U.S.-China trade friction, (2) developments in emerging economies including China, and (3) negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU).
In the foreign exchange market, the U.S. dollar had appreciated, reflecting market participants' focus on the difference in the direction of monetary policy between the United States and other countries.
Meanwhile, business sentiment stayed at a favorable level on the whole, although the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike were evident in results of some surveys for April and May.
In contrast, some members expressed the view that the previous year's surge in crude oil prices would result in stronger downward pressure on the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, particularly for the period from summer until early autumn of this year.
On this basis, a few members noted that it was desirable to (1) accelerate the annual pace of increase in the monetary base from about outstanding of the Bank's holdings would be increased from an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen.
As for the outlook, members shared the view that, even if the U.S. economy continued to recover, the pace would be only modest given that the foundation for a recovery remained fragile -- as evidenced by the persistent strains from balance-sheet adjustments -- and that room for implementing policy actions was becoming limited.
(3) On August 8, 2013, the government had compiled the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan and the guidelines for budget requests for fiscal 2014.
The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on January 17 and 18, 2007.
In China, the deceleration of the economy had come to a halt: although exports had declined, domestic demand continued to show high growth.
A few members referred to the fact that the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for the Tokyo metropolitan area for October 2011 had accelerated because the positive contribution from the rise in the tobacco tax and charges for accident insurance had dissipated.
Members agreed that many indicators suggested improvement in private consumption, amid steady improvement in the employment and income situation, and that it was appropriate to revise the Bank's assessment upward to one stating that private consumption "has increased its resilience" from the previous one stating that it "has been resilient."
The budget for fiscal 2016 would be the first under the Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal Revitalization, and the government deemed it necessary to fully realize this plan to achieve its goal of generating a surplus in the primary balance for fiscal 2020.
On this basis, the member noted that the current weak developments could again be the start of stagnation in consumption.
With regard to credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes -- as perceived by firms -- were significantly accommodative.
[8] In this situation, the amount outstanding of the monetary base had been in the range of 241-254 trillion yen.
As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that supply and demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve moderately and employee income had also shown a pick-up.
One member expressed the view that the economy would likely be able to maintain its growth rate of about 6.5 percent on the back of an upturn in the rate of increase in fixed asset investment -- reflecting in part the progress in manufacturers' adjustments of excess production -- and with the support of stimulus measures.
Regarding global financial markets, members shared the recognition that market participants' risk sentiment had improved, mainly against the background of growing expectations for progress in U.S.-China trade negotiations and the United Kingdom's exit from the EU, and that the markets recently were stable compared with some time ago.
This member therefore was paying close attention to how the GDP-based figure for real fixed investment would be revised at the second preliminary estimate, and to how fixed investment plans were being implemented.
(5) Regarding the National Strategic Zones project, special zone meetings had been held in the Kansai area and Fukuoka City, and discussions had progressed with regard to efforts such as drawing up plans.
One member pointed out that, as a positive output gap pushes up prices for the immediate future, which simultaneously brings about the secondary effect of raising inflation expectations in an adaptive manner, it was appropriate to assess the impact of the output gap on prices in terms of the "area" calculated by multiplying the degree of the positive gap by its duration.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had increased somewhat, mainly due to anticipation of improvement in corporate profits.
Some members commented that firms were increasingly suffering from difficult funding conditions, especially limited availability of funds, as shown by, for example, the continuing decrease in the issuance of CP and corporate bonds and by the December Tankan, which indicated that the number of firms that saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as "severe" -- not only small firms but also large ones -- exceeded those that saw them as "accommodative."
In the United States, downgrading of securitized products backed by subprime mortgage loans and the emergence of subprime mortgage-related losses at some financial institutions had led to a considerable drop in stock prices.
In response to these remarks, one member noted that, as inflation expectations in the medium to long term tended to be formed based largely on economic fundamentals such as the rate of growth in productivity, it was unlikely that such expectations would converge toward 2 percent and lead to achievement of the price stability target in about two years.
They expressed the view that the functioning of the CP and corporate bond markets had been recovering steadily.
(2) Furthermore, the government considered that it was important for the soundness of the Japanese financial system that financial authorities in Japan and abroad continue to cooperate closely.
As for the outlook, members concurred that overseas economies were likely to remain in a state of slight deceleration for the time being, but to moderately increase their growth rates as advanced economies would continue to see firm growth and emerging economies would move out of their deceleration phase on the back of the developments in advanced economies.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had been around 0 percent, mainly due to earlier declines in crude oil prices.
This member, however, continued that the potential need for additional monetary easing by affecting longer-term interest rates had not yet decreased, given that there was a risk that the time necessary to achieve price stability would be prolonged.
It had launched the Council for Promotion of Foreign Direct Investment in Japan on April 25, and confirmed such items as the guidelines based on the Report on the Expert Group Meeting on Foreign Direct Investment in Japan.
Meanwhile, currencies in emerging economies and crude oil prices were generally unchanged.
One member said that, although the Bank's purchase under the Program was an unconventional policy measure, its transmission mechanism was no different from that of a conventional measure, in that the purchase would affect interest rates and risk premiums and subsequently feed through to economic activity.
Housing investment was projected to continue picking up with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily, supported as well by accommodative financial conditions.
The government strongly expected that this new framework would facilitate the elimination of deflationary expectations.
Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, was picking up mainly due to policy measures, despite the continued severe employment and income situation, and this trend was likely to continue for the time being.
A few members pointed out that labor market conditions remained tight, as evidenced, for example, by the unemployment rate remaining at a low level in the range of 2.0-2.5 percent and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio maintaining its high level.
It was expected to increase gradually as supply-side constraints eased and disaster-stricken homes were rebuilt.
A different member said that growth in sales tax revenue tended to be slower in those states where the rate of decline in housing prices was faster, and this might indicate that the decline in housing prices had started to have an adverse effect on private consumption.
Private consumption had been decelerating, particularly in the ASEAN countries, against the background of (1) the end to the boost from policy measures targeted at car sales and (2) consumer sentiment having turned cautious.
In this situation, financial institutions had been tightening their lending standards.
After declining sharply following the earthquake, production and exports continued to increase with the easing of supply-side constraints.
Some members -- referring to the substantial decline in the consumer confidence index and weak housing-related indicators, as well as the high unemployment rate and the prolonged average duration of unemployment -- said that the foundation for an economic recovery remained fragile.
Regarding the outlook, although such consumption was expected to be affected by price rises, it was projected to keep increasing moderately with nominal employee income continuing to improve, and partly supported by household savings that had accumulated as a result of pandemic-related restrictions.
One member said that housing investment in the United States had only relatively limited effects on other economies and therefore, in examining the impact on the global economy, it was important to evaluate the extent to which the correction in the U.S. housing market and the resultant turbulence in financial markets would affect private consumption and business fixed investment in the United States.
One member was of the view that there was no change in the uptrend in the CPI, because examination of the CPI excluding energy by goods and services showed that goods prices had been rising at a very moderate pace, and services prices continued to increase gradually reflecting the increase in labor costs and the fact that imputed rent of condominiums had stopped falling.
(2) In view of the current severe economic conditions and concerns about economic deterioration, the government -- based on the "Three-Step Economic Measures" -- had implemented the first step, financed by reserve funds, and was implementing the second step, financed by the supplementary budget for fiscal 2010.
Regarding the corporate sector, members agreed that, although the pace of increase in exports had slowed, partly due to the effects of the appreciation of the Many members referred to relatively low growth in the United States during the January-March quarter of 2015, and expressed the view that this was attributable to temporary factors such as the severe winter weather and the labor disputes at U.S. West Coast ports.
Meanwhile, business sentiment had generally stayed at a favorable level, although some cautiousness had been observed.
Liquidity in foreign exchange swap markets was low, and there continued to be intense funding strains in markets for U.S. dollar funds maturing beyond the year-end.
In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments had been decreasing with the negative interest rate coming into effect, and had been at around or slightly below 0 percent.
Some members expressed the view that, as market participants tended to pay keen attention to developments in individual indicators such as the CPI, the Bank should explain thoroughly that, in conducting monetary policy, it paid full attention to the underlying trend of economic activity and prices.
One member said that, since the resurgence of COVID-19 had a considerable impact on the face-to-face services industry, which held a large number of employees, attention on such impact was warranted.
Some members noted, however, that downside risks to the U.S. economy had increased: anecdotal information suggested that the negative effects of the subprime mortgage problem had begun to spread to the commercial real estate market, and consumer confidence had deteriorated.
However, along with a phased reopening of businesses, it was expected to pick up moderately, supported by various income support measures and demand stimulus measures.
Regarding risks to developments in overseas economies, members shared the recognition that uncertainties remained high, including those over U.S. economic policy, negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the EU, and geopolitical risks.
These members agreed that the projected rates of increase in the CPI presented in the October 2018 Outlook Report were somewhat lower, mainly for fiscal 2018, than those in the July Outlook Report.
As specific measures, members shared the recognition that it was appropriate to expand eligible collateral for the Bank's provision of credit, in light of the view that financial institutions had been facing a shortage of assets eligible for collateral as the Bank conducted large-scale JGB purchases.
Some members pointed out that the CAI -- calculated by the Bank by combining various sales and supply-side statistics -- had continued to rise moderately since summer 2016.
They also agreed that the Bank's massive JGB purchases had the effect of compressing risk premia, and this effect would become increasingly pronounced as the Bank proceeded with the purchases.
Based on the above discussion, members concurred that the global economy as a whole was continuing to expand, with growth gaining breadth geographically.
Many members expressed the recognition that, although an increase in business fixed investment had not been confirmed clearly in both its leading and coincident indicators released thus far, business fixed investment was likely to increase, mainly because business sentiment had generally stayed at a favorable level.
One member said that rises in the prices of daily necessities had increased consumers' inflation expectations and the effects of these increased inflation expectations should be watched carefully.
Members shared the view that the depreciation of the yen would push up private consumption through wealth effects stemming from the rises in stock prices and the value of external assets; it would also increase business fixed investment and wages through a rise in corporate profits in the manufacturing industry.
Many members shared the view that it would be appropriate to increase the amount of the Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, and further enhance monetary easing, with a view to preventing any deterioration in the sentiment of firms and households and heightening of risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting economic activity.
(2) The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace.
They also agreed that the improvement in the economy had been underpinned by various policy measures taken at home and abroad and by inventory restocking, and there was not yet sufficient momentum to support self-sustaining recovery in private demand.
(1) The government was currently making its best efforts to work on the comprehensive reform of the social security and taxation systems.
The pace of growth in production had been slowing on the whole, reflecting weakness mainly in materials and electricity, although machinery had been firm since shipments overseas had been favorable.
In particular, the government would raise the minimum wage at the rate of about 3 percent per year, considering the growth rate of nominal GDP.
Moreover, a different member said that it was desirable for the Bank to discontinue the system in which the eligible counterparties could borrow an amount equivalent to twice as much as the net increase in their amount outstanding of loans.
Thereafter, they were expected to increase moderately as overseas economies moved out of their deceleration phase.
[6] In this situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the range of 0.075 to 0.085 percent.
One member noted that close attention should be paid to future developments in Germany in particular, mainly because of its strong presence in the European economy, heavy reliance on foreign trade, and close economic ties with China.
Members agreed that public investment continued to increase and was projected to continue hovering at a high level through the first half of fiscal 2014, reflecting a boost from economic stimulus, and thereafter gradually turn to a moderate downtrend.
Some members, however, expressed the opinion that, with the unemployment rate at a high level, consumer spending other than car purchases and business fixed investment had remained weak.
Members concurred that particular attention should continue to be paid to developments in global financial markets, including the Chinese stock market.
The member continued that, therefore, the member could not agree with the view that the Bank should moderate the pace of QQE because the output gap had been around zero.
And second, in the United States, following the avoidance of the "fiscal cliff" at the beginning of 2013, a bill to temporarily suspend the federal debt ceiling had been passed.
In line with discussions within the Policy Board so far, the fund-provisioning measure should (1) act as a catalyst for financial institutions to make efforts toward strengthening the foundations for economic growth, and (2) offer support as broadly as possible for the various efforts that financial institutions would make on their own initiative.
One member added that firms might have changed their price-setting behavior in the course of the recent increases in energy and materials prices and might now tend to revise their sales prices in response to external shocks more quickly than before.
Although business fixed investment was likely to remain more or less unchanged for the time being as the sense of excessive capital stock was strong among firms, it was expected to pick up gradually with the improvement in corporate profits.
In Europe, German long-term interest rates had risen as the flight to quality caused by deterioration in fiscal conditions in some peripheral European countries was losing momentum.
In the basic policies for economic and fiscal management and reform to be completed this summer, it would indicate the timing of achieving a primary surplus and its plan to underpin the achievement.
Some members noted that interest rates on term instruments and long-term interest rates had also been stable.
They were of the opinion that it was likely to be on a recovery trend, but the pace was likely to be modest.
Some members said that, while indicators related to services consumption continued to increase, some sluggishness was being observed in indicators related to retail sales and consumer sentiment.
With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members concurred that the U.S. economy had been recovering, particularly in household spending, amid improvement in the employment and income situation, and that the recovery had been spreading to the corporate sector.
One member said that if "deflation" was defined as a continued decline in prices, the Bank should explain to the public that such a situation was in line with the Bank's assessment of price developments presented in the October Outlook Report.
As for domestic private demand, business fixed investment had continued to trend upward and was expected to continue to do so since the growth in domestic and external demand and the high level of corporate profits were likely to be maintained.
Yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs had been narrowing very moderately, reflecting solid demand from investors.
The conditions should be as follows.
Meanwhile, international commodity prices had been more or less flat on the whole, although they continued to be weak from a relatively longer-term perspective in a situation where recovery in emerging economies lacked momentum.
On the subject of inflation expectations, some members commented that the breakeven inflation rates were declining recently.
Many members pointed out that the second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter of 2015 had been revised upward from the first preliminary estimate, particularly for business fixed investment, registering positive growth.
Many members, however, pointed out that investors' risk sentiment could worsen again if trade friction between the United States and China intensified.
Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had been regaining stability gradually, as evidenced by developments in stock prices in many economies; specifically, they had declined toward early June, partly against the backdrop of the heightening of uncertainty regarding U.S. trade policy, but thereafter started to rise reflecting, for example, increasing market expectations of a federal funds rate cut by the Federal Reserve and indefinite suspension of imposing new tariffs that had been scheduled to be implemented by the United States against Mexico.
U.S. and European long-term interest rates were more or less unchanged when fluctuations were smoothed out, due in part to speculation about monetary easing in these economies.
The value of public works contracted -- a measure that reflected public works orders -- had been more or less flat, albeit with monthly fluctuations, after having surged in the April-June quarter.
A few members raised the possibility that Japan's economy would be adversely affected if a substantial risk materialized, stemming from the European debt problem.
They were expected to continue to be essentially flat for the time being and increase moderately thereafter, mainly reflecting a pick-up in the pace of recovery in overseas economies.
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was likely to be above 2 percent through fiscal 2024, due to factors such as the remaining effects of the pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the past rise in import prices.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in consumer prices had been elevated, not only in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) for all items but also the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, which registered a year-on-year rate of increase of 2.0-2.5 percent.
Members shared the recognition that, although the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike on economic activity were likely to be smaller than those in fiscal and varied depending, for example, on the income situation and price developments.
It had fallen recently to around 17,000 yen, mainly against the background of declines in overseas stock prices.
The government would also do its utmost to implement policy measures in a seamless manner toward overcoming the deflationary recession so that the benefits of economic growth would be widely distributed among the public.
In addition, one member said that it was becoming difficult for Greece to make progress toward fiscal consolidation, as negative economic growth continued.
One member said that, because the inflation rate was likely to increase gradually under QQE with Yield Curve Control, the Bank should monitor the policy effects under the current framework for the time being.
Some members expressed the view that, amid the continued declining trend in firms' funding costs, stimulative effects from low interest rates were beginning to strengthen in light of improved corporate profits.
They shared the view that overseas economies were decelerating primarily as a result of a decline in real purchasing power brought about by the earlier rise in crude oil prices, supply-chain disruptions associated with the disaster in Japan, and the effects of monetary tightening in the emerging economies.
A few members then said that, although exports were likely to maintain their moderate growth for the time being, it was important to continue monitoring them carefully as there were some developments suggesting a slowdown in overseas economies, such as a decrease in machine tool orders from China.
In addition, this member -- noting that, even if such payment were to be abolished, market functioning would be maintained under the current guideline for money market operation -- expressed the view that, in abolishing this payment, it was appropriate to review the interest rates on the loans under the Asset Purchase Program and the Loan Support Program.
Some members highlighted factors behind such developments in emerging economies, as follows.
Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective; an assessment of the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2015.
A few members said that, as part of that process, it was important to examine how the effects of developments in global financial markets and the U.S. economy would affect the Bank's baseline scenario and confidence regarding the likelihood of the scenario materializing.
(2) The government's responses, such as implementing the emergency economic measures, had already had considerable positive effects.
Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) had been slightly negative.
In the midst of the substantial fiscal deficit, the government -- while devising ways to allocate the budget -- had been taking measures to deal with the low birth rate and to stabilize and enhance the social security system.
(1) The budget for fiscal 2017 was planned to be decided at the Cabinet meeting to be held on December 22, 2016.
(2) As for the outlook, it was likely that the disruption in the supply of parts, constraints on electric power supply, the crisis at the nuclear power plant, and the dampening of production due to the disaster would cover a wide area and last for a prolonged period.
Members concurred that business fixed investment continued on an increasing trend with corporate profits and business sentiment maintaining their improving trend.
With regard to business sentiment, a few members expressed concern that sentiment in manufacturing was deteriorating significantly and that the effects of such weak sentiment were spreading to some sectors in nonmanufacturing.
(3) The government deemed it necessary to work toward narrowing the negative output gap in order to overcome deflation.
As for developments in economic activity and prices, which formed preconditions for the Bank's monetary policy, a few members expressed the recognition that, even though monthly fluctuations tended to draw attention, the focus should be on the underlying trends.
Moreover, in order to achieve both economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation, while firmly maintaining the goal to achieve fiscal consolidation by fiscal 2020, the government would proceed with deliberations at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy and formulate a concrete plan by the summer of 2015.
Moreover, it had held the first meeting of the Headquarters for Overcoming Population Decline and Vitalizing Local Economy in Japan on September 12, and decided on its basic policies.
A few members expressed the view that -- although private consumption had been somewhat weak recently, due to the effects of irregularly warm weather -- it was likely to rise moderately, reflecting an increase in employee income.
In terms of the outlook for prices, most members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to turn slightly positive and thereafter would continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of an improvement in the output gap and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
This member continued that the deceleration seemed to be consistent with the current moderate economic recovery.
They concurred that employee income was likely to continue to do so in line with the recovery in economic activity and business performance.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had risen at one time, mainly as a reflection of the yen's depreciation, and temporarily exceeded the 18,000 yen level.
Japanese stock prices, after declining partly due to the appreciating trend of the yen, had recovered somewhat along with the recent rises in U.S. and European stock prices.
With respect to overseas economies, members agreed that advanced economies continued to see moderate growth, mainly in household spending, and that production and business fixed investment had been picking up gradually on the back of global improvement in manufacturing.
With respect to the future conduct of monetary policy, most members shared the view that the Bank would continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary to maintain this target in a stable manner.
Moreover, on March 4, 2009 the Bank commenced outright purchases of corporate bonds.
U.S. and European stock prices had risen, mainly reflecting U.S. economic indicators that were stronger than market expectations, amid the easing of risk aversion among investors.
With regard to outright purchases of T-Bills, some members noted that it was necessary to devise ways to ensure smooth purchases because undersubscription could occur if the Bank increased the amount of purchases.
Voting against the action: NAKAMURA Toyoaki.
A few members pointed out that the production forecast index and interviews with firms suggested that production was expected to increase moderately.
A few members expressed the view that pensioners and low-income households might be taking a cautious stance toward consumption.
These members continued that future developments in the labor force participation rate therefore warranted attention.
Many members raised the possibility that the effects of the rise in international commodity prices would spill over to consumer prices as a risk factor for the outlook for prices.
This member expressed hope that the use of this type of fund-provisioning measure would therefore promote these institutions' efforts to stimulate regional economies.
The number of housing starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, continued to pick up until January 2008 and had since been more or less flat.
Some members -- while noting the relatively weak developments in consumer confidence since October 2013 -- said that this might be attributable to consumers' awareness of the consumption tax hike, and future developments warranted attention.
Members concurred that, as there were downside risks to the outlook for the global economy, developments in Japan's exports continued to require careful monitoring.
Many members expressed the recognition that, considering, for example, reports at the January 2024 meeting of general managers of the Bank's branches and recent communication by labor and management, the possibility of a certain degree of wage hikes being achieved in this year's annual spring labor-management wage negotiations had heightened.
With regard to the discussions on the academic front and within the central bank community, while many studies made at home and abroad noted that unconventional monetary policy had brought about monetary easing effects, there were also studies that pointed to large uncertainties regarding such effects.
On this basis, the staff noted that, as for Japan, one option to consider would be that the Bank specify uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices as the basis for judgment on the Bank's policy stance, while referring to the important economic event that was scheduled to take place in the near future -- namely, the consumption tax hike.
They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at very low levels.
Regarding the outlook, industrial production was likely to remain more or less flat for the time being.
In order to ensure the overcoming of deflation, the government considered it necessary to firmly support economic activity and reverse somewhat weak developments.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been showing large fluctuations, partly due to a decline in U.S. stock prices and uncertainties over the U.S.-China trade friction, and was moving at around 21,000 yen recently.
Members concurred that growth in private consumption had recently been somewhat sluggish against the background of the continued increase in prices of petroleum products and food.
In relation to this, one member expressed concern over the worsening in consumer sentiment that was seen since around the latter half of 2013.
The member continued that significant progress therefore had been made toward achieving the target.
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent.
It expected the Bank to continue conducting appropriate monetary policy.
On this point, a different member commented that the effects of deleveraging by European financial institutions in Central and Eastern European economies had so far been less serious than previously anticipated.
Interest rates on term instruments showed the following developments.
As for fiscal 2015 through fiscal 2016, they shared the view that a virtuous cycle of economic activity would be maintained -- supported by (1) a firm increase in domestic private demand reflecting accommodative financial conditions and heightened growth expectations, as well as (2) an increase in exports due to an improvement in overseas economies -- and that the economy was likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, while fluctuations in demand stemming from the scheduled second consumption tax hike were anticipated.
Many members said that a downward revision in the CPI might affect the public's view on prices.
This member continued that the authorities should take measures with this point in mind.
Together with the timetable for these reforms, the government would formulate a concrete plan by the middle of 2011, aim to secure public consensus, and subsequently carry out these reforms.
(3) The government and the Bank had released a joint statement on January 22, 2013.
The staff proposed that the Bank make necessary amendments to its Guidelines on Eligible Collateral and the principal terms and conditions for repo operations and securities lending in view of the results of the Bank's annual review of appropriate margins reflecting recent developments in financial markets.
One member said that real GDP was likely to remain more or less unchanged, or that its growth rate would remain at a considerably low level for the time being.
Nevertheless, regarding the outlook, they shared the view that exports were likely to increase moderately again, as the growth rate of the global economy was starting to increase again and inventory adjustments in IT-related goods seemed to be making progress underpinned by steady final demand.
The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) showed that it had been somewhat weak, mainly due to the earlier decline in international commodity prices, and it was expected to remain so for the time being.
This member continued that negative wealth effects stemming from these developments could bring about a further decline in household consumption.
Many members said that price rises had been observed not only in energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items, as evidenced by the fact that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for February 2014 had marked 0.8 percent.
A different member commented that, in a situation where wages rose due to labor shortages, it was necessary for firms to boost their productivity through, for example, fixed investment to promote labor saving.
A different member was of the opinion that, given, for example, that risks concerning the outlook for economic activity had tilted to the downside and early achievement of 2 percent inflation could not be envisaged, it was necessary for the Bank to further strengthen monetary easing instead of persistently continuing with the current policy.
Against the background of improvement in consumer sentiment, private consumption had been increasing moderately due to the effects of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles.
On the other hand, a different member pointed out that sales of online shopping seemed to be recovering steadily after hitting a bottom in April 2014.
[6] The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.
Some financial institutions had been making use of this facility close to the maximum amount that could be provided to each of them -- namely, 150 billion yen.
Some members expressed the view that the purchasing of various financial assets through the program discussed at this meeting should only be a temporary and extraordinary measure.
On this basis, the member pointed out that, when conducting yield curve control, it was important to consider in a flexible manner such factors as the range of yield movement and the target maturity of JGBs, while maintaining the framework of monetary easing.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be negative for the time being, mainly affected by COVID-19 and the past decline in crude oil prices.
Many members pointed to the following as the background to this view: (1) the rate of increase in exports slowed to the extent that it had become more or less flat due to the deceleration in the pace of recovery of the world economy; and (2) a planned reduction in fiscal spending, coupled with the deterioration in household and business sentiment, was starting to exert downward pressure on economic activity.
Meanwhile, they shared the recognition that, although the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike on economic activity were likely to be smaller than those in fiscal 2014, when the last consumption tax hike took place, these effects were highly uncertain and varied depending, for example, on the income situation and price developments.
Meanwhile, public investment has been increasing and housing investment has been more or less flat.
The long-term interest rate: The Bank will purchase a necessary amount of JGBs without setting an upper limit so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.
Some members noted that business performance had been favorable and the effects had been seen in the rise in stock prices.
A few members expressed the view that, among these factors, downside risks to developments in overseas economies appeared to be waning on the whole, as emerging economies had become firm and the uncertainty regarding such issues as those concerning the financial sector in Europe had lessened.
A few members then referred to the fact that the government recently had laid out measures such as tax cuts for firms that raised wages proactively.
Some members pointed out that, given, for example, post-pandemic changes in the economic structure, it was possibly becoming difficult for statistics to accurately capture developments in consumption of services and online consumption.
Meanwhile, some members said that developments in business fixed investment and private consumption would be affected partly by the timing of the elimination of supply-side constraints and the consequences of the crisis at the nuclear power plant.
As background to the outlook for price developments, members discussed the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations, both of which were the main factors that determined the underlying trend in inflation.
(2) The government also regarded Japan's economic conditions as severe, and had announced economic measures amounting to about 75 trillion yen in total.
One member expressed the recognition that, for the time being, the Bank should maintain the current stance of monetary policy and carefully examine the positive effects and side effects.
Since mid-September, credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds had widened and issuance of corporate bonds had declined.
With regard to the outlook, such investment was expected to continue on an increasing trend, mainly on the back of improvement in corporate profits and accommodative financial conditions.
Housing investment had increased and was expected to continue trending upward.
With regard to corporate bond markets in the United States and Europe, credit spreads had been more or less unchanged on the whole, and the issuance of high-yield bonds continued to be steady.
One member expressed the view that, with an increase in scheduled cash earnings, medium- to long-term inflation expectations would become more likely to rise since there would be a growing tendency among people to take action based on the expectation that prices and wages would increase.
Members concurred that private consumption was picking up partly due to policy measures.
Based on this discussion on upside and downside risk factors to the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices, members shared the recognition that there was high uncertainty regarding developments in overseas economies and medium- to long-term inflation expectations in particular, and that attention should continue to be paid to the effects of these developments on Japan's economic activity and prices.
Reflecting such developments in demand, the pace of growth in production had been slowing moderately.
As reasons for this, some members expressed the opinion that this might have been affected partly by the view that the U.S. economy was likely to remain firm and by the stable yield differential between Japan and the United States, as well as by the significant increase in currency-unhedged foreign direct investment.
The recent reading on production had been relatively weak.
In the outlook, private consumption was likely to continue to be pushed down by such effects as of the tax hike for the time being.
Mr. G. Kataoka expressed the opinion that further coordination of fiscal and monetary policy was important in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, and that it was necessary for the Bank to make a commitment to taking additional easing measures if it revised downward its assessment of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Many members noted that growth in employment continued, albeit at a slower pace, as evidenced by the upward revision of nonfarm payroll employment for August and the increase in September.
The rates in Russia and Brazil had been declining, primarily due to a pause in the depreciation of their currencies.
A few members expressed the opinion that the experience of the recent global financial crisis suggested that, in the conduct of monetary policy, it was necessary to make wide-ranging assessments of not only stability in prices measured by the price index but also accumulation of financial imbalances observed in, for example, asset prices and credit aggregates.
These members continued that, when deciding additional monetary easing, it was necessary to thoroughly explain that this commitment remained unshakable, in order to convey the Bank's unwavering determination to conquer deflation.
These members continued that, although a central bank consequently would face fluctuations in its profits in the short run, it would bring about seigniorage -- the profit generated by issuing banknotes as the sole issuer -- in the long run.
In this regard, some members said that recent surveys suggested that the inflation expectations of private economic entities might be changing, and any changes should be watched closely.
Many members raised the following as factors behind this outlook: (1) exports were likely to increase moderately again as the growth rate of the global economy was starting to increase again; and (2) the effects of the reverse following the sharp increase in demand for cars on consumption and production would wane.
Credit spreads between CP at issuance and T-Bills as well as yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs remained stable at low levels.
Some members said that they would continue to pay attention to developments in the U.S. economy since there was some uncertainty regarding the extent to which the adjustment in the housing market would affect private consumption and the risk of a further deceleration in the economy was not negligible.
Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T. Sato, Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of the firm growth in overseas economies.
On this basis, these members expressed the recognition that, with the implementation of measures to support financing, mainly of firms, the environment for external funding remained accommodative, as seen, for example, in the DI for financial institutions' lending attitudes maintaining its accommodative level.
At the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on May 15, the Prime Minister had given instructions to the Cabinet to set out in the Basic Policies a policy for further reform from the perspectives of both expenditure and revenue, toward the formulation of the budget for fiscal 2015, as well as a direction for initiatives to realign the structure of the corporate tax rate to one that was oriented toward growth.
These members concurred that the projected rate of increase in the CPI for fiscal 2016 was lower compared with that presented in the January 2016 Outlook Report, mainly reflecting downward revisions in projections for GDP growth and wage developments.
Excluding local public bodies, the proportion of projects - measured in terms of their number -- for which contracts were concluded with private firms and actual work started had risen further from around 61 percent in April 2013 to around 79 percent in May.
They shared the view that the sovereign debt problems in Europe in particular could result in weaker growth not only in the European economy but also in the global economy, especially through their effects on global financial markets.
Some members pointed to the possibility that, due to a decline in the competitiveness of Japanese products and to the progress in local procurement by Japanese firms operating overseas, the degree of increase in Japan's exports in response to the upturn in overseas economies and the depreciation of the yen had lessened.
One member said that, in an environment where the projected rates of increase in the CPI turned out to be lower compared with the previous projections, it was clear that interest rates would be maintained at low levels for a long term, and therefore there might be no significance in purposely introducing forward guidance.
Regarding the guideline for money market operations until the next meeting to be held on September 6 and 7, 2010, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.
Exports and industrial production were expected to continue decreasing for the time being and start picking up thereafter as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Production had declined significantly since the earthquake, particularly in certain industries, mainly because production facilities were damaged, the supply chain was disrupted, and electric power supply was constrained.
In addition, they shared the assessment that firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels.
Regarding economic developments, members noted the following points: (1) strains in global financial markets had intensified in the wake of failures and rescues of U.S. and European financial institutions; (2) there were downside risks to the world economy, reflecting sluggish growth in the U.S. economy and a clearer slowdown in European and Asian economies; and (3) weaker income generation in Japan reflecting the earlier deterioration in the terms of trade could potentially weigh on domestic private demand.
Meanwhile, U.S. and European stock prices increased somewhat in response to the announcement of financial stabilization measures by the U.S. authorities.
Although public investment continued to increase, as seen in the statistics on the amount of public construction completed, the value of public works contracted -- a measure that reflected public works orders -- remained flat in the July-September quarter from the previous quarter, which might suggest slower growth in future public investment.
A different member pointed out that, taking into account the current situation in which downside risks to economic activity and prices were significant, the Bank should continue to examine whether additional monetary easing would be necessary.
They added that, against this background, business fixed investment was expected to continue to improve and private consumption was expected to pick up again with the improving trend in the employment and income situation.
Most members expressed the view, however, that downside risks to the outlook for the U.S. economy had been increasing.
Some members said that they continued to hold a cautious view regarding the momentum in terms of bringing the inflation rate closer to the level of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Stock markets in Europe had been nervous due to concerns about the consequences and possible impact of the fiscal deficit problem in countries such as Greece, and stock prices had most recently declined sharply triggered by the downgrading of some sovereign debt.
Members shared the view that, in order to fully resolve the sovereign debt problems in Europe, the countries concerned should make steady progress with fiscal consolidation by making adjustments to their revenues and expenditures, and tackle structural reforms that would raise the medium- to long-term growth potential of these economies by, for example, enhancing industrial competitiveness.
With regard to Chinese stock prices, many members expressed the recognition that, although the significant decline in prices had paused, they remained highly volatile and future developments warranted close attention.
A different member commented that, given the current industrial structure in Japan, future economic recovery would continue to depend largely on developments in overseas economies, and therefore uncertainty regarding the outlook for Japan's economy was high.
Machinery orders -- a leading indicator of machinery investment -- had shown signs of bottoming out, mainly for manufacturing, reflecting increases in exports and production.
These members continued that this showed the resilience of Japan's economy against the slowdown in overseas economies.
Various actions continued to be taken by European governments and the European Central Bank (ECB), but the content and swiftness of these actions had not been enough to earn a positive response from the market.
Private consumption had been relatively weak, mainly due to sluggish growth in household income and the increase in prices of energy and food.
Regarding Japan's economy, members agreed that exports had continued to increase, reflecting the expansion of overseas economies, and were likely to continue to increase.
As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) had been slightly negative and was likely to remain so or be about With regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity, members shared the view that sluggishness was likely to remain in exports and production for some time, and the pace of economic recovery was likely to remain slow.
Against this view, as was the case when the April 2014 Outlook Report had been discussed, some members held a more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the forecasts in the baseline scenario, mainly because there seemed to be a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the view that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would reach around 2 percent around the middle of the projection period.
Another member said that it would be appropriate to adopt the auction method that would provide funds at a fixed rate, so that U.S. dollar funding in the Tokyo market would not be disadvantageous compared with funding in the U.S. and European markets.
One member, noting that China's producer prices had been on an increasing trend, expressed the recognition that it was necessary to examine whether this suggested that the worldwide disinflationary trend was changing.
This member added that a rise in the savings rate for households amid a decrease in the fiscal deficit suggested room for fiscal expansion.
It had turned upward -- albeit marginally -- in the January-March quarter of 2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in four quarters, and had increased moderately in the April-June and July-September quarters on the same basis.
(4) In Singapore and the Middle East, the government representative had recently explained the measures in Abenomics and the growth strategy; many investors had given favorable evaluations of reforms carried out in Japan, and had expressed positive expectations about the Japanese market.
The member also pointed out that such efforts played a role in consequently constraining price rises through an increase in labor productivity.
Meanwhile, members reaffirmed that the Bank would do its utmost to ensure that the European debt problem would not threaten the stable conditions in Japan's financial markets, and consequently financial system stability.
One of these members added that a_ clear increase was observed in the number of new job openings in manufacturing, which had been lagging behind.
With regard to the growth strategy, the government intended to submit over 30 related bills to the Diet.
The Bank of Japan announced that it would be considering the introduction of similar measures.
It deemed that the role the Bank's monetary policy had to play in overcoming deflation was extremely important, and welcomed that the Bank was strongly committed to pursuing bold monetary easing, particularly through the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing with the aim of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.
With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy, most members shared the view that it would (1) continue with QQE with Yield Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner, (2) continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target in a stable manner, (3) as for policy rates, maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019, and (4) examine the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy and make policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward achieving the price stability target.
The amount outstanding of bank lending, especially to large firms, had continued to increase at a relatively fast pace, although the pace of increase had slowed.
Economic activity in Brazil continued to decelerate, and that in Russia had become increasingly stagnant, particularly in domestic demand, reflecting a tightening of financial conditions due to the raising of policy interest rates and to capital outflow.
One of these members added that attention also should be paid to how an increase in financial institutions' provision of subordinated loans and the narrowing of spreads on these loans would affect their intermediation function.
Many members expressed the view that the sovereign debt problems in Europe -- which were spreading to large-scale economies such as Spain and Italy -- had caused a deterioration in the funding conditions of European financial institutions, and therefore concerns over the European financial system as a whole were intensifying further.
Members discussed the Bank's communication of its thinking concerning the conduct of monetary policy.
Reflecting these developments in demand at home and abroad, signs of stabilizing had been observed in production, although its growth momentum remained slow.
Many members, however, pointed out that there were still various uncertainties regarding developments in overseas economies.
On the other hand, a different member was of the opinion that the rate of increase in the CPI was likely to rise over the course of fiscal 2012 as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved, after deteriorating temporarily reflecting a decline in household sentiment.
That said, the rate of increase in the CPI had been in the range of 2.0-2.5 percent recently, mainly on the back of the fact that, despite waning, the effects of a pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the past rise in import prices remained, and services prices had increased moderately.
A different member expressed the view that expectations for economic measures to be taken by the new administration had been reflected in, for example, the recent improvement in firms' and households' sentiment.
Housing investment had leveled out.
Economic activity in Russia and Brazil had been recovering moderately, mainly on the back of stable inflation rates.
Members were in agreement on these points.
Some members pointed out that a significant increase in the number of corporate bankruptcies had not been observed thus far.
Some members expressed the view that the weakening of household and business sentiment had been spreading from peripheral countries to core countries recently.
Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, these economies had been picking up on the whole, but the pace still continued to be moderate in the corporate sector.
A different member expressed the opinion that, in a situation where there was no change in the trend of the positive output gap, it was appropriate that the Bank maintain the current monetary easing policy and carefully monitor economic developments.
Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend, aided partly by the restoration of disaster-stricken facilities.
On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead, members agreed that, given the assessment of economic activity and prices described above, it would be appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.
One member said that firms' attitude toward fixed investment was likely to improve further as exports would start increasing, and this would enhance monetary easing effects on business fixed investment.
The new lending rate on the operations would therefore be the prevailing U.S. dollar overnight index swap (OIS) market rate that corresponds to the lending duration, plus 0.5 percentage point.
In view of the need to dispel such misunderstanding and suspicions, thereby encouraging further permeation of monetary easing effects, as well as to influence market expectations, these members then raised the issue, as in the previous meeting, of whether it would be effective to change the current wording of the Bank's policy commitment -- namely, that the Bank aimed to achieve its goal of 1 percent for the time being in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit of powerful monetary easing, conducting its virtually zero interest rate policy and implementing the Program mainly through the purchase of financial assets, and would continue with this powerful easing until it judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight.
The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on September 14 and 15, 2015, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.
Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had risen somewhat.
Moreover, a different member commented that, in order to confirm whether the virtuous cycle between wages and prices had become more solid, the Bank needed to carefully assess the rise in services prices and the progress in the pass-through of cost increases to selling prices by small and medium-sized firms.
The number of housing starts -- a leading indicator of housing investment -- had continued to fall since the January-March quarter, mainly in owner-occupied homes and houses, but had virtually bottomed out recently.
As for the outlook, they shared the view that emerging economies would move out of their deceleration phase, mainly due to the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and economic stimulus measures both on the monetary and fiscal fronts, after continuing their deceleration phase for the time being.
Second, as for CP and corporate bonds, it would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.
In accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1 percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both of which were decided at the previous meeting on January 20 and 21, 2020, the Bank had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.3 In this situation, 10-year JGB yields had been at around 0 percent, and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been consistent with the guideline for market operations.
On this basis, they agreed that Japan's economy continued its moderate recovery trend.
A few members expressed the view that purchasing JGBs of various maturities would likely facilitate the Bank's smooth purchases.
Some members said that, in such situation, the amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings would remain at a high level and thus its easing effects would continue; however, it could be considered that the conduct of JGB purchases would not be regarded as an active monetary policy tool.
The staff reported that liquidity conditions in U.S. dollar funding markets had deteriorated significantly worldwide.
With this resumption, the economy was likely to follow a moderate improving trend through the materialization of pent-up demand and supported by accommodative financial conditions and the government's economic measures.
Meanwhile, one member said that the recent slight slowdown in emerging economies could be viewed as a downside risk factor in the short run but lead to a more sustainable expansion of these economies in the long run.
Many members expressed the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI would probably be at around 0 percent, potentially falling into slightly negative territory, for the time being.
A different member expressed the view that the tightening of labor market conditions observed across a wide range of regions, firm sizes, and industries had been underpinning an improvement in consumer sentiment.
In terms of risk management, it would be appropriate to (1) segregate assets purchased through the Program from those obtained through other money market operations; (2) set a purchase limit for each issuer and type of financial asset, as necessary; and (3) record, as provisions for possible losses on ETFs and J-REITs, the difference between the market and book values.
They concurred that there remained high uncertainties surrounding Japan's economic activity and prices, including developments in overseas economic activity and prices, developments in commodity prices, and domestic firms' wage- and price-setting behavior.
It was likely to continue increasing for the time being due to the implementation of various economic measures.
(4) Although there had been media reports that the government might fund rebuilding costs by issuing JGBs to be underwritten by the Bank, the government had never considered this to be an option.
(1) The real GDP growth rate for the January-March quarter registered a decrease of 3.7 percent on an annualized basis.
Yields on Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- continued to grow at a moderate pace, despite the slowdown in emerging economies.
A few members said that, in China, the monetary and fiscal policy stance had shifted toward stimulating economic growth, and this was expected to boost the economy.
These members continued that Japan's export environment had started to improve, as shown by, for example, the slight improvement in Japanese manufacturers' forecasts of future overseas supply-demand conditions for products in the March _Tankan, against the background that_ orders from China and the NIEs had increased and there had been progress in adjustments of Japanese firms' overseas inventories.
Members agreed that overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand and were likely to keep expanding.
With regard to the budget for general expenditures, for example, the government aimed to achieve both economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation by continuing to undertake expenditure reforms, including those needed to reach the benchmarks set in the New Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal Revitalization.
As for the outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely to maintain its expansion, partly underpinned by expansionary fiscal measures in a situation where the Federal Reserve conducted monetary policy while taking account of downside risks to economic activity and prices.
A few members said that it was becoming more evident that economic growth had been underpinned by domestic demand, including public investment, as suggested by increases in the amount of public construction completed and the value of public works contracted, which are the coincident and leading indicators of such investment, respectively.
During Phase with higher inflation expectations and lower nominal interest rates for both short- and long term rates.
One member pointed out that a rapid increase in unemployment and bankruptcy had been avoided and corporate financing seemed to have progressed; thus, it was appropriate to examine the policy effects for the time being.
Return to text Attachment January 21, 2020 Bank of Japan Statement on Monetary Policy At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided upon the following.
The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank amounted to 24,510.8 billion yen after the new loan disbursement.
Regarding housing investment, a different member expressed the recognition that, although some recent indicators had been relatively weak, it would return to an improving trend as interest rate developments stabilized, given that households' purchasing behavior with respect to housing was strong and the level of housing inventories was low.
The government therefore deemed it necessary to eliminate the deficit through expenditure reform as well as other measures and attempt to generate a surplus in the primary balance.
Some members noted that, in formulating a specific numerical expression, the Policy Board should continue to take three perspectives into consideration: (1) a measurement bias in the price index; (2) the safety margin that acted as a buffer against the risk of a vicious cycle of deflation and stagnation; and (3) the rate of inflation at which households and firms perceived price stability -- that is, the public's perception of price developments.
In many of these Asian economies, inflationary pressure continued to be strong, reflecting the earlier rise in food and materials prices and an acceleration in the pace of wage increases due to tight labor market conditions.
With regard to private consumption, members agreed that it had picked up gradually on the whole, although consumption of services, such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, remained at a low level.
A slowdown in the economy of the euro area had become somewhat more evident.
With regard to the baseline scenario for prices, many members expressed the view that there was considerable uncertainty, mainly in developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations, and risks on the price front were skewed to the downside, although a few members expressed the recognition that these risks could be assessed as being largely balanced.
Meanwhile, one member pointed out that future developments in the U.S. credit market warranted attention, since market participants had been actively conducting risk-taking activities.
First, the aggregate supply and demand balance (output gap, and the same hereafter) had been improving mainly on the labor front; it appeared to have reached around the past long-term average of about zero and was likely to continue improving.
They added, however, that attention should be paid to the risk that, depending on future economic developments, firms might postpone implementation of their fixed investment.
Markets in emerging economies had been calm on the whole because policy actions such as the raising of interest rates had been adopted to address current account deficits and high inflation, although markets in some emerging economies had shown nervousness, mainly reflecting the situation in Ukraine.
Although the pace of increase in exports seemed to be slowing recently, domestic demand remained firm overall as fixed asset investment maintained high growth.
This member commented that, therefore, it was likely that the rise in costs eventually would be passed on to firms' sales prices.
Members shared the recognition that developments in the 2024 annual spring labor management wage negotiations would be important when examining the intensification of the virtuous cycle between wages and prices.
They also agreed that the gradual increase in household income was likely to continue against the background that firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and corporate profits were expected to remain high.
Some members expressed the view that in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, economic conditions continued to be on a recovery trend as domestic demand stayed firm, although the pace of increase in production and exports had recently slowed, partly due to the effects of the disaster in Japan.
With regard to the cause of the rise in long-term interest rates, some members said that it was important to find out whether it reflected improved prospects of economic expansion or higher inflation expectations.
In many of these Asian economies, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had risen due to higher food and materials prices, reflecting the effects of the increase in international commodity prices, and to greater utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.
Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had gradually begun to wane -- particularly in components other than durable goods.
It also expected that the Bank would continue to cooperate closely with the government while sharing a sense of crisis, in order to bring about an early recovery of the Japanese economy from the impact of COVID-19.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items decelerated, reflecting the decline in energy prices, whereas the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat.
Machinery orders and construction starts in terms of planned expenses for private and nondwelling construction -- both of which were leading indicators of business fixed investment -- continued a moderate increasing trend, albeit with some fluctuations.
One member said that there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding the outlook for domestic and overseas demand, and distributors' inventories might increase if sales declined, and due attention should therefore be paid to the risk that inventory adjustment pressures might increase.
Regarding the outlook, members concurred that business fixed investment was likely to decelerate temporarily for the time being, mainly for machinery investment by manufacturing firms, due to the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies; however, it was expected to increase moderately from a somewhat longer-term perspective, mainly on the back of accommodative financial conditions.
A few members said that higher materials prices had been gradually passed on to prices downstream, and that some services prices had started to be raised.
The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.
Some members were of the view that this trend was likely to continue for the time being.
Another member commented that, while the current policy responses had had positive effects, it was still the top priority to ensure corporate financing and sustain employment.
Based on this discussion, most members concurred that, while the Bank was determined to achieve the 2 percent price stability target with a time horizon of about two years, it was appropriate to set the time frame for continuing monetary easing in relation to achieving the price stability target, rather than restricting it to two years at the outset.
However, many members expressed the view that, due partly to the effects of fiscal austerity, severe conditions continued in some peripheral countries that were facing fiscal problems, and disparities between these peripheral countries and core countries were becoming noticeable.
Taking this into account, they concurred that it was necessary to reexamine economic and price developments at the next Monetary Policy Meeting, when the October 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices would be compiled.
With regard to the first factor, one member said that inflation expectations for fiscal 2012 and 2013 had been relatively low at around 0 percent, although medium- to long-term inflation expectations remained stable at around 1.0 percent.
The government would continue to promote the integrated economic and fiscal reforms toward achieving the fiscal consolidation target by fiscal 2025, in line with the New Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal Revitalization.
Household income was likely to continue decreasing substantially for the time being, mainly due to the lagged effects of the earlier drop in corporate profits and production.
(1) The application of budget requests for fiscal 2018 was closed on August 31, 2017, and the government would proceed with the budget formulation toward the year-end.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average temporarily declined to some extent in response to the drop in U.S. stock prices and Japanese firms' somewhat weaker-than-expected corporate results for the July-September quarter of 2012, but had The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.
As for prices, members agreed on the following view: (1) global inflationary pressures remained high given the high commodity prices, particularly crude oil prices; and (2) in Japan, it was necessary to be mindful of upside risks to inflation due to changes in, for example, the inflation expectations of households and the price-setting behavior of firms in addition to developments in energy and materials prices.
Long-term interest rates in Japan had recently been in the range of 0.65-0.70 percent as the Bank proceeded with its JGB purchases, although they had risen somewhat, mainly against the background of a slight rise in U.S. long-term interest rates.
Based on this recognition, members concurred that, since the basic stance for the operation was set, it was appropriate to make a decision regarding the operation at this MPM and accordingly make it public.
As for prices, members shared the recognition that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was at around 0 percent, mainly affected by the past decline in crude oil prices, and that in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) was at around 0.5 percent, while inflation expectations had weakened somewhat.
A few members expressed the view that the improvement in housing-related indicators, such as home prices and housing starts, had recently slowed and future developments warranted monitoring.
As for the outlook, industrial production was expected to pick up, reflecting developments in demand at home and abroad, as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Some members pointed out that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI might slow to around 0 percent in the immediate future, due to the effects of the decline in crude oil prices, but what should be considered in conducting monetary policy was the underlying trend in inflation, and there was no change in this trend.
A few members pointed to the fact that the Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity had been showing moderate improvement and there had been signs of a pick-up in consumer sentiment in Germany and France.
(2) The government confirmed the progress of the emergency economic measures at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on June 13, 2013; the proportion of national and local government projects -- measured in terms of their number -- for which actual work had started was around 81 percent.
On the other hand, one member expressed the view that, from a forward-looking perspective, the Bank should maintain the uncollateralized overnight call rate target at around 0.25 percent because there was significant uncertainty regarding the future pace of increase in prices, given that the relative weakness in wages and private consumption had not been dispelled and that there was a likelihood of a temporary pause in the growth of production in the future although adjustments might be marginal.
Exports remained on an increasing trend, but the pace had slowed somewhat.
Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented considering that, with a view to maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the short-term policy interest rate should be set at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level of a long-term interest rate was not appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to further increase the pace of its JGB purchases.
A few members said that, when increasing purchases of CP and corporate bonds, the terms and conditions should be relaxed with regard to, for example, the maximum amounts outstanding of a single issuer's CP and corporate bonds to be purchased.
As for the employment and income situation, members agreed that labor market conditions continued to tighten and the number of employees, particularly full-time employees, continued to increase steadily.
As for credit demand, firms' demand for working capital and funds for fixed investment had declined, and some firms had reduced on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated.
In the housing market, significant adjustments were still continuing.
The U.S. economy generally continued to recover at a moderate pace, particularly in the household sector, although signs of weakness were observed in the corporate sector.
(2) On December 8, the Cabinet decided the "Emergency Economic Countermeasures for Future Growth and Security."
By making such policy efforts in a seamless manner, the government would do its utmost to help the economy overcome deflation and achieve a self-sustaining recovery.
One member noted that it was necessary to closely monitor future developments in exports, as a sense of vigilance was intensifying among Japanese exporting firms, mainly reflecting a reignition of the U.S.-China trade friction.
As for prices, although the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items remained at a relatively high level, it had declined somewhat due to the effects of an earlier fall in international commodity prices.
As was the case when the October 2013 Outlook Report had been discussed, a few members held a more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the forecasts in the baseline scenario, mainly because it seemed highly uncertain whether changes in inflation expectations would lead to a rise in the actual rate of inflation.
One member said that continuing with monetary easing by conducting the three measures would support the economy, and thereby lead to achievement of the price stability target.
One of these members pointed out that the March _Tankan showed that this tendency in firms' outlook for future_ general prices was rather noticeable among small firms, which seemed to face difficulty in terms of passing on costs to prices.
Overseas economies have been depressed significantly, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
With regard to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate had declined slightly, and was in the range of 1.20-1.25 percent.
It was expected to continue its moderate declining trend, albeit maintaining a somewhat high level.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen had been more or less flat against both the U.S. dollar and the euro.
The government would also like the Bank to continue to support the economy by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, taking account of the downside risks to the economy and prices and also of the government's policy efforts.
This member said that it would still not be too late to raise the policy interest rate after explaining the Bank's projections for prices including that for fiscal 2008 through, for example, the upcoming Outlook Report.
A different member added that funding by firms and households was expected to become more active.
Based on the above discussion, most members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to increase gradually toward 2 percent as firms' stance gradually would shift toward further raising wages and prices and as medium- to long-term inflation expectations were projected to rise gradually.
A different member expressed the view that the main aim of the Bank's policy already had shifted from the quantitative to the interest rate aspect, and thus it was important for the Bank to conduct asset purchases in a flexible manner.
Some members referred to the fact that, according to high-frequency price-related indicators, moves toward sales price revisions had become widespread with regard, for example, to daily necessities and food since April 2015.
A few other members expressed the view that marginal demand for labor might be weakening somewhat, noting the fact that the pace of increase in the number of employees in the Labour Force Survey had been slowing recently and the ratio of job offers to applicants had continued to decline.
A few members noted that in credit markets the decline in the amount outstanding of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) was coming to a halt and credit spreads, such as those on corporate bonds, were narrowing somewhat.
Looking at real GDP for the April-June quarter of 2020 for each economy, which was released during the intermeeting period, many economies experienced record plunges, which reconfirmed that overseas economies had been depressed significantly due to the spread of COVID-19 and measures such as lockdowns.
The member continued that this was evidence that firms were beginning to take an active attitude toward carrying out fixed investment from a long-term perspective, amid the progress in the conversion of the deflationary mindset.
One of these members -- referring to the view that the year-on-year decline in the monetary base represented a weakening of the Bank's stance of maintaining the monetary easing -- added that this view was a complete misunderstanding.
One member noted, however, that financial institutions' lending attitudes toward construction and real estate firms had become cautious, and this had led to the recent increase in the number of bankruptcies.
A few members said that housing-related demand had been firm, owing in part to an expansion of teleworking.
Some members pointed out that, although a decline in exports, mainly of capital goods and IT-related goods, had pushed down production for January, firm domestic demand had been underpinning production as a whole.
With regard to the global standard, these members noted that major economies pursuing the same rate of inflation also would facilitate the stability of exchange rates in the long term.
Based on this discussion, members shared the view that the new measure would be consistent with the monetary policy mission stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act that the Bank should aim at achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.
Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that overall economic conditions had deteriorated as the negative feedback loop between financial markets and economic activity worsened.
They continued that such developments in inflation expectations were likely to have been influencing actual wage and price settings, as seen in a base pay increase that was likely to take place for the second consecutive year.
The CGPI was expected to remain more or less flat for the time being.
With a view to contributing to a further enhancement of discussions on monetary policy, the staff proposed that the Bank review the contents of the principal terms and conditions in order to avoid, to the extent possible, revisions that did not have policy implications.
It then declined for the October-November period as a result of a combination of factors such as weather conditions, in addition to the impact of high prices.
Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of change in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been positive.
[6] As for the Bank's conduct of nimble market operations, it had reduced the amount of its scheduled JGB purchases, for example, mainly taking into account interest rate developments and supply and demand conditions in the JGB markets.
Exports had recently been more or less flat, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies.
First, they agreed that the output gap had steadily followed an improving trend driven mainly by labor market developments, as the tightening trend in labor market conditions continued, albeit under some downward pressure partly from the flattening of exports.
Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the October 2018 Outlook Report (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background") and formed a majority view.
One of these members, however, was of the view that it was rather difficult to judge changes in the underlying trend in inflation expectations from these indicators, which therefore should be interpreted carefully.
A few members expressed the view that it was unrealistic to expect high growth in private consumption, taking into account the effects of structural factors such as demographic changes.
The employment and income situation remained severe, but supply and demand conditions in the labor market had been improving moderately.
Long-term interest rates in the United States had fallen, mainly reflecting heightened expectations for additional monetary easing, and those in Europe had fallen somewhat in response to the weakening of some economic indicators.
These members said that there was a view that the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy had recently declined, and added that they would take this into account as they watched developments in inflation pressures with close attention.
Attachment 2 Assessment of the Momentum toward Achieving the Price Stability Target [Note 3] The Bank of Japan judged, at the previous Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), that it was becoming necessary to pay closer attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target would be lost, given that, recently, slowdowns in overseas economies had continued to be observed and their downside risks seemed to be increasing.
A different member commented that it was highly likely that the mechanism behind price developments would continue to be consistent with the price stability target, although the inflation rate could fall below 2 percent, mainly due to temporary factors.
The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been in the range of had declined somewhat mainly in response to the drop in stock prices, and was in the range of 1.2-1.3 percent.
In the meantime, public investment has been more or less flat.
Meanwhile, a few members pointed to the risk that China could face electricity shortages this summer that might restrain its economic activity.
One of these members said that the optimal inflation rate should be considered by taking into account the future developments in economic activity and prices without depending too much on the general public's current perception of price developments.
Exports of capital goods had turned to a pick-up due to a global recovery in production activity and in demand for business fixed investment, mainly for machinery investment.
Overseas economies had recently shown clear signs of a slowdown due mainly to the impact of the outbreak of COVID-19.
Private consumption had picked up gradually on the whole, although consumption of services, such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, remained at a low level.
As for prices, in many of the NIEs and the ASEAN economies, core inflation rates were at relatively high levels, mainly reflecting the higher wage inflation caused by tight labor market conditions.
The member continued that it was desirable that market expectations about future monetary policy be formed based on an outlook for economic and price developments that was shared by the market and the Bank.
It also had been proceeding with discussions on reforms of the employment system and the agriculture industry.
On average, however, they had risen slightly in the January-March quarter of 2015, registering an increase for three consecutive quarters from the July-September quarter of 2014.
And fourth, the corporate sector as a whole was likely to continue to be firm, although somewhat cautious views were becoming more prevalent about the outlook for the manufacturing industry.
Some members said that private consumption and fixed asset investment continued to show high growth.
A few members added that the economies of commodity-exporting countries and grain-exporting countries such as those in the Middle East and Central and South America, as well as Australia, showed signs of recovery on the back of growing demand for commodities and food from China.
Some members referred to the fact that fixed investment plans for fiscal 2009 had been revised downward in survey results released in June, and commented that firms were being cautious about investing when the level of capacity utilization remained low and the outlook for the economy was highly uncertain.
A different member pointed to the possibility that the efforts toward increasing base pay would not spread sufficiently, in which case wages and prices might be weaker than expected.
The number of housing starts -- a leading indicator of housing investment -- had picked up from the start of the year onward, mainly in owner-occupied houses and apartments for rent.
Second, as for the long-term interest rate, it would purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields would remain more or less at the current level of around 0 percent.
Meanwhile, in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, stock prices had been more or less unchanged at high levels and currencies -- from a relatively long-term perspective -- had been on an appreciating trend in the foreign exchange markets, in a situation where capital inflow into these economies -- through investment funds in particular -- had been showing signs of an increase.
The funding conditions of European financial institutions had recently been even more stable.
The experience so far with the negative interest rate policy shows that a combination of the negative interest rate on current account balances at the Bank and JGB purchases is effective for yield curve control.
Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated a proposal to purchase ETFs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen and put it to a vote.
They added that problems such as the slowdown in private consumption could become more pronounced depending on developments in housing and stock prices, and there was increasing uncertainty with regard to developments in the U.S. economy.
Tensions in global financial markets regarding the European debt problem had abated somewhat compared with the situation around the end of 2011.
On the other hand, some members expressed the opinion that an overheating in emerging economies and the resultant rise in commodity prices might cause prices to become stronger than expected through an increase in import prices.
Prices for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) had been rising somewhat, albeit with fluctuations.
One member, referring to the fact that the Bank had conducted additional monetary easing half a year after the previous consumption tax hike took place in 2014, pointed to the possibility that it might become necessary to conduct additional monetary easing this time as well, depending on the underlying trend in consumption.
Some members commented that it was important for the Bank to be well prepared to take policy actions -- including measures to stabilize the financial system -- as the central bank, bearing in mind the risk that the sovereign debt problems in Europe could cause a serious shock to global financial markets and the global economy, thereby affecting the financial system and financial conditions in Japan.
A few members commented that the purchase of JGBs with a remaining maturity of one to two years was also effective in terms of ensuring stability in the foreign exchange market, considering the current situation where the correlation of the yen-dollar exchange rate with the two-year interest rate differential between Japan and the United States was high relative to its correlation with the interest rate differential of other maturities.
They said that it was important that the Bank explain carefully that the timing of any policy change depended on developments in economic activity and prices and that it had no predetermined view regarding the future path of monetary policy at this point.
Exports of motor vehicles and their related goods -- due in part to the effects of developments in foreign exchange rates -- had resumed an uptrend, assisted by a pick-up in those to China -- which had seen a significant drop -- while those to the United States and other regions had been steady.
However, the pace of the pick-up was expected to be only moderate for the time being while downward pressure stemming from COVID-19 continued, mainly on face-to-face services.
The government would swiftly implement the supplementary budget for fiscal 2012, which had been approved by the Diet on February 26, 2013, and steadily implement the fiscal 2013 budget and the fiscal 2013 tax reform.
The number of housing starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, had recently begun decreasing again.
Private consumption had increased clearly, supported by the rising trend in compensation of employees, as the effects of the past low crude oil prices and high stock prices remained.
Nevertheless, some members expressed the view that, even though the probability of the economy returning to a moderate recovery path had increased, subsequent economic developments remained uncertain.
The pick-up in business fixed investment had become increasingly evident as corporate profits had improved.
Many members expressed the view that private consumption had been firm in terms of the average of July and August, as seen in the following developments: consumption, which was sluggish in July due to adverse weather conditions, recovered in August due to the extremely hot weather; and sales of passenger cars, which previously were declining, increased in August.
A few members said that, as suggested by the current further increase in daily and weekly price indices based on the point-of-sale (POS) data, firms had recently taken an aggressive stance of setting higher prices on the sales front, and this was evidence that consumption was resilient.
(5) The maximum outstanding amount of each ETF to be purchased should be set so that the Bank's purchases would be roughly proportionate to the total market value of that ETF issued.
A different member added that if demand for services started to plunge, a possible consequent fall in services prices, which had remained stable for a long time, might cause households' medium- to long-term inflation expectations to fall considerably.
Production was expected to increase moderately as domestic demand stayed firm, and as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picked up gradually.
This member continued that, to this end, it was appropriate for the Bank to purchase JGBs so that yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer would broadly be lowered further.
Return to text Attachment October 29, 2020Bank of Japan Statement on Monetary Policy At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided upon the following.
As for the outlook, exports and production were likely to be at low levels for the time being, due mainly to the depression in overseas economies stemming from the impact of COVID-19; however, they were projected to stop declining and then head toward a pick-up as the impact waned worldwide.
Attachment December 20, 2016 Bank of Japan upon the following.
However, a few other members were of the view that home prices continued to be on a substantial decline on the whole, and there were no signs of the housing market bottoming out.
The government would, taking into account the opinions of people in all social groups, do its best to prevent further economic deterioration and to help the economy overcome the current crisis.
With respect to overseas economies, members agreed that advanced economies continued to recover, mainly in household spending, and that the spread of the effects of such recovery to the corporate sector had become more evident, as seen in further positive developments in manufacturers' business sentiment.
The member then expressed the view that close attention should be paid to future price developments, taking into consideration the possibility that both the natural rate of interest and inflation expectations would decline.
Many members said that it was important, first of all, to reaffirm the following principles.
Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that Section 2.
After the state of emergency was lifted, liquidity in the JGB market had shown some improvement, such as in trading volume, but remained at a low level in a situation where interest rates had been stable.
They shared the view that the outlook for the employment and income situation was clearly improving, considering that an increased number of firms had decided to raise base pay and, according to various surveys, summer bonus payments this year were likely to increase noticeably.
One member expressed the view that various leading indicators of business fixed investment suggested that it would likely continue to increase firmly for the time being, including Olympic Games-related investment and labor-saving investment to address the labor shortage.
Firms nevertheless had generally maintained their plans to increase fixed investment firmly in the March Tankan, and machinery orders continued to show a solid increase, albeit with some fluctuations.
As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that supply-demand conditions in the labor market remained tight, and that employee income had increased.
As for liquidity in the bond market, one member pointed out that the ratio of the daily price range to the transaction volume in the JGB futures market remained at a relatively high level.
With regard to European economies, many members said that the economy of the euro area continued to expand with domestic and external demand well in balance.
Although it was likely to be affected by the slowdown in overseas economies for the time being, it was projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend thereafter.
Business fixed investment continued to see movements toward a pick-up, particularly in Germany.
(5) At an intensive discussion regarding monetary policy and prices at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on January 30, the government had reviewed the progress toward overcoming deflation and promoting economic revitalization.
Regarding the future path of monetary policy, members said that the Bank would conduct monetary policy by carefully assessing economic activity and prices.
Exports and industrial production were expected to remain relatively weak for the time being and increase moderately thereafter as overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase.
Members shared the view that financial conditions, with some lingering severity, had continued to show signs of easing.
On this point, many members noted that, according to the June 2013 _Tankan, business sentiment was clearly improving across a wider range of_ industries.
One of these members expressed the view that it was premature to consider a so-called exit from those purchases.
Thereby, the Bank will do its utmost to provide U.S. dollar liquidity.4 (2) Measures to facilitate corporate financing a) Introduction of the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Corporate Financing regarding the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) The Bank decided, by a unanimous vote, to introduce a new operation to provide loans against corporate debt (of about 8 trillion yen as of end-February 2020) as collateral at the interest rate of 0 percent with maturity up to one year.
Following the above discussions, members discussed the description on the outlook for prices in the Outlook Report.
Although the pace was decelerating while the effects of fiscal stimulus measures were waning, exports were continuing to increase and business fixed investment was rising moderately.
(3) The government, taking into account the effects of the disaster, would do its utmost to achieve stability in the normal routines of people's living situation and of economic activity.
They agreed that it would be appropriate for the Bank to reduce the maximum amount outstanding of the fixed-rate operation by about 5 trillion yen and instead increase outright purchases of T-Bills as similar short-term assets, by the same amount.
Members shared the view that housing investment had recently leveled out, mainly in the Tokyo metropolitan area, and was likely to gradually head for a recovery.
Private consumption was likely to weaken temporarily mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot weather and the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, but was expected to pick up again thereafter.
A few members said that firms still saw the number of their employees as excessive - although to a lesser extent, according to the results of the December Tankan -- and it would take time for employment to recover even with a continued pick-up in the economy.
One member expressed the view that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target had to be judged as being lost temporarily, and thus it was appropriate to revise the forward guidance for the policy rates to relate it to the impact of COVID-19.
The euro had depreciated against the dollar in light of further monetary easing by the European Central Bank (ECB).
Many members expressed the view that the upward pressure on prices stemming from the rise in firms' costs had continued to increase, partly due to a continued clear uptrend in hourly scheduled cash earnings of part-time employees and a rise in input prices.
In relation to this, one member expressed the view that it was also necessary to pay attention to the impact that price rises due to the yen's depreciation had on costs for small and medium-sized firms and on household sentiment.
Members agreed that sentiment in global financial markets had improved, partly due to the end of the U.S. presidential election and progress in the development of vaccines.
Meanwhile, one member pointed out that the sluggish increase in wages was partly attributable to the prevailing practice in which wage increases were determined based on the previous year's inflation rate, and that one method for accelerating wage growth -- as argued by a U.S. economist -- would be for the public sector to take the lead in revising such practice.
They also agreed that, in a situation where the output gap was likely to remain more or less at the same level, it seemed likely that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) would be around 1.0 percent on average, reflecting the rise in the prices of petroleum products and food products.
Third, with the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank would conduct monetary policy as appropriate, in response to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions, from the perspective of sustainable and stable achievement of the target.
Based on these discussions, members shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective.
Exports had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace.
Moreover, the Bank continued to conduct U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral and on January 8, 2009 started to conduct special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing.
Members shared the recognition that business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend with corporate profits and business sentiment improving in a wider range of industries.
Members concurred that the following thinking on the monetary policy stance for the future remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections materializing as well as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would implement appropriate policies in an accordingly flexible manner.
One member, however, expressed the view that if the recovery of advanced economies was delayed, growth in overseas demand would remain weak, making it unlikely, for the time being, that the Chinese economy would recover fully enough to return to its past rates of high growth.
Some members pointed out that the adverse feedback loop in some peripheral countries among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and economic activity had continued, and that its negative effects had been spreading even to core countries such as Germany.
These members continued that, according to reports at the July 2019 meeting of general managers of the Bank's branches, for example, business fixed investment had been underpinned by demand for medium- to long-term strategic investment and for investment by the nonmanufacturing sector, both of which are relatively unsusceptible to changes in overseas demand and the business cycle.
(3) As stated in the basic policies for economic and fiscal management presented in the government would overcome the restrictions brought about by the disaster in a sequential and steady manner, as well as strengthen the initiatives for achieving new growth and restore the growth potential of the Japanese economy.
Many members pointed to the fact that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for October 2013 had risen to 0.3 percent and that the number of items for which prices had risen had exceeded those for which prices had declined.
As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy would likely continue to grow stably, albeit at a somewhat slower pace, as authorities carried out stimulus measures while progressing with structural reforms.
Regarding the corporate sector, members agreed that, although the pace of increase in exports had slowed, partly due to the effects of the appreciation of the dollar, business sentiment and the momentum in production activity had been solid on the back of firm household spending, and business fixed investment continued to recover.
The government would like the Bank to implement effective monetary policy that was consistent with the government's policy efforts and with its outlook for the economy while paying due consideration to developments in financial markets, and to support the economy from the financial side responsibly, taking into account downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices.
Private consumption continued to be on an increasing trend, albeit with a somewhat clearer slowing of the pace of increase.
A different member expressed the opinion that it was appropriate for the Bank to decide at this meeting to continue with the negative interest rate policy, considering that terminating the yield curve control framework and the negative interest rate policy simultaneously should be avoided from the perspective that the Bank should avoid the risk of bringing about discontinuous changes in financial conditions.
A few members added that, although the functions of these two facilities overlapped each other to some extent, they would have value in playing their different respective roles.
A different member pointed out that, as often happens at the beginning of the first and second halves of the fiscal year, revisions in services prices had been confirmed in April 2024, the beginning of the fiscal year.
Facility'" was put to a vote.
The government would accelerate preparations for submitting related bills, primarily those on fundamental reform of the tax system, to the Diet by the end of fiscal 2011.
With regard to the working-style reform, the government would aim to compile a concrete action plan within the fiscal year.
The euro had generally been more or less level against the dollar.
Some members, referring to the increasing number of items for which prices had declined, expressed the view that attention should be paid to the possibility that the impact of the deterioration in the supply-demand balance on prices might be gradually growing.
In this situation, long-term interest rates in the United States and Germany were rising marginally, although they remained at low levels.
A few members expressed the opinion that the policy effects of boosting consumer spending had been decreasing, as evidenced by the decline in car sales.
The government expected the Bank to continue to thoroughly and actively explain the situation of its monetary policy management, including the proposals presented at this meeting.
Members discussed what level the loan rate for the complementary lending facility should be.
It decreased in the January-March quarter, but the decline was largely due to a reaction to the high growth in the previous quarter.
As for housing investment, members shared the recognition that it continued picking up on the back of accommodative financial conditions.
In the Economic and Fiscal Projections for Medium- to Long-Term Analysis released by the Cabinet Office, the national and local governments' primary balance-to-GDP ratio for fiscal 2015 was projected to be approximately minus 3.3 percent, indicating that this target could be achieved.
Regarding the outlook, they concurred that it was likely to be affected by the slowdown in overseas economies for the time being but was projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend thereafter, with overseas economies growing moderately on the whole.
Private consumption had shown a moderate recovery, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve, although the employment and income situation remained severe.
Interest rates on Euroyen futures, particularly those with distant contract months, had fallen further.
Some members expressed the view that, although the number of COVID-19 cases in Japan had been fewer than experienced in other countries, it would take some time until COVID-19 subsided.
The government expected the Bank to continue powerful monetary easing until the exit from deflation was ensured.
(3) With the aim of acting preemptively against the downside risks to the economy and the risks of hollowing out of domestic industries, both stemming mainly from the rapid appreciation of the yen, the government would swiftly finish compiling the mitigating the pain caused by the appreciation, building a robust economy that was resilient to risks, and making the maximum use of merits of the yen's appreciation.
Regarding the direction of the Bank's monetary policy responses to recent developments, members concurred that it was appropriate for the Bank to enhance monetary easing, with a view to doing its utmost to ensure smooth corporate financing and maintaining stability in financial markets, thereby preventing firms' and households' sentiment from deteriorating, given the following facts that reflected the outbreak of COVID-19: financial markets had been unstable, as seen particularly in significant fluctuations in the stock market; and concern over financial positions had become apparent, mainly among small and medium-sized firms.
Nevertheless, many members expressed the recognition that private consumption had been firm, supported in part by a favorable employment and income situation, and the economy maintained its resilience on the whole.
In the CP market, issuing conditions had been favorable: issuance rates on some high-rated CP had been below yields on government bills, and those on low-rated CP had been below their levels seen just before the failure of Lehman Brothers.
As for prices, although the effects of the rise in international commodity prices had been observed, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating due to slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods market and a decline in unit labor costs.
Nevertheless, it was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace, reflecting the effects of a range of policy measures.
Some members noted that effects of financial market turmoil in industrialized economies had spread worldwide, especially to emerging economies.
It was likely to weaken temporarily mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot weather and the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, but was expected to pick up again thereafter.
Regarding the "understanding," most members acknowledged that there was a view that it did not effectively communicate the Bank's policy stance, and recognized that one factor behind this view was that the Bank had provided the understanding of individual Policy Board members, which represented the level of inflation that each member considered to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the medium to long term, and that each member considered the Bank should aim to achieve.
As for the policy rates, the Bank expects short- and long-term interest rates to remain at their present or lower levels as long as it is necessary to pay close attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target will be lost.
With regard to the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the index for televisions turned positive in the CPI for the Tokyo metropolitan area for May, one member was paying attention to whether firms' price-setting behavior had started to change against the background of the rise in wages overseas and of the yen's depreciation since autumn 2012.
Although China's economic activity had gradually been picking up, its capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector had not returned to the level seen prior to the outbreak, and supply chain disruptions caused by a shortage of parts were yet to be resolved.
However, some of these members noted that, regarding the U.S.-China trade negotiations, uncertainty remained as there were issues on which the two countries differed with respect to the partial agreement and those on which an agreement had not been reached yet, as was the case with industrial policies.
Some members pointed out that private consumption in China remained firm except for that of automobiles, which saw a subsequent decline from the past increase in response to the reduction in the related tax cut.
One of these members added that, in order to achieve price stability on a sustainable basis, not only improvement in the negative output gap, but also strengthening the economy's growth potential -- through a rise in productivity, for example -- was important, and therefore it was deemed necessary for the Bank to share the same understanding with the government and the public regarding this point.
(1) The Japanese economy was moving steadily on its upward trend.
One member expressed the view that, considering the current economic and price developments, allowing eligible counterparties to borrow at a fixed rate of 0 percent for four years was too generous an incentive to encourage them to borrow funds.
Some members noted that the fact that yields on T-Bills had been negative at most times was indicative of the Bank's pursuit of aggressive monetary easing under quantitative and qualitative monetary easing.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was minus 0.3 percent in March mainly due to declines in airfares and mobile telephone charges in addition to a slightly increased negative contribution from petroleum products.
As for exports, movements toward a pick-up had been seen, although these had been somewhat weak.
They also agreed that, although business fixed investment had declined substantially and private consumption had remained generally weak, public investment had increased, exports and production had picked up, and business sentiment, especially at large manufacturers, had stopped deteriorating.
(2) As for prices, although the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food, or the core CPI, had been slightly positive for the past two consecutive months, the economy was still in a mild deflationary situation, as evidenced, for example, by the continued fall in price trends.
As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year maturity, declined slightly, staying in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent.
On the price front, commodity prices had fallen back.
Many members said that global financial markets remained unstable.
A different member said that rises in prices controlled by the government, such as the standard selling price for wheat, tended to lag a rise in market prices, and it was necessary to watch closely the effects of such delayed price rises.
Prices were also rising moderately.
One member said that, given the results of this year's annual spring labor-management wage negotiations to date, achievement of the price stability target seemed to have come in sight to some extent, mainly due to price rises accompanying wage increases.
On this basis, one member said that the combination of an increase in the size of the Program and the removal of the minimum bidding yield would generate more powerful monetary easing effects.
One member pointed out that investment was expected to accelerate further in light of moves such as the shifting of production sites back to Japan and the expansion of investment in research and development.
Such signs were expected to gradually become more evident as the improvement in corporate profits continued.
The member continued that, despite this acceleration, the pace of increase in the money stock (M2+CDs) was decelerating partly due to the ongoing shift of funds from bank deposits to other types of financial assets in a situation where the rate of return on financial assets other than bank deposits was improving and the Japanese financial system had regained stability.
A few members noted that attention should be paid to the point that some market participants had renewed concern about the size of the outstanding amount of government debt in Japan.
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had remained slightly over 2 percent.
One of these members, however, said that wage growth had not accelerated as much as expected, compared to the high level of corporate profits.
In relation to the fact that fixed investment for large manufacturing firms had turned positive for the first time in eight quarters in the _Financial Statements Statistics of_ shared the recognition that favorable movements were beginning to be observed in manufacturing, which had been lagging behind.
In this situation, stock prices in the United States and Europe had been declining.
b) With regard to debt of companies that have not obtained an external credit rating, the companies should be classified as "normal" borrowers in the self-assessment by financial institutions.
Industrial production continued to move down in October relative to the July-September quarter, after having declined for two quarters in a row since the April-June quarter.
Members concurred that overseas economies on the whole still had not emerged from a deceleration phase, but some improvement had been observed, including the continued recovery, albeit at a moderate pace, of the U.S. economy.
In global financial markets, while investors had remained somewhat less risk averse on the back of the European debt problem, particular attention should be given to developments in these markets.
Economic activity in the euro area had been sluggish.
One member, however, noted that it showed signs of improvement, as seen in the fact that the number of female employees in the area of medical and nursing care exceeded the level seen before the Lehman shock, and that the number of part-time workers was increasing.
As for the employment situation, according to the Labour Force Survey, the year-on-year rate of decline in the number of employed persons for the July-August period was almost the same as that for the April-June quarter, mainly due to a decrease in non-regular employees in the face-to-face services industry.
Most members said that financial conditions remained generally tight, as evidenced by the fact that the polarization of funding conditions continued between firms with high and low credit ratings, and uncertainty in the pace of future economic recovery might be preventing firms from becoming optimistic about future funding conditions.
Some members said that, although the overall economy had continued to recover moderately, uncertainty regarding the outlook remained high, given the need to proceed with fiscal consolidation and balance-sheet adjustments at financial institutions.
A different member said that it was possible that it would take some time to achieve the price stability target, and therefore ensuring the sustainability of the policy was likely to become increasingly important.
Meanwhile, private consumption had been firm, especially in the ASEAN countries.
The year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had accelerated, mainly due to the prices of petroleum products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier, in addition to the substantial slack persisting in the economy as a whole.
As for the employment situation, a decline in the number of new job offers and sluggish growth in non-scheduled hours worked had recently been seen, mainly in the manufacturing sector.
On this basis, they shared the recognition that, although these risks were judged as not significant at this point, mainly because financial institutions had sufficient capital bases, it was necessary to pay close attention to future developments given that developments in financial institutions' profits had a cumulative impact on their financial strength.
Also, details such as the total amount of the loans and the deadline for new applications for the loans should be determined, taking into account financial institutions' plans for such lending and investment.
On Asian economies, members concurred that the economic slowdown had intensified, due to a decrease in exports reflecting the economic downturn in the United States and Europe and to deterioration in financial conditions mainly caused by a capital outflow.
A few members pointed to the recent bond issuance by firms that had previously deferred issuance in view of the instability in global financial markets stemming from the heightened sovereign risks in Europe, and also noted the increase in the number of firms issuing bonds.
In relation to this, a different member said that the background to the outflow of deposits from Greek banks was not the solvency problem of individual banks, but rather concern about the currency system -- specifically, the potential exit of Greece from the euro area.
Some members expressed the recognition that the pace of economic growth was highly likely to recover through the second half of 2019, partly because the effects of stimulus measures gradually would materialize and progress in adjustments in IT-related goods was anticipated.
In relation to this, one member said that the Bank should continually examine whether the level of the policy interest rate was appropriate, employing various methods, for instance, assessing the relationship between the real interest rate and the potential growth rate.
A different member said that the effects of monetary policy could be constrained if market participants began to question the Bank's stance toward overcoming deflation.
It was likely that production would remain on a downtrend reflecting weaker domestic and overseas demand, but the pace of decline was expected to moderate as adjustment pressures on inventories waned.
Exports had picked up with the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies diminishing.
Members also agreed that risks to the outlook were still tilted to the downside and uncertainty surrounding the outlook for the global economy remained high.
With regard to firms' price-setting stance, one member pointed out that, in a situation where an increasing number of firms were beginning to raise prices, due mainly to labor shortages, there were cases where the profitability of firms in some industries -- such as food services as well as beer and related beverages -- had improved owing to price increases, and that this had led to rises in their stock prices.
Exports and production had shown signs of stabilizing but growth in business fixed investment, particularly in the NIEs, had been sluggish as business sentiment remained cautious.
The slack in supply and demand conditions and the slow growth in wages continued to exert downward pressure on prices, while there was inflationary pressure from the impact of the increase in the value-added tax rate in Italy and the rise in prices of goods, including processed food, due to the continuing pass-through of the earlier increases in international commodity prices.
Some members then pointed out that real exports on a GDP basis for the July-September quarter had turned positive on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and said that signs of recovery in exports had been observed.
One member noted that attention should be paid to the fact that, from a macroeconomic perspective, growth in business fixed investment and wages was slow relative to that in corporate profits.
These factors could push the Bank closer to the realm of fiscal policy.
They then shared the recognition that exports and industrial production would probably remain relatively weak for the time being; however, although domestic demand was likely to remain resilient, mainly supported by reconstruction-related demand, a substantial increase in such demand, which would thereby compensate for the weakness in exports and industrial production, could no longer be expected.
Members shared the recognition that global financial markets remained volatile, as uncertainties surrounding overseas economies had increased against the backdrop of the United Kingdom's vote to leave the European Union (EU) and the slowdown in emerging economies.
Private consumption had been relatively weak as a whole, while production had been picking up as exports increased and the pace of decline in business fixed investment moderated.
With respect to yield curve control, members shared the view that, since the previous meeting, the JGB yield curve had been formed smoothly in a manner consistent with the guideline for market operations.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of an improvement in the output gap and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.
Members expressed the view that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, as Japan's economic and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts presented in October On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets' anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years, this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a buildup of financial imbalances.
Some members -- noting that small firms, particularly very small ones, regarded their financial positions as having deteriorated - commented that differences in funding conditions according to firm size were widening.
Regarding the consumption tax hike, a few members expressed the recognition that its effects on private consumption were expected to be smaller than those of the previous hike in 2014, mainly because the government would implement various measures to smooth out demand prior to and after the hike.
On the expenditure side, the government had recently compiled and released the fiscal 2014 budget requests based on requests submitted by ministries and agencies in accordance with the guidelines for budget requests for fiscal 2014 compiled in August 2013.
Regarding the outlook, as overseas economies grew moderately, exports were projected to return to an uptrend, mainly due to a pick-up in global demand for IT-related goods.
Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike.
On this basis, they shared the view that it was becoming more important for the Bank to continue to strive to ensure smooth settlement of funds and maintain market stability, taking into account the recent developments among U.S. financial institutions and their impact.
However, some members including this member were of the opinion that, although it was likely that the policy measures in individual countries would produce positive effects, it would be some time before they would be seen clearly and it was very uncertain how great they would be.
In this situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had climbed somewhat, mainly because the year-on-year rate of change in energy prices had turned positive.
The government would make the most of its negotiating power and pursue the best path to suit Japan's national interests.
It welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting of the principal terms and conditions for purchases of these assets as a swift response.
Many members expressed the opinion that the rate was likely to reach around 2 percent -- the price stability target -- in or around fiscal 2015, on the assumption that crude oil prices would rise moderately from around the recent level.
Regarding the special rules for small-lot investments and loans, many members noted that, although the amount of loans at the first disbursement was relatively small, the breakdown by area of loans provided by financial institutions that had received the Bank's loans showed that the proportions were large for areas such as "medical and nursing care," "business reorganization," "setting up a new business," "agriculture, forestry, and fisheries business," and "business serving the needs of senior citizens."
Thereafter, it was expected to remain more or less flat at a high level underpinned by Olympic Games-related construction, although the positive effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures would diminish.
On the other hand, services consumption such as dining-out and travel had been increasing firmly recently.
Funding conditions for firms and households had deteriorated further.
Based on this discussion, some members said that full attention should continue to be paid to developments in China's macroeconomic policy, including monetary policy, and their possible effects.
Judging from interviews with firms, production was projected to increase markedly in the April-June quarter of 2013. detecting large fluctuations after the Lehman shock as outliers (estimation by the Research and Statistics Department, Bank of Japan).
Another member said that uncertainty with regard to the outlook for economic activity and prices for fiscal 2013 and 2014 was considerably greater than that in previous projections.
In the commodity market, crude oil prices had risen amid concern in particular over geopolitical risks in the Middle East.
On the price front, international commodity prices declined in the period from the summer to the early autumn, but remained high in a situation where global demand was on an increasing trend.
Some members expressed the view that the undersubscription that had recently occurred in the Bank's outright purchases of corporate bonds and T-Bills under the Program, as well as a decline in the bid-to-cover ratios of the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral with a six-month term, indicated that the effects of the Bank's significant monetary easing had been spreading to financial markets.
The financial positions of firms had continued to be favorable as a whole, although those of small firms had deteriorated somewhat.
Real exports posted a solid increase in the January-March quarter from the previous quarter, after exhibiting high growth throughout the second half of 2007.
A few members pointed out, for example, that the Chinese authorities had been making a very strong commitment to underpinning the economic growth rate, and that Japanese-affiliated firms in China were generally less pessimistic about developments in the Chinese economy than their headquarters in Japan.
Nominal wages per worker, however, had remained somewhat weak.
Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom was picking up.
Third, with regard to the risk balance, he proposed a new expression that "risks to both economic activity and prices are likely to be generally balanced for the time being."
As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy would gradually show signs of bottoming out -- triggered by an improvement in economic entities' sentiment and the pick-up in exports -- as additional downward pressure from the fiscal side was reduced.
Some members expressed the opinion that attention should be paid to the effects of the recent instability in stock prices on private consumption.
(2) Faced by the current severe economic conditions, the government, with the aim of overcoming deflation and ensuring economic recovery, would carry out the emergency economic countermeasures and steadily implement the budget for fiscal 2010, and would also draw up concrete plans for the "New Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and implement the plans.
On this basis, many members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would accelerate as the base effect of the falling crude oil prices dissipated, and was likely to reach around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015, given that the output gap and inflation expectations -- both of which determined the underlying trend in inflation -- were likely to improve steadily and increase, respectively.
In addition, one member said that, in order to encourage firms' efforts toward creating value-added, it was important to develop and enhance direct financing through, for example, creating a deep corporate bond market so that more investment funds for growth would be provided to firms, and that the Bank should encourage their activities toward sustainable growth.
A few members expressed the view that the demand-boosting effects of various policy measures targeted at durable goods consumption -- which had supported the pick-up in the economy -- were likely to wane upon completion of the policy measures in fiscal 2010.
It was expected to remain firm as the employment situation gradually headed toward improvement.
Exports remained on an increasing trend.
As for the outlook, some members were of the opinion that, amid the waning of the effects of inventory restocking and fiscal spending, the pace of U.S. economic recovery was likely to remain moderate, constrained by households' excessive debt.
The upward trend was expected to continue as overseas economies continued to grow and domestic demand kept expanding.
Many members referred to developments in import prices as a risk factor for the outlook for prices, and pointed to the need to closely monitor the degree to which the recent appreciation of the yen exerted downward pressure on consumer prices.
The general collateral (GC) repo rate had remained relatively high due to lenders' cautious stance on trading.
As for the employment and income situation, household income had continued rising moderately, reflecting improvements in employment and wages, in a situation where various indicators for labor market conditions had been improving.
Members shared the view that the pace of growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN economies was likely to gradually rise since exports were expected to continue picking up, particularly those to Europe and the United States, on the back of recovery in advanced economies.
Some members, referring to varied market speculation about the Bank's conduct of monetary policy, said that monetary policy should be conducted in light of its objective to achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability.
As for prices, there were differences by country and region.
Members agreed that, although overseas economies taken as a whole had continued to expand, the pace of growth was slowing and downside risks remained elevated, mainly reflecting the increasing tensions in global financial markets, sluggish growth in the Members shared the view that tensions in global financial markets had been increasing against the background of the recent developments among U.S. financial institutions.
Moreover, some members expressed the view that, in addition to manufacturers, firms in nonmanufacturing industries seemed to be gradually starting to lead the current economic growth, noting the following facts in relation to large nonmanufacturing firms.
Members shared the recognition that exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of the growth in overseas economies.
Many members shared the assessment that services prices continued to increase moderately, partly due to the moderate wage increases thus far.
In India, the economy had been growing steadily, particularly in domestic demand, partly in reflection of expectations for structural reforms and of monetary easing effects.
The European economy was likely to gradually move out of its deceleration phase as adjustments in the manufacturing sector, which had shown some weakness, progressed.
Private consumption was expected to remain resilient, supported in part by improvement in the employment situation.
One of these members referred to the fact that there was an ongoing polarization of real estate prices between metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas as well as within metropolitan areas.
As background to this, these members noted the following two points: (1) firms' stance was likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices with the steady improvement in the output gap, and (2) medium- to long-term inflation expectations, which had been more or less unchanged recently, were likely to rise steadily as further price rises came to be observed widely.
One member pointed out that, if side effects materialized as a result of additional easing, it was necessary to consider methods to mitigate them.
A different member said that international commodity prices had bounced back recently, and such upward pressures on upstream prices warranted attention because they might affect consumer prices eventually.
Members shared the recognition that factors such as U.S. economic policies, negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU), and geopolitical risks continued to be regarded as risks to developments in overseas economies.
Based on this discussion, members concurred that it was appropriate to properly communicate the following consensus views to the public.
Business fixed investment was projected to continue to see a moderate increase for the time being on the back of the high level of corporate profits.
Meanwhile, a few members stated that risks regarding economic activity at home and abroad remained significant, and it was necessary to carefully assess, for example, the propensity to consume after the consumption tax hike, sustainability of favorable developments in financial markets, and developments in the decoupling of the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors.
In addition, the Bank decided to make the following adjustments in accordance with the measures described above.