And the recovery in global demand remained susceptible to further shocks, especially if the imbalances that contributed to the financial crisis were not rectified.
Private sector pay pressures were benign, but prospects going forward depended on whether this would persist or was simply a reflection of the weakness of activity; and public sector pay was growing strongly.
But the balance of manufacturers expecting to increase investment was the most negative since October 1992 according to the CBI.
A15 Within the quarterly industrial breakdown of sterling bank lending, the annual rate of repayment of bank debt by manufacturers had increased in Q3.
A2 US industrial production had grown strongly during April, and consumer confidence in May had been strong.
In contrast, the Halifax house price index had risen by 2.2% in January.
The UK current account deficit was now estimated to have increased to 5.7% of GDP in Q3 – the biggest quarterly deficit in the past 50 years and proportionally the largest in the G7.
On the other hand, the evidence from share prices clearly went in the opposite direction.
Euro-area business confidence had fallen in November, but consumer confidence had been unchanged from the previous two months, following the sharp fall in September.
Some expenditure by firms was probably in areas that were hard to measure, or on items that were as yet not counted as investment in the National Accounts, so that perhaps the underlying picture was a little stronger than recorded in the official data.
However the recent fall in oil prices could help to offset these pressures through lower petrol prices.
And several of the Bank’s Agents had been told of a rise in late payments by small and medium-sized firms.
Growth in total pay per employee in 2002 compared with 2001 had been expected to be higher by 28% of the respondents, while 34% had expected it to be lower.
And evidence from options suggested, if anything, an upside rather than a downside risk to market interest rates over the next year or so.
As permitted under the Bank of England Act 1998, as amended by the Bank of England and Financial Services Act 2016, Diana Noble was present on 20 January, as an observer for the purpose of exercising oversight functions in her role as a member of the Bank’s Court of Directors.
Core inflation had remained relatively weak in October at 1.1%.
But labour market indicators had continued to weaken and there had been further falls in home sales and construction spending.
Nevertheless, the Citi/YouGov five-to-ten year ahead measure had matched its previous record high recorded in June 2011.
There had also been a fall in petrol prices, although the underlying oil price remained volatile.
The planned investment percentage balance for the manufacturing sector had fallen to +2 in Q1, from +8 in Q4, and the proportion of firms operating at full capacity had fallen to 33% in Q1, from 38% in Q4.
In contrast to movements in advanced-economy government bond markets, there had been relatively little news in corporate financing conditions.
Changes in OPEC production would, however, probably remain a key driver of oil prices.
As the outlook for demand remained subdued, with vacancies continuing to fall and nominal pay growth easing, the risks to inflation returning sustainably to the target in the medium term were to the downside.
This was 0.1 percentage points weaker than Bank staff had anticipated immediately before the data release, and 0.3 percentage points weaker than the February Inflation Report projection.
Sales of clothing and white goods had also weakened.
Euroarea HICP inflation had risen to 2% in January.
The recent financial reporting season for European banks had not produced any major unexpected losses or problems with reported capital buffers.
Unit labour costs had been growing at rates above those consistent with meeting the inflation target in the medium term, and core services CPI inflation, excluding rents, had risen to rates consistent with meeting the target.
Measured GDP could be expected to rise sharply in the third quarter as the Diamond Jubilee effect unwound, alongside a possible small boost from the Olympics.
The oil price had risen further since the Committee’s previous meeting, and had touched $30 per barrel.
Short-term sterling interbank interest rates, relative to market expectations of Bank Rate, had continued to fall on the month, as they had since the original announcements of the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) and activation of the Extended Collateral Term Repo (ECTR) facility, and, subsequently, announcements regarding the ECB’s Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme.
Employers might decide not to pass on in price increases the higher costs implied by their own increased contributions, either because of competitive pressures or because they were confident that the Committee would act to maintain inflation close to target.
A fuller analysis of the implications of the new information contained in Blue Book 2015 would be possible as the Committee prepared its November Inflation Report projections.
The slightly stronger-than-expected consumption numbers reflected the ONS’ attempts to capture the changing seasonal pattern of car registrations.
Earnings growth excluding bonuses had been 3.6% in the three months to November, down 0.1 percentage points on the three months to October.
Following the ECB’s extension of its Securities Market Programme to the purchase of Italian and Spanish bonds, yields had initially fallen back to around 5%, but they had subsequently risen a little.
Across all markets, investors appeared to be beginning to discriminate between different instruments according to their underlying credit quality.
The picture from the surveys seemed consistent with reports from the Bank’s regional Agents.
The JP Morgan global composite output PMI, which had started to pick up in February, had increased a little further in March.
The annual rate of growth of credit card lending had fallen to 17.2%, from 17.6% in December, and the annual rate of growth of other unsecured lending had risen to 10.7%, from 10.2% in December.
But yields on Portuguese government debt had remained very high.
Members discussed how large a reduction in Bank Rate was appropriate this month.
There had been very strong gross issuance in non-financial corporate bond markets, although in the United Kingdom these markets continued to be accessed by a relatively small number of companies.
In particular, wage growth has been notably weaker than expected.
Excluding the factor cost adjustment, GDP at market prices grew by 0.8% in Q1.
If anything, slightly less of the consolidation was now planned during the Committee’s three-year forecast period, with correspondingly more after that.
Point estimates are constructed by using values of 0, 0.5, 3, 8 and 15 for the respective categories.
Equity prices had fallen by 2% in the United Kingdom, less than the 3% decline seen in US markets, while share prices in the euro area had increased modestly.
Some of those members also noted a downside risk to inflation arising from the possibility that the reduction in the economy’s supply potential following the recession had been less, and hence spare capacity greater, than assumed in the Inflation Report.
Consistent with this environment of heightened uncertainty, market intelligence suggested that some companies had paused or scaled back their investment plans.
A10 In the money markets, expected three-month interbank rates implied by sterling futures contracts had changed little since the previous MPC meeting.
Core inflation in the euro-area had been surprisingly persistent, although the flash estimate of the area-wide Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, on the headline measure, had unexpectedly fallen somewhat, from 2.0% in May to 1.7% in June.
Total car registrations had fallen further in February and private registrations had remained particularly weak.
Developments in the international economy had been supportive of UK activity, with business surveys internationally being consistent with sustained demand growth in the near term.
Surveys of private sector economists’ expectations of euro-area inflation and GDP growth had also picked up steadily.
Household consumption growth still showed no obvious signs of slowing: growth in the fourth quarter now seemed likely to be somewhat faster than previously expected and possibly above that recorded in the third quarter, retail sales were growing at an annual rate of around 4% on the three-month comparison and car registrations had increased sharply on a year earlier in each month of the fourth quarter.
In the rest of Asia, activity had continued to hold up well.
The ONS estimated that GDP had fallen by 0.8% in 2009 Q2, following a 2.4% decline in the previous quarter.
That slowdown reflects weaker global growth, driven by trade protectionism, and the domestic impact of Brexit-related uncertainties.
There were also arguments in favour of a programme of purchases towards the upper end of the range.
However, given the potential costs to the economy of reversing the programme underway, they would not vote against the continuation of the programme.
The spot price of oil had risen by about 6% in dollar terms, seemingly prompted by increased concerns about Middle-East supply.
Pay growth had been volatile in the first half of the year, partly due to the reduction in the top rate of income tax in the spring, but the impact of this had faded and the data were probably now giving a cleaner read on pay pressures.
Reports during the month had suggested that several regional administrations in Spain would apply to the central government’s Regional Liquidity Fund, raising concerns that targets for Spanish fiscal consolidation might not be met and that the country might need to seek further financial assistance.
Annual growth in export volumes had been 3.7% in July, compared with a fall of 1.2% in June.
CPI inflation had declined to 1.5% in March and was likely to fall below 1% in the next few months, in large part reflecting developments in energy prices.
Ahead of its final meeting, the Committee was made aware of the flash S&P Global/CIPS UK composite PMI for September that would be released publically on Friday 22 September.
This may have partly been explained by the unwinding of the effect on households’ M4 of Scottish Widows windfall payments.
Market expectations of official UK rates implied by overnight indexed swap rates had been that UK official rates would be increased by 25 basis points at the May meeting.
Public sector earnings growth had been unchanged at 3.4%.
M4 lending (excluding securitisations) had grown by £9.7 billion (1.0%) in November, and the twelve-month growth rate had risen sharply to 8.4%.
On balance, most members felt there was no need to stimulate demand at this time given the signs of a pickup in growth and the near-term risks to inflation from higher energy prices.
Global demand had slowed, and the near-term outlook was weaker than the Committee had assumed in May, largely due to the impact of the euro-area financial crisis.
The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank’s repo rate should be maintained at 4.75%.
Both the Bank/Ipsos and the Citi/YouGov surveys had reported a further rise in households’ short-term inflation expectations in 2022 Q1.
But mortgage equity withdrawal in Q2 was still estimated to have been stronger in real terms than at any point since 1991 Q4.
The Committee agreed to announce its policy decision immediately following the end of the special meeting.
Although corporate bonds were typically issued by larger companies, any shift towards debt issuance would reduce their demand for bank The version of these Minutes originally published erroneously stated “…over the past two decades…”.
On the supply of labour, there was little indication that the extent of inward migration would diminish in the near term and there probably remained a degree of slack in the labour market.
On the other hand, there was a case for injecting further monetary stimulus.
The same survey had revealed little expectation of any further extension to the other elements of the MPC’s August package over the next twelve months.
For example, manufacturing output had risen for the ninth consecutive month in January, whereas construction output – a series that was often revised substantially – was estimated to have fallen sharply.
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
A second channel was via the associated impact on asset prices, which would reduce wealth and affect the value of collateral available to borrowers.
Seven members considered the current policy stance to be appropriate to balance the demands of the Committee’s remit.
The Committee’s central view was that CPI inflation would fall a little further from its March level over the course of the year, but remain above the 2% target in the near term.
Prices had responded to a range of supply factors, including the impact of US sanctions on Russia affecting its aluminium production, as well as uncertainty related to trade policy.
Food commodity prices had risen by 3% on the month, and by 19% since May, but the impact of this was likely to be offset by falls in the prices of metals and non-food agricultural products.
It had risen since the November Inflation _Report, partly as a result of_ progress in those negotiations.
On 5 November, the Government had announced that the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (CJRS) would be extended until the end of March, with employees receiving 80% of their current salary for hours not worked.
The main news on GDP this month had been in the release of the National Accounts, which had significantly revised both the estimated profile and the apparent composition of growth in recent years.
The GDP revisions indicated that consumption growth had been slightly weaker in 2003 Q4 and investment growth somewhat stronger than previously thought.
But while sterling was expected to fall at some point against the euro, it was impossible to predict the timing or size of any such adjustment.
Some members placed considerable emphasis, given the projection of persistent trade deficits, on the potential upside risks to inflation from the possibility of a sterling depreciation.
Bank staff estimated that unit labour cost growth had fallen back slightly, to 2.6%, in Q1, and projected a 3.0% rise in Q2.
Taking all the evidence into account, members agreed that the prospect for domestic demand was sufficiently buoyant that, despite the probable future impact of the higher exchange rate on activity, there was a need for tighter monetary policy in order to hit the inflation target looking two years or so ahead.
The prospective increase in VAT in January 2011 would affect measured CPI inflation for twelve months, and would probably keep inflation above the target for a period.
The central projection assumed decelerating unit labour costs.
More generally, the pass-through from unit labour costs to prices was not straightforward.
The revisions to the household and corporate sector financial balances were broadly offsetting, such that overall the private sector financial deficit had been little changed.
Another possibility was that recruitment difficulties were related to the level of unemployment rather than to its rate of change.
That might to some extent reflect respondents’ expectations of a rise in unemployment, as indicated by the drift upwards over the past few months in the balance of expectations about unemployment reported in the regular GfK survey of consumers.
Inflation expectations derived from index-linked gilts had fallen slightly.
Lower demand would be consistent with the evidence from surveys and vacancies.
In contrast, the BCC survey had reported a rise in manufacturing investment intentions in Q2, with the survey balance rising to +7, from -3 in 2002 Q1, but it had still been below its long-term average.
There were still risks from a number of sources in advanced and emerging economies, however, including any disorderly outcome from a failure to reach agreement on a new Greek programme.
The twelve-month rate of aggregate broad money growth had fallen to 5.6% in June, the lowest since March 1995.
Intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggested that, although there had been some early signs of a slowing in underlying growth, demand had remained mostly robust and broadly in line with projections at the time of the May Report.
The majority of economists responding to the latest Reuters poll expected Bank Rate to rise in 2016 Q2, although since that survey had been conducted a number of economists had shifted their expectations to later in the year.
The pickup in growth was supported by: a moderate but persistent expansion in global demand; the sustained stimulus from monetary policy; a further easing in credit conditions aided by the FLS and steps to increase the resilience of UK banks and building societies; and a gradual fading of the impact of the financial crisis on household and business spending.
The Committee reviewed developments since its previous meeting and the extent to which they had been in line with the projections in the November Report.
This could feed through into average wages as job-to-job churn returned to more normal levels and existing workers demanded commensurately higher pay to prevent them, too, seeking alternative employment as a means of achieving higher income.
The implied path of sterling, US dollar and euro official interest rates had flattened significantly since the August Inflation _Report, apparently in response to weaker perceived global growth prospects, linked partly to higher oil_ prices.
At the end of 2013, the Bank and HM Treasury had announced that the terms of the FLS extension would refocus the Scheme towards business lending in 2014.
The GfK consumer confidence balance had been +1.7 in April compared to +1.6 in March, and the MORI indicator had risen sharply towards 0 in March, in line with the GfK measure of general confidence.
In the United States and the euro area, short and longer-term market interest rates had, over the 15-day average period, been a little higher than at the time of the November Report, although they had subsequently fallen back.
This reflected the view that accumulating inflationary pressures would surface after a period in which measured inflation was held back by a series of specific price level changes.
These are the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting ending on 4 May The Bank of England Act 1998 gives the Bank of England operational responsibility for setting monetary policy to meet the Government’s inflation target.
At 0.5% in March, twelve-month CPI inflation had remained well below the target.
Although there had been increases in new Covid cases in most European countries, mortality rates had so far remained low.
Bank and building society lending to industrial and commercial companies (ICCs) had risen sharply in the first quarter.
Since imports would contract, aggregate demand and output growth would plausibly fall by less than would simply be implied by the reduction in exports.
Expectations for interest rate increases in the euro area had also firmed and expectations of cuts in the United States had diminished somewhat.
If activity growth continued to slow, one might expect a simultaneous slowdown in broad money growth, possibly alongside a fall in asset prices.
The supply of credit by banks to households and private non-financial firms was likely to remain constrained as long as banks were restructuring their balance sheets.
The Committee had previously been concerned about the prospective impact of high RPI and CPI inflation on inflation expectations and on wages.
Employment growth was particularly robust in the fourth quarter and this would support consumption.
The US dollar effective exchange rate index (ERI) had fallen by 4.1% since the Committee's previous meeting.
Measured labour productivity had fallen sharply during the recession, but had begun to recover.
Market contacts had attributed at least some of the rise to news about the scale of the increased government borrowing revealed in the Budget.
The news on the month had continued to suggest a robust recovery in activity in the United Kingdom.
But futures prices had been little changed, suggesting that the rise in spot prices was expected to be temporary.
That said, there might still be a perception that the euro-area authorities were now more committed to shifting the burden of future bank restructurings from governments to uninsured private creditors.
It suggested that annual corporate services price inflation had fallen to 2.9% in Q4, from 3.1% in Q3.
Business surveys continue to suggest underlying quarterly GDP growth of around ¼% during the middle of this year.
Since the MPC’s previous meeting, indicators of financial market volatility had increased and advanced economy risky asset prices had fallen.
Five-year fixed mortgage rates had fallen as the yield curve had inverted, and reports suggested that new fixed-rate mortgage business was strong.
There was also a degree of uncertainty over the seasonal adjustment of the data in the first quarter.
It was unclear how quickly, and to what extent, departmental underspends from earlier years would be reversed, which would slightly change the path of total spending within the Budget envelope.
A5 Between 7 April and 5 May, the FTSE All-Share index had risen by 1.6% in local currency terms, while the other major international indices had fallen – the S&P 500, Topix and the Dow Jones Euro Stoxx had fallen by 1.7%, 1.5% and 0.7% respectively.
And the renewed sense of caution in financial markets might delay any significant easing in credit conditions.
Concerns over foreign travel had been expected to boost domestic tourism, but some companies would be adversely affected by the expected continued low number of visitors from North America.
This had partly reflected differences in labour cost inflation.
In the euro area, annual HICP inflation had increased to 7.5% in April, with core inflation at 3.5%.
The movement in the past month had been broadly consistent with interest differentials, but was less easy to reconcile with the apparent strength of domestic recovery in the United States relative to the euro area.
The surprise this year had been that there had not so far been more upward pressure on wages, given the increase in National Insurance contribution rates and the higher levels of retail price inflation.
Firms had also been asked what factors would cause them to increase their spending on investment.
Alternatively, it could signal that firms had begun to respond to weaker actual or prospective demand by reducing hiring.
The shift in market rates had tightened monetary conditions further, but the change in Bank Rate over the previous year had largely been a withdrawal of an accommodative policy stance and it was not so surprising that demand growth had not yet slowed in response.
Indicators of labour market tightness had nevertheless remained elevated.
It would take a while, however, before it would be possible to assess with any confidence the impact the Scheme was having on lending.
Survey and asset price evidence had suggested a wider divergence of views on UK rates over the next year or two, based on alternative forecasts for growth and inflation up to 2000.
GDP figures indicated growth of 1.9% in the first quarter of 1999.
The twelve-month growth rate of M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had also risen, to 10.7% in December from 10.4% in November.
Household spending on durable goods had recovered sharply since the April trough in activity, returning to around pre-crisis levels by the end of June, and the most recent payments data had shown a levelling off.
On the whole, the Committee judged that, if the economy followed a path broadly consistent with the May central projection, then monetary policy could need to be tightened by a somewhat greater extent over the forecast period than the very gently rising path implied by the market yield curve underlying the May projections.
In part, that was because the anticipated modest expansion in supply capacity would help to slow the rate at which slack was absorbed, thereby limiting the build-up of domestic inflationary pressure.
The world economy was also strong.
The material rise in spot and forward wholesale gas prices since the August Report represents an upside risk to the MPC’s inflation projection from April 2022.
Sterling had appreciated against all major currencies in June.
There seemed to be three channels through which US house prices might have an impact on the macroeconomy.
Real consumption had increased by 0.8% in July, following a fall of 0.4% in June.
However, recent CPI data had been surprisingly weak, which might suggest that the competitive pressures on margins were stronger than the Committee had realised.
Althoughgross mortgage lending by banks and building societies had increased quite sharply over the last couple ofyears, the recent acceleration in net mortgage lending (to a twelve- month increase of 6.2% in June) was more modest.
A8 Sterling initially rose following the Russian turmoil – with the UK effective exchange rate index increasing around 2½% to 106.7 – as the United Kingdom was perceived to be relatively insulated from the emerging market problems.
The British Retail Consortium (BRC) Retail Sales Monitor had reported that retail sales had grown by 8.1% on the year to December, compared with 8.2% in Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) new car registration figures for December showed a 17.3% rise compared to December 2000.
According to these new estimates, the recession was deeper than previously thought.
During the month, the ONS had published the first results of the Census for England and Wales.
In the public sector, the Pay Review Body awards, which took effect in April, had averaged about 0.5 percentage points less than in 2002.
Another view was that these figures, along with the recent settlements data reported in the Annex, were clear signs of an acceleration in earnings.
As business investment in intellectual property, and ICT, machinery and equipment had held up during 2020, there might not be as large an adverse effect on capital services and total factor productivity as was assumed in the May projections.
And some of the structured investment vehicles had less access to committed liquidity lines (although they would also have a higher proportion of medium-term funding).
Bank staff estimated that around three-quarters of the deviation of inflation from the 2% target reflected unusually weak contributions from food, energy and other imported goods prices, and expected that CPI inflation would remain around zero before picking up around the turn of the year, largely as the influence of the sharp falls in oil and food prices at the end of 2014 dropped out of the annual comparison.
A45 Manufacturing input prices had fallen by 1.3% in May, although base effects had resulted in a rise in the annual inflation rate to 1.0% in May, from 0.4% in April.
Inflation was likely to decline faster in the short term than in the Committee’s central projection.
But whereas in previous months it had inflated the growth rate, in the latest month there had been a net return of old 50p coins, depressing the monthly growth rate by an estimated 0.1pp.
It could not sensibly be rolled forward indefinitely.
This reflected the assumption that the additional activity under a constant Bank Rate was associated with higher productivity, thus moderating its inflationary impact.
Annual growth in secured lending was little changed, at almost 8%.
The Bank’s latest Decision Maker Panel (DMP), conducted over the period from 6 to 20 March, indicated that many businesses expected Covid-19 to have a large negative impact on sales over the next year.
The news from the United States had probably been to the downside for the Committee over the month, though not by enough to change its views on the outlook for the US economy to a significant extent.
However, in the period since the beginning of October, and despite the continuation of a relatively positive flow of UK economic data, the sterling effective exchange rate index had depreciated further taking the total depreciation since sterling’s November 2015 peak to 21%.
The pattern of revisions to GDP in the first quarter, with stronger final domestic demand and imports, and weaker stockbuilding, suggested stronger growth in subsequent quarters.
A48 In the labour market, manufacturing job losses had continued and were no longer being offset by gains in other sectors.
The final release of the University of Michigan headline index of consumer confidence had risen to 89.6 in October, from 87.7 in September.
At present, for example, the UK’s potential supply capacity might have been affected by Brexit-related factors.
But the three-month annualised growth rate had fallen slightly further, to 13.8% in February from 13.9% in January, having peaked at 14.6% in October 2002.
The Federation of Recruitment and Employment Services survey had also suggested that the demand for employees was falling.
The contribution of goods prices to twelve-month CPI inflation had fallen back only marginally in February.
At some point household spending on vehicles would recover, and hence the current growth rate might be erratically low.
Overall, the economy had so far slowed broadly in line with the Committee’s May forecast.
Higher LTV mortgage rates had continued to fall since the Committee’s previous meeting, albeit at a slower pace.
But it was likely that the underlying rate of growth had increased between the two quarters.
A38 The Agents also asked whether the quality of recruits had changed in the last 12 months.
According to the CBI Industrial Trends Survey, the availability and cost of corporate credit had increased as a concern, but had remained fairly low down the list of factors judged by companies to be limiting investment, with uncertainty about demand continuing to be identified as the most significant constraint.
The Average Earnings Index (AEI) showed another fall in earnings growth, from 4.6% to 4.1% on the three-month headline basis, and from 4.0% in the year to May to 3.8% in the year to June.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had fallen to 2.4% in June from 2.8% in May.
GDP and market sector output growth were both expected to pick up and be positive over the first half of the year.
Construction output had continued to contract in Q1.
Demand and output growth seemed to be slowing in line with the August central projection although the risk of a faster slowdown had increased.
That suggests that average hours are around their ‘desired’ or equilibrium level.
This had risen to around 9% in 1994-97, but was projected by the international organisations to fall to 4-6% over 1998-2000.
External demand growth might slacken, in particular if oil prices were to rise even more sharply.
These scarring effects on demand would be greater the longer that the current conditions of infection, restriction and uncertainty persisted.
One year ahead inflation expectations had fallen back in Q4, after an increase in Q3.
Overall, GDP was expected to rise by 0.2% in the first quarter of this year, supported by a slightly more positive global backdrop and the reduction in short-term uncertainty observed since the general election.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve had announced that it would purchase $40 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities per month, in addition to reinvesting funds from maturing assets, until there had been a sustained improvement in labour market conditions.
An international comparison of uncertainty measures showed the United Kingdom to be an outlier.
Household sight deposit rates were likely to increase in coming months, although the Committee’s expectation was that pass-through would be only partial, as deposit rates had been unusually high relative to Bank Rate during the post-crisis period.
Although the stock of broad money had fallen again in December, its velocity remained well below the rates prevailing in the late 1990s.
The increase in non-farm payrolls in October had been somewhat higher than expected, although the unemployment rate had ticked up, to 3.6%.
Sterling twelve-month forward OIS rates had risen by around 20 basis points since the time of the February Inflation Report.
One possible counterpart to the recent revisions to the current account might be weaker estimates of the financial position of the corporate sector, but corporate balance sheets had recently been improving and appeared well-positioned to accommodate higher levels of investment.
As a result, GDP began to recover in the second half of 2009, rising somewhat above its historical average growth rate by the end of the forecast period.
A36 Headline (three-month average) whole-economy average earnings had increased by 3.4% in the year to August, up 0.1 percentage points on the July rate.
Growth in unit wage costs had risen again in Q2, as wages and salaries had grown faster than productivity.
In the recent unprecedented circumstances, the economy had been subject to very large and repeated shocks.
Firms in the construction, property and retail sectors still appear to be most affected, but intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that lenders have also modestly tightened criteria for other sectors.
In the distribution sector, annual RPIY goods price inflation had been lower than the inflation in distributors’ weighted costs for most of the period since 1999, possibly reflecting a structural squeeze on wholesalers’ margins.
The slack in the labour market would help to reduce the risk of the expected spike in inflation feeding into higher wages during the coming wage round.
There had been further news on the month about some of the factors influencing demand.
Similarly, economists polled by Reuters on 27 February attached a mean probability of 80% to the Committee leaving the repo rate unchanged.
Annual services price inflation had been unchanged at 4.0% and annual goods price inflation had remained unchanged at 0.7% in June.
Before turning to its immediate policy decision and against the background of its latest projections for output and inflation, the Committee discussed the world economy; money, credit and asset prices; demand and output; labour market conditions; prices and costs; and some possible tactical considerations.
A59 Information from options markets had shown that the one-month implied volatility for $/yen was typically higher than for $/Mark.
On the other hand, adjusting AWE data on a CPI-weighted basis indicated that pay growth could be moderating at a slower pace than the headline data were suggesting.
In any event, all members agreed that these domestic developments needed to be set against those in the external environment.
But since the MPC’s October meeting, sterling had increased by 2.1% (on an effective basis) and was now broadly in line with the August forecast.
The latest Agents’ intelligence indicated that pay settlements over the second half of the year were, as expected, coming in at lower rates compared to H1, and 2025-expected settlements might be in a 2 to 4% range.
The 2% fall on the quarter had been largely driven by a sharp drop in extraction investment, a consequence of low oil prices.
Four-quarter Chinese GDP growth had slowed to 7% in Q1, a little weaker than expected in the February _Inflation Report, and annual growth in industrial production had fallen to 5.6% in March.
Most other measures of inflation expectations had remained elevated, particularly in the near term, although financial market indicators of medium-term inflation expectations were lower than their recent highs.
Twelve-month CPI inflation fell to 3.4% in February from 4.0% in January and December, a little below the expectation in the February Monetary Policy Report.
The euro had fallen by about 5% against the dollar and the yen.
Some measures of the longer-term inflation expectations of households had risen over the past year.
But import growth had also remained strong, with the result that net trade had continued to make less of a contribution to GDP growth than the Committee had previously expected.
(d) 2019 Q4 data are outturns.
In that case, consumption might not soften as much as expected.
Despite this renewed weakness in activity, the euro-area unemployment rate, at 8.4% in October, had been only 1 percentage point above its 2019 Q4 level.
That pickup in growth had been slightly more brisk than the Committee had judged likely at the time of the August Inflation Report.
Annual inflation in the euro-area harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) had increased to 2.1% in August, from 1.9% in July.
House prices (as measured by the average of the lenders’ indices) had fallen by 1.0% in April, consistent with a further easing in house price deflation, and remained around 20% below their October 2007 peak.
The trend in recent months suggested that vacancies had stopped increasing, but this had been distorted by adjustments to allow for the over-count of vacancies.
They are conditioned on a smooth adjustment to the average of a range of possible outcomes for the UK’s eventual trading relationship with the European Union and the gently rising path of Bank Rate implied by market yields.
A number of Committee members noted that one consequence of additional asset purchases would be to bring forward the point at which the extraordinary degree of stimulus could begin to be withdrawn, if the projected impact was realised.
Headline earnings growth in the private sector had increased by 0.7 percentage points, to 3.8%.
This suggested that, in addition to high energy prices, pressures from global bottlenecks due to strong demand for goods and inelastic supply had been passing through to consumer prices.
Within that, estimated domestic demand had been weaker than the Committee had expected, while net trade had contributed rather more to growth than expected.
The number of LFS employees had risen by 39,000 over this period and also by 26,000 since the onset of the pandemic.
These would moderate the extent to which annual CPI inflation was likely to rise over the coming months as a result of the earlier large declines in energy prices – in late-2014 and early-2015 – dropping out of the annual comparison.
This reflected three main factors.
On the first, recent Bank analysis had implied that the oil price could have played a sizeable role in the recent increases in CPI inflation, through both direct and indirect channels.
Construction output growth had been revised down to 2.0%, from 2.5%.
The prospect of the new millennium might have had some impact on investment, for instance in IT, though this remained unclear.
Households’ expectations of near-term inflation expectations had fallen back, even though CPI inflation had continued to rise.
There were several methods of producing estimates of the equilibrium unemployment rate, including: simple statistical models; more sophisticated statistical filters that exploited information from reduced-form wage Phillips curve relationships; and structural ‘search and matching’ models of the labour market.
The recent strength of money GDP growth was likely to have persisted into the second quarter, based on the data seen so far.
In Hong Kong, political tensions had contributed to the sharpest fall in economic activity since the_ global financial crisis.
It has been lower than real wage growth (Chart 2.20).
Longer-term forward interest rates had increased a little in both the United Kingdom and United States, but had been broadly unchanged in the core euro-area countries.
This programme of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) would be focused on secondary market purchases of short-dated sovereign bonds of countries that agreed to enter a European Financial Stability Fund/European Stability Mechanism programme.
That engagement had taken place to explore the feasibility of such a monetary policy being introduced at some point in the future, were the MPC to judge it appropriate in order to meet the inflation target.
A 25 basis point increase in Bank Rate was fully priced into overnight index swap_ rates by May 2015, a little later than at the time of the Committee’s previous meeting, and the median respondent to the Reuters survey had put a 30% probability on there being a rate rise during 2014, down from 40% the previous month.
The Institute of Management Services (IMS) index had risen in January.
The production and new orders components had both been above the neutral ‘50’ level for the first time this year.
The number of approvals for house purchase in July had been 111,000, the highest figure since the series was redefined in 1997.
A2 The US outlook had remained robust, despite a slowdown in GDP growth in Q2.
High frequency indicators had also pointed to stronger, broad-based momentum in the near term, leading Bank staff to revise up their expectation for growth in 2017 Q1, to 0.5%.
The GDP release had also contained the first estimate of the Q2 expenditure components, although the ONS’s new publication schedule for GDP data meant that a slightly smaller proportion of measured expenditure data was available than had been the case previously.
Other indicators suggested continuing robust growth in consumption.
There was no area-wide expenditure breakdown yet available for the second quarter, though the GDP breakdown for Germany suggested that some of the second quarter weakness there might have been the result of erratic factors.
A37 The CIPS employment survey for June had suggested continued overall employment growth.
Changes in Bank Rate could not be expected to smooth out all short-term fluctuations in output growth.
As in previous Covid waves, headline GDP was still likely to be affected significantly by the ways in which public-sector output was measured in the UK national accounts.
The non-manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index for August had fallen significantly and pointed to only marginal further expansion, although some other data had been more positive.
A34 The overall CIPS employment index for May had improved slightly on the previous month, but had remained below the ‘no-change’ level of 50.
Retail sales volumes grew by 0.3% in July, more slowly than the 0.7% monthly average in the first half of the year, but this was nevertheless sufficient in combination with the strong growth in May and June to keep the three-month (on previous three months) growth rate on a rising trend.
Consensus Economics forecasts of average inflation in 2002 and 2003 had been unchanged, at 2.1% and 2.3% respectively.
Chinese annual consumer price inflation had been unchanged in August, at 5.3%.
By contrast, the BCC’s balance on similar investment intentions in the manufacturing sector had fallen from +16 to +11 in Q3.
But data for August showed a 7.9% increase in exports to the non-EU area.
The news from other components of spending had been mixed.
The twelve-month growth rate of OFCs’ M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had slowed, to 10.6%.
In response to social distancing measures, some people might be able to work from home.
For the euro area, the question was whether consumption growth would pick up any slack resulting from the impact of slowing US demand and the appreciation of the euro on net trade.
A17 There was large public sector debt repayment of £10.4 billion in January, partly due to higher than expected receipts under the new self-assessment tax system.
But there were signs of improvement in corporate profitability, which could support investment.
It would be hard to confirm or refute this hypothesis until further data regarding household income and saving became available.
Annual growth of M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had increased, to 13.8% in August, from 12.7% in July.
New measures of tightness based on these ideas implied that the labour market was not as tight as the simple vacancies to unemployment ratio suggested, but they appeared to be less affected by structural improvements in the labour market.
Some indicators of nominal spending continued to grow strongly.
The working-age employment rate had been broadly unchanged over the past six months.
Consumption had grown by 0.6%.
However, updated staff analysis and reports from the Agents’ contacts suggested that food price inflation was likely to fall back more slowly than previously expected.
The weaker global backdrop was weighing on exports.
The volume of sales balance had been at its weakest since January 1999.
Moreover, it was possible that the weakness of productivity was in part associated with the impact of the crisis on the banking system’s ability to allocate credit efficiently across the economy – a constraint on output growth that would be unlikely to be removed by further demand stimulus alone.
Activity in the housing market had also picked up: having risen by 18% through the course of 2015, mortgage approvals for house purchase had grown further in January 2016 to around 75,000.
A51 Economists polled by Reuters between 29 and 31 October had attached mean probabilities of 55% to no change in the Bank’s repo rate, 43% to a decrease of 25 basis points and 2% to a decrease of 50 basis points.
German growth in the second quarter had been 2.2% and, given the continued fall in unemployment, it was possible that some of the pickup in consumer spending growth might be sustained in the third quarter.
The Manpower survey of employment intentions had shown a sharp deterioration looking ahead to 1999 Q1.
A28 Labour market inactivity had risen by 71,000 in the three months to July compared with the previous three months, with much of this increase accounted for by the number of people classified as not wanting a job.
Based on the available survey evidence for output, firm growth was likely in the fourth quarter also.
There were suggestions from the Bank’s regional Agents that the recovery in confidence was fragile.
The employment rate was broadly unchanged.
It was likely that the degree of slack in the labour market had remained higher than implied by this measure, however.
That was not easy, especially when some shocks could affect both demand and supply.
Perhaps consistent with that, there had been a rise in lending rates on some mortgage products with LTV ratios at or below 75% recently.
A lack of supply would be consistent with the continued rises in house prices.
For the duration of the Guarantee, this might have been expected to reduce the risk that a long period of externally generated price inflation led to more persistent domestic price and wage pressures, although that risk remained material.
Since the May Monetary Policy Report, CPI inflation had been slightly higher than expected, largely reflecting upside news in energy prices.
Against this, credit markets in the euro area remained impaired and any additional stimulus to demand from this source was likely to be limited.
The slowdown in global growth has been broadly based across regions (Chart 2.2).
Total unsecured lending was strong in December, rising by 17.9% on a three-month annualised basis, following windfall-related debt repayments in Q3.
A final decision on the imposition of US tariffs on imports of automotive products had been delayed for 180 days.
That judgement also reflects that monetary policy will act to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored around the 2% target.
In sum, although near-term prospects for global growth had improved, whether this momentum would be sustained remained an open question.
One possibility was that the composition of demand would normalise and that any sectoral re-adjustment on the supply side might be relatively quick.
It would be necessary, however, to reassess the domestic outlook in light of the revised National Accounts data that the ONS would release in full as part of _Blue Book 2014._ CPI inflation had unexpectedly fallen back to 1.6% in July and it now seemed likely that June’s 1.9% figure had largely reflected a change in the timing of the summer sales for clothing and footwear.
The Committee’s central projection was for inflation to fall well below the 2% target in the medium term.
The weak US non-farm payrolls data for February and the Madrid bombings had triggered falls in rates, but the strong US payrolls data for March had led to increases.
Concern about the health of the US economy was one candidate trigger for the volatility in financial markets.
At this meeting, the Committee voted to maintain Bank Rate at 5%.
If stress in financial markets persisted, it also had the potential to constrain banks’ ability to raise as much term funding as they desired.
Household consumption had grown slightly faster than income in Q1, such that the household saving ratio had fallen to 6.1% in Q1, from 6.4% in 2003 Q4.
But there was a risk that the Committee had underestimated the potential impact.
A29 The Halifax and Nationwide prices indices had both recorded increases in October.
Claimant count unemployment had declined by 22,300 in August; the rate had fallen by 0.1 percentage points to 4.2%, its lowest rate since March 1980.
Japanese consumer prices had fallen by 0.2% in July.
The rise in oil prices would put some upward pressure on UK inflation in the near term, relative to what had been assumed in preparing the May Inflation Report projections.
The CIPS construction index had also been strong at 57.5 in November, with housing and commercial orders remaining robust.
Public and private sector means were also 3.1%.
But the most recent survey on August 10 indicated a fall, perhaps consistent with a change in foreign currency risk premia in favour of sterling given concerns about financial fragility overseas.
Finally, it might be that companies were borrowing in order to invest overseas, and that some of this borrowing was held on deposit in the UK ahead of a prospective acquisition.
It was likely that this, in part, reflected increased expectations of gilt purchases for monetary policy purposes.
An additional Growth Plan announcement is scheduled to take place shortly after this MPC meeting, which is expected to provide further fiscal support, and is likely to contain news that is material for the economic outlook.
Pre-tax corporate profits (including an adjustment for inventory valuation and capital consumption) had risen by 3.3% in Q4 compared with a quarter earlier.
Analysis by Bank staff suggested that changed expectations for monetary policy in the UK or overseas were not the prime cause of the appreciation.
Broad money and credit growth continued to be weak: M4 excluding the holdings of interbank intermediaries had increased by about 1% on a three-month annualised basis in May and M4 lending had been unchanged on a similar basis.
Annual regular pay growth in the private sector had increased from around 1% in mid-2014 to over 3% in spring 2015, but had moderated to 2.3% in the latest data for the three months to October.
The CIPS services survey had pointed to rising output prices in May: the average prices charged index rose to 54.6, from 53.5 in April.
Reports of declining employment in manufacturing had increased.
In the central projection, GDP growth remained sluggish in the near term as the squeeze on_ households’ real income continued to weigh on consumption, before picking up over the remainder of the forecast period.
The Committee considered how the news over the past month affected this assessment.
With demand and supply currently broadly in balance, a margin of excess demand was expected to build during the forecast period, feeding through into higher growth in domestic costs than had been seen in recent years.
The Committee noted that a number of market-based measures of implied and realised volatility had remained historically low, which appeared at odds with the elevated level of aggregate measures of policy uncertainty.
Their contacts had also reported that pay increases had been significantly higher for workers with skills in particularly short supply, such as HGV drivers, while the use of one-off bonuses to retain staff had become more widespread.
The Committee discussed the combined evidence on the position of the corporate sector, which generally reacts to interest rate changes sooner than the household sector.
A9 The M4 deposits of the household sector had increased by 1.1% (or £5.1 billion) in April.
A37 Wage drift, on the basis of these data, had increased in recent months, particularly in the service sector.
The Committee discussed how the United Kingdom would, through a number of trade and financial channels, be affected by these developments.
Measures of consumer confidence had remained strong, and on some measures business confidence had risen in recent months.
The first rise in Bank Rate was fully priced into OIS rates by 2015 Q2, with economists polled by Reuters expecting the first rise in Q1, a little earlier than in May.
Those increases had been more marked at shorter horizons, but five year inflation swap rates, five years forward, had risen to their highest level since 2010.
Percentage changes on a year earlier + – 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 + 0.0 – 0.5 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Sources: Eikon from Refinitiv, Eurostat, OECD, ONS and Bank calculations.
But the strength of the dollar need not be inconsistent with the falls seen in US equity markets, since the exchange rate was a relative price and equity prices had fallen sharply as well in many European countries.
Non-farm payrolls had increased by 257,000 in January so that, in net terms, over 1 million jobs had been created over a three month period – the largest increase in the number of people employed since 1997.
Recent announcements of further monetary and fiscal stimulus were likely to boost the outlook for activity and inflation.
German retail sales had risen strongly in December.
Second, it was plausible, judging from the reports of the Bank’s regional Agents and from surveys, that earnings growth would be lower in 1999 than in 1998, contrary to the assumption used in the Committee’s central projection.
A37 Prices of total imported goods had risen by 0.8% in June.
The outlook for the world economy had deteriorated, which reinforced their assessment that world activity would grow less rapidly than the best collective judgment reflected in the Committee’s February projection.
House prices continued to rise rapidly, with the twelve month rate on both the Halifax and Nationwide indices above 10%.
Mean inflation expectations, in HM Treasury’s survey for 2002 Q4, had risen to 2.4% in December, from 2.3% in November.
M4 lending (excluding securitisations) had grown by £9.2 billion (0.9%) in December, and the twelve-month rate had risen to 9.0%, its highest since October The rapid growth had been broadly based: household borrowing had remained strong and private non-financial corporations’ (PNFCs) and OFCs’ borrowing had strengthened in Q4.
Some comfort on the latter point could be taken from the relatively small percentages of loans collateralised against stocks and shares.
Labour productivity growth has been persistently weak since the financial crisis, and has been generally lower than the MPC’s forecasts.
Input prices excluding food, drink, tobacco and petroleum had risen by 0.7% in May, taking the annual rate of inflation to 4.0%, its highest since November 1995.
That view was supported by the increase of 288,000 in non-farm payrolls and the sharp fall in unemployment to 6.3% in April.
The twelve-month growth rate of OFCs’ M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had fallen to 3.5% in February, from 5.7% in January.
The war in Iraq had increased the difficulty of interpreting survey responses, probably making them unduly pessimistic but to an unknown extent.
However, the rate of CPI inflation in the medium term would also depend substantially on the prospects for regular pay, non-wage costs and other drivers of domestic inflation.
That would occur if a decline in growth during the second half of the year prompted companies, which had been holding on to underutilised resources in anticipation of a faster recovery in activity, to shed more labour and scrap more capital.
LFS employment had grown by 0.2% in the three months to January, slightly stronger than had been expected at the time of the February Report.
Manufacturing output growth had been 0.6% in Q3, up from 0.4% in Q2, while service sector growth had slowed to 0.7% from 0.9%.
It was possible that a recovery might be associated with relatively little job creation, as labour productivity increased.
Bank staff were continuing to analyse the significance within M4 of OFIs’ holdings but no new information had come to hand.
Despite reports of gradually improving credit availability, net finance raised by private non-financial companies from UK banks and capital markets had fallen in February for the seventh month in the past eight.
Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Stephen Nickell) voted in favour.
The following members of the Committee were present: Eddie George, Governor Mervyn King, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy Andrew Large, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability Charles Bean Marian Bell Richard Lambert Stephen Nickell Paul Tucker Kate Barker was present on Wednesday 4 June but was, unexpectedly and unavoidably, unable to attend on Thursday 5 June.
The prospective revisions could, nevertheless, make household consumption spending appear significantly stronger than in the current data vintage, and the household saving ratio commensurately lower.
And, despite recent policy initiatives, there was still a possibility that this process would involve a disorderly adjustment, resulting in sharply lower output in the euro area.
A significant development in monetary and financial conditions was the further rise in sterling’s effective exchange rate.
Real consumption had risen by 0.2% in the month to May, but nominal retail sales had fallen by 0.3% – the second consecutive monthly fall.
Whole-economy Average Weekly Earnings (AWE) growth had increased to 5.4% in the three months to February on a year earlier, more than 1 percentage point above the February Report forecast, reflecting strength in both regular pay and bonuses.
Although pay growth has eased somewhat, unit labour costs have continued to grow at rates above those consistent with meeting the inflation target in the medium term.
A30 Employment had continued to grow steadily.
In Japan, GDP had been revised down and was estimated to have fallen by 0.5% in 2014 Q3.
A measure of general uncertainty from the latest Deloitte CFO survey suggested that the proportion of respondents who judged that the level of uncertainty was high or very high currently had declined sharply from an elevated level in the previous quarter.
Second, there were some possible downside risks to the outlook.
In contrast, dollar interest rates had fallen by a little more from mid-2007 onwards.
A7 M3 in the euro area had remained buoyant in April, increasing by 6.5% on the year, while credit to the private sector had increased by 11.4%.
French consumer expenditure on manufactured goods had increased by 1.6% in December compared with the previous month.
Some members also considered arguments for raising the repo rate by 25 basis points.
Firms had also been asked what factors would influence their investment plans over the next year, and how they planned to change investment in particular assets.
This suggested that the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment was likely to be higher.
This added to the risk of the perception arising that the Committee was more prepared to tolerate persistent deviations of inflation from the target than in the past.
It remained the case, however, that the actual path of Bank Rate would reflect economic developments.
Prices for non-oil commodities had also risen in the month.
Whole‑economy total labour costs divided by GDP at constant prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast.
But that had in large part come at the expense of severe recessions and high unemployment in some countries.
There had been a number of UK monetary policy communications during the month: the statement released at the conclusion of the Committee’s previous meeting; the publication of both the minutes of that meeting and the February Inflation Report; and public evidence given by some MPC members to the Treasury Committee.
In the past, such a dip in the housing market had tended to go hand-in-hand with a softening in consumption growth.
Overall, although annual unit wage cost growth had increased over the past few quarters, probably reflecting the past tightening of the labour market, it remained lower than would be consistent with meeting the 2% inflation target in the medium term, were it to persist at current rates, even if external influences were no longer weighing on inflation at that horizon.
Only a minority of the decline in non-farm payrolls was accounted for by the call-up of reservists in the armed forces (over 200,000 by mid-March, not all of whom would have been on those payrolls beforehand).
In China, GDP growth had picked up to 1.3% in 2021 Q2, in line with expectations at the time of the MPC’s previous meeting, following a relatively weak expansion of 0.4% in Q1.
The rise in bank borrowing had coincided with a decline in other external finance.
The weaker global backdrop is weighing on exports.
Covid vaccination programmes have progressed and picked up pace in many countries.
The first concerned the meaning of the fan charts published in the Inflation Report.
Employment growth had been strong in February, but had weakened in March.
The number of loan approvals and particulars delivered had been little changed in April compared with March.
Consumer confidence had also improved, and credit conditions appeared to be stabilising.
Businesses’ own price expectations, as reported in the DMP Survey, had remained at slightly more elevated levels, although on a continued downward path.
The reported output balance (past four months) had fallen from +7 to -4, the lowest balance since April 1993; expected output (next four months) had fallen to -8, the lowest since July 1991.
Developments in this area would require continued monitoring, although they were not yet a cause for concern.
In the United States, Q2 GDP growth had been revised up by 0.1 percentage points to 1%.
The Census results would be reflected in revisions to population and Labour Force Survey data back to the early 1980s.
CPI inflation had fallen to 1.7% in February.
Annual input price inflation excluding oil had eased from 5.0% in January to 2.4% in June.
Monetary policy was already highly stimulatory and the benefit of past actions would continue to be felt: the first rise in Bank Rate was not fully priced into market rates until well into Inflation was above the 2% target, was likely to rise further later this year, and was expected to remain elevated for an extended period.
On average, external forecasters expect inflation to return gradually towards the target over the forecast period, reaching 2% at the three-year horizon (Chart B).
The process of fiscal consolidation and rebalancing in these economies would need to continue for some time yet, with the consequence that euro-area activity was likely to remain subdued for quite a while.
House prices had again been volatile, with the Nationwide index recording a strong rise on the month, while the Halifax index had fallen.
Retail sales had increased by 0.6% in April and the retailers’ sales balance in the CBI Distributive Trades Survey had risen further in May, to its highest level since the end of 2004.
Many commentators expected a large number of mortgage foreclosures over the coming years, which could affect banks’ willingness to lend.
One channel had been via the diversion of resources, with, for example, a number of companies reporting that their senior executive officers had spent time preparing for Brexit.
Overall, the December 2005 contract had declined by around 20 basis points since the Committee’s previous meeting, and around 50 basis points since the May Inflation Report.
There was uncertainty around both slack at the start of the forecast period and how quickly it would be absorbed, but in the central projection slack was broadly absorbed by the end of the forecast period.
Real government consumption had risen by 1.0% and whole-economy investment had risen by 1.4%.
There had already been some stimulus imparted from the substantial downward movements in interest rates across the term structure over the past two months, although part of that was likely to have been in anticipation of policy rates remaining unchanged for longer than previously expected and further asset purchases by the Committee.
This was expected to limit increases in unemployment in 2020 H2.
Since the peak in the FT-SE All-Share on 20 July, the financials and services sectors had been the main contributors to the fall of 22.5% in the index.
Although house prices were rising, so far this seemed consistent with the reduction in interest rates since October.
Conditions elsewhere in the euro area were generally rather more robust, although business confidence was less buoyant even in France and euro-area industrial production had fallen in January; a slowdown in the telecommunications sector might also hold back growth.
A4 The sterling effective exchange rate had risen by 0.3%, to 106.2.
CPI inflation had risen to 3.0% in September.
A measure of GDP which excluded these volatile sectors (which account for around 6% of GDP) showed growth continuing at above trend rates of around 0.8% per quarter in 1997 H2.
But there was no case for a further rise.
Trade concerns have contributed to volatility in global equity prices and corporate bond spreads, as well as falls in industrial metals prices.
During 2014, the sterling index had risen above the top of the range it had previously_ occupied in the period since the financial crisis.
This lessened the trade-off that the MPC was required to balance and, all else equal, reduced the MPC’s tolerance of above-target inflation.
US and euro-area short rates were also little changed over the same period.
While modest by historical standards, that growth rate exceeded the diminished rate of supply growth of the economy, which was projected to be around 1½% per year.
In the MPC’s central projection in the May Monetary Policy Report, UK GDP had been expected to recover strongly over 2021, to pre-Covid levels.
Although often subject to erratic movements, goods exports had grown sharply in October and had not fallen back as much as expected in November.
Data from the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors had shown a fall in the seasonally-adjusted net balance of estate agents reporting price rises in the three months to December.
That had been reflected in the changes in the GDP growth and CPI inflation forecasts discussed above.
The weakest sector, by a wide margin, had been general industrials, which had declined by around 11%.
Mean RPIX inflation expectations for 2003 Q4 in HM Treasury’s survey had fallen to 2.5% in May, from 2.6% in April.
Longer-term nominal forward interest rates had changed little over the period.
Capital goods orders – usually a reasonable leading indicator of business investment – had picked up in the latest CBI Industrial Trends Survey but had fallen sharply in the April CIPS/RBS survey.
It was too early to assess the impact of the FLS by reference to lending flows, but encouraging signs concerning the impact of the Scheme had continued to emerge.
Rates implied by the contract for September 2002 had fallen by 36 basis points and those implied by the contract for September 2003 had fallen by 60 basis points.
The outlook for emerging markets had generally improved, although Argentina looked if anything more fragile and problems at Daewoo had affected financial markets in Korea.
More generally, the Committee noted that companies could respond in a number of other ways to higher costs, including by reducing nominal pay growth.
Even after making allowance for the probable impact of the adverse weather conditions, growth had slowed during the second half of 2010.
And the news was such that it was difficult to form a quantitative assessment of the overall impact on the medium-term inflation projection and of the size of any interest rate increase that might be required.
Since the Committee’s previous meeting, it had been consulted over the size and terms of the Bank’s ECTR Facility, in advance of the monthly auction on 19 December 2012.
In the United Kingdom, data over the month had been consistent with the Committee’s expectation of a significant contraction in activity in the fourth quarter of 2008.
The Committee voted unanimously to continue with the programme of sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate bond purchases totalling up to £10 billion, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
Most members felt that there had been little news on balance over the month.
For the euro area as a whole, retail sales were up 0.6% in Q3.
Since then, industrial production had declined by 1.2% in May, and by over 5% over the past year.
Tensions appeared recently to have eased somewhat, however.
The sterling exchange rate had been 0.7% above the August Inflation Report projection.
But there was relatively little information, as yet, and the early figures were subject to revision as further settlements were recorded.
At its August meeting, the Committee had been briefed that technical preparations internally and by PRA-regulated firms had progressed sufficiently that a negative Bank Rate could be implemented by the system as a whole, with or without tiered reserve account remuneration, if warranted.
Hence consumption growth might pick up after the weakness around the turn of the year.
A few days earlier sterling had failed to break through 1.70 against the dollar, and this triggered a sell-off on technical grounds.
The recent declines in consumer confidence might reflect uncertainties about the international political situation, which might be resolved in the near term.
Analysis by Bank staff suggested that the output gap, while continuing to fall, was estimated to be slightly larger in the second half of the year than had been previously expected.
Bond yields had generally risen after the US interest rate decision.
It was possible that the increase in uncertainty following the terrorist attacks on 11 September had had a greater impact than previously believed.
The preliminary survey balance for house prices produced by the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) had fallen, on the basis of a 90% sample, from +26 in May to single figures in June, having been at +61 as recently as March.
Further steps were likely over coming weeks and months to alleviate strains in the euro area and to provide additional support for vulnerable member states as they sought to finance public and external deficits and to rebalance their economies.
A27 Turning to indicators of expenditure in 2004 Q4, retail sales volumes had fallen by 0.4% in October, following strong growth in August and September.
The expected volatility of the major equity indices implied by options prices had increased, possibly reflecting recent increases in historical volatility.
Spreads on products with loan-to-value (LTV) ratios lower than or equal to 75% were now similar to spreads in January 2020, while spreads on products with LTV ratios higher than 75% had remained above their January 2020 levels.
Most indicators of consumer spending had held up recently.
Those participants who expected an increase in official interest rates had attached importance to the robustness of domestic demand and labour market indicators over the period since the MPC last increased interest rates in February.
The Committee noted that it could take account of the analysis and opinion of outside commentators, but had to reach its own assessment, in line with its remit.
The projections described in the February Inflation Report depend in good part on three main judgements: that the lower level of sterling continues to boost consumer prices broadly as expected, and without adverse consequences for expectations of inflation further ahead; that regular pay growth does indeed remain modest, consistent with the Committee’s updated assessment of the remaining degree of slack in the labour market; and that the hitherto resilient rates of household spending growth slow as real income gains weaken, without a sufficient offset by other components of demand.
Overall the labour market remained tight.
For instance, financial crises in other countries in the past had often been accompanied by sustained shortfalls in output relative to its pre-crisis trend.
The Committee discussed the recent weakening in UK GDP growth, in the context of the significant tightening of monetary policy since the end of 2021, continued weakness in potential supply growth and an unwinding of previous fiscal support.
Consistent with the Committee’s decision at its February 2022 meeting to begin to reduce the stock of UK government bond purchases by ceasing to reinvest maturing assets, the £5.9 billion of cash flows associated with the redemption of the September 2022 gilt held by the APF would not be reinvested.
In the light of recent developments, there was a range of views among Committee members about how the balance of risks to the outlook for inflation in the medium term had changed since the time of the May Inflation Report.
A13 There had been little change in RPIX inflation expectations derived from surveys for 2000.
That supported the view that the October figures had been temporarily depressed by the impact on sentiment of the financial market turbulence seen in the middle of that month.
In the second estimate for 2015 Q1, headline GDP growth, at 0.3%, had not been revised, with upward revisions to industrial production and construction output offset by a weaker estimate of service sector growth.
Signs of improvement in the latest DMP had been less pronounced, although there was tentative evidence of rising investment intentions for those companies who had been more uncertain about Brexit.
A25 On the expenditure side of the accounts, real household consumption (including that of non profit institutions serving households) had risen by 0.6% in 2004 Q3.
Third, the additional recent depreciation of sterling would increase pressures on prices along the supply pipeline.
As permitted under the Bank of England Act 1998, as amended by the Financial Services Act 2012, Dave Prentis was also present as an observer in his role as a member of the Oversight Committee of Court.
Final domestic demand growth in Germany had been relatively weak since early 1999.
The harsh winter had almost certainly played a part in temporarily depressing activity and, based on data on household consumption in April and May, Bank staff’s estimate of growth in the second quarter was 0.8%.
A36 Manufacturing input prices had risen by 1.8% in October.
The annual inflation rate of the government consumption deflator had fallen to 7.8%, from 8.2% in Q3.
The Bank’s Agents suggested that this might reflect UK exporters attaching strategic importance to retaining their position in European markets, even when profitability was low.