In addition, and against the backdrop of the recent significant expansion in the scale of the Asset Purchase Facility, the Committee agreed to ask Bank staff to commence work to reconsider the previous guidance on the appropriate strategy for tightening monetary policy should that be required in the future.
Even with the relaxation of some Covid-related restrictions on economic activity, a degree of precautionary behaviour by households and businesses is likely to persist.
Forecasts in the Consensus Economics survey had continued to point to dollar depreciation against the euro, even though relative interest rates would have been consistent with dollar appreciation.
Some of the tax measures seemed likely to have a delayed effect, for example because they were not being implemented immediately (MIRAS) or because they would affect consumers only after a lag (dividend tax credits).
There had been a decline in the Bank’s regional Agents’ scores for investment intentions and a reduction in capital goods orders had been reported in the latest CIPS/NTC survey of manufacturing.
The three-year long-term repo operation by the ECB on 21 December 2011 had improved market sentiment and a number of banks had been able to issue public unsecured term debt.
Indicators of consumer spending growth had remained weak, consistent with the squeeze on real disposable incomes.
The level of the corporate sector financial balance had generally been revised down since 2000, compared with the previous estimates.
It was surprising, particularly given the recent downward revisions to Consensus forecasts, and seemed to indicate a fair degree of market optimism that the US economy would recover strongly in the second half of next year.
The previous release had shown a fall of 0.2%.
Data on activity in the euro area had continued to suggest a period of weakness in the near term.
By contrast, market participants did not expect the Federal Open Markets Committee to raise US interest rates until well into 2004.
However, this had followed much weaker growth in employment costs in 1999 Q1, and the two-quarter growth in employment costs still seemed subdued compared with the same two quarters of 1998.
Total output prices had been flat year on year.
Respondents were unanimous that if the repo rate were to be left unchanged this month, it would be raised in May.
The MPC’s latest central projections were also conditioned on the assumption of an immediate, orderly move to a comprehensive free trade agreement with the European Union on 1 January 2021.
Households’ median one-year inflation expectations, as measured by both the Bank/Ipsos and Citi/YouGov surveys, had fallen.
Survey indicators provided some evidence that hiring intentions were firming.
In contrast, final domestic demand was estimated to have grown faster than output in 2008 Q1.
Nonetheless, markets had functioned well, and the improved resilience of the core of the UK financial system, and the flexibility of the regulatory framework, had allowed the impact of the referendum result to be dampened rather than amplified, such that there had been little indication that asset prices had been distorted by impaired market functioning.
There were some early signs that tighter lending conditions and a decline in credit demand were feeding through to lower lending volumes.
During its policy meeting, the Committee had received a briefing from the Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability on the Financial Policy Committee’s (FPC) most recent assessment.
Should that risk materialise, however, the impact on the United Kingdom would probably be tempered by an associated fall in the demand for, and prices of, commodities.
Measures of implied interest rate volatility had picked up, albeit from historically low levels.
Ten-year yields had fallen by around 20, 60 and 20 basis points in the United Kingdom, United States and Germany respectively.
But, given that accumulated pension pots were in many cases relatively modest in size, this was not likely to result in a significant pick up in either spending or asset prices.
Equity prices, as measured by the FT-SE 100 index, had risen by a further 4.1% since 5 June from 4576 to 4762 on 9 July, though the FT-SE 250 index had fallen by 1.6%.
A27 The contribution to GDP growth from stockbuilding in 2001 Q1 had been revised up to 0.9 percentage points from the previous estimate of 0.3 percentage points.
The picture for manufacturing was more mixed.
Both the Consensus Economics and Treasury surveys for RPIX inflation in 2001 had been unchanged at 1.9%, the lowest level since 1997.
A20 Since the Committee’s previous meeting, UK equity indices had fallen, and they had been very volatile during the period.
The slowdown in the rate of job creation in May was sharper than most commentators had expected, but revisions to March and April data raised the level of non-farm payrolls by 185,000.
Retail sales volumes had also rebounded in Q2, and the reported sales balance for retailing in the CBI Distributive Trades Survey had risen to just above its long-run average in July.
The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply’s manufacturing survey showed a rebound in manufacturing activity, with the balances for output, orders and export orders all rising.
Mean inflation expectations of the general public at 12 and 24 months ahead, as surveyed by BASIX, had risen slightly on the quarter.
Manufacturing PMIs had been below 50 in August, in part driven by a drought in southern China that had been affecting electricity supply.
The ISM non-manufacturing index had eased slightly, but remained high.
The greater-than-expected rise in house prices would tend to offset the influence of the fall in equity prices on consumption, and might lead to a stronger near-term prospect for consumption than envisaged in the August Inflation Report.
Over coming months, CPI inflation was expected to remain close to 2%, dipping slightly below the target in the first quarter of the year before temporarily edging back above 2% in April.
The outlook for the economy, and particularly the relative movement in demand and supply during the recovery from the pandemic, remained unusually uncertain.
A50 Retail sales had recovered slightly over the Easter period and into early May, but the underlying position had been one of weaker growth in 2003 compared with 2002.
Real consumption and retail sales had both risen in July following falls in June, with increased spending across many categories, including motor vehicles, but some of the indicators for August were more mixed.
That assessment had been based on the signals from both retail sales and from vehicle registrations.
The new government had announced its intention to present an updated Budget on 8 July.
Downward bias in early estimates of GDP growth had, historically, been particularly marked in Q1s; quarters affected by heavy snowfall had, in the past, been subject to above-average upward revisions; and construction sector output estimates had, in recent years, tended to be revised up over time.
A21 The sterling exchange rate index (ERI) had fallen by 0.9%, to 105.9, between 31 July and September.
That fall would reduce inflation projections (relative to last month’s) by around 0.2 percentage points in the near term, but, because the two-year-ahead futures price of oil had remained unchanged, there was now likely to be a higher mechanical contribution to the annual rate of inflation further out.
Slower employment growth, along with the upward revisions to the GDP data over the past year meant that productivity growth had appeared less weak than previously.
It was possible that recent global trade tensions could be affecting business sentiment more generally.
Consumer credit had continued to rise very rapidly.
First, the balance of news over the month had been broadly neutral.
Some International Energy Agency member countries had also agreed to release additional oil from their emergency stocks in response to the ongoing disruption of supplies from Libya.
Interest rate expectations implied by short sterling futures had risen by up to 50 basis points since the Committee’s previous meeting.
On one view, the slowdown in manufacturing growth was likely to have knock-on effects for services, directly through the dependence of business services on the production industries, and indirectly via slower personal sector income growth if wage growth and employment fell in manufacturing.
Net trade had subtracted from growth again, while the contribution to growth from inventories had increased.
Equity prices, measured in local currency, had fallen a little in the United Kingdom and in the euro area over the month, but had risen a little in the United States.
Market contacts expected the MPC to extend its asset purchase programme at its June meeting.
International equity prices had been relatively stable during the month.
The Governor Bank of England Threadneedle Street London EC2R 8AH REMIT FOR THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE The Bank of England Act came into effect on June 1.
But the claimant count measure had fallen by 3,300 in October and the rate had fallen by 0.1 percentage points, the first change for 21 months.
The implications of this for global demand and inflation would depend on monetary and fiscal policy responses in the United States and elsewhere.
The Committee would have the chance to assess the updated fiscal projections in the preparation of its August _Inflation Report._ The May business surveys had been somewhat mixed.
A45 The Agents had reported that recent strong annual retail sales growth had been maintained into January.
Several central banks had tightened monetary policy further and had noted that policy was dampening economic activity.
In the near term, the risks to inflation were likely to be on the upside, related to the possibility of higher commodity and energy prices.
Quantity measures of the labour market suggested that it was no longer tightening.
A54 The sterling ERI had been broadly stable since the Committee’s previous meeting, rising by 0.5% to 105.0.
Estimates of short real interest rates could be made by subtracting survey measures of inflation expectations from a corresponding maturity wholesale money market rate.
The Bank of Japan’s Tankan large manufacturers’ diffusion index had fallen by 1 point, to –10, but the large non-manufacturers’ diffusion index had increased by 2 points, to –14.
First, CPI inflation was at present significantly below target and, on the central projection, would remain below it for most of the next two years.
The increase might simply have reflected the normal volatility of these data.
Goods inflation fell further in April, to 1.9%, compared with 2.1% in March and over 3% in late 1996.
As permitted under the Bank of England Act 1998, as amended by the Financial Services Act 2012, David Lees was also present as an observer in his role as a member of the Oversight Committee of Court.
That would restrain lending and could hold back the recovery in the global economy.
The introduction of the National Minimum Wage (NMW) was akin to a price level shock.
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 3%, activity is stronger than in the MPC’s forecast conditioned on market rates, although GDP is still expected to be falling at the end of 2023.
Another possible explanation was simply that the effects of US events on UK confidence were lagged.
At shorter maturities the fall in nominal forward rates had been attributed to a fall in inflation expectations.
Headline public sector earnings growth had risen by 0.1 percentage points to 4.3%.
Movements in sterling over the month appeared largely unrelated to changes in UK yields relative to overseas.
The housing market seemed to have slowed, which appeared consistent with slowing consumption growth.
productivity growth since the referendum Impact of Brexit planning on labour productivity growth[(a)] Percentage points 2 3 Years since referendum Sources: Bureau van Dijk, DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
Consumer services had continued to record modest growth.
Those heightened concerns had increased investor perceptions of the risks associated with individual banks, as evidenced by higher premia on credit default swaps.
UK short-term interest rates had changed little on the month, while longer-term rates had risen slightly.
The apparent paradox had continued into 1998: surveys suggested that employment growth was still strong, but the decline in claimant unemployment had slowed further.
Some businesses had probably sought to offset some of the increases in the costs of imports by cutting back on their wage bills.
On their own, the latest industrial production data would imply a downward revision of perhaps 0.1% to estimated GDP in Q4.
There was also little sign that the labour market was yet on the turn, although some forward-looking indicators continued to suggest that it might be soon.
The Committee noted that the estimated drag on average earnings growth from so-called compositional effects had fallen, to around ¼ percentage points in Q4 from around ¾ percentage points in Q3.
Sterling money market instruments implied that interest rate expectations were broadly flat over the next year or so.
The sterling effective exchange rate index had been stable, and the euro had depreciated a little against the dollar.
This had been the lowest rise in employment since 2000 Q4.
In the year to date, gross issuance of UK corporate debt and equity had been in line with historical averages, but less than the exceptional issuance recorded during 2009.
A9 The twelve-month growth rate of notes and coin had risen to 8.1% in April, from 7.5% in March.
The housing market appeared distinctly strong.
This sectoral picture had been broadly corroborated by the reports of the Bank’s regional Agents.
Private sector regular average weekly earnings growth had declined to 4.9% in the three months to July.
A31 In manufacturing, the CIPS output balance had fallen slightly, to 58.3, in January, from 58.4 in December.
The Committee noted that labour market data in early 2009 might be a good indicator of whether companies believed that the slowdown in output would be short-lived, in which case they might just reduce working hours, or whether the slowdown would be more persistent, in which case they were more likely to reduce the size of their workforce.
It appeared that UK household spending on social activities such as entertainment, hospitality and tourism had fallen to a greater extent than elsewhere, which looked to have been related to weaker mobility indicators and possibly a more cautious response to infection risk.
There had been few surprises in recent economic data and the February Inflation Report projections, conditioned on a gently rising path of Bank Rate, had appeared broadly on track.
A16 The Consensus Economics Forecasts measure of the expected average inflation rate over the next two years had risen since 1999 Q1 by 20 basis points, to 2.3% in 1999 Q2.
While the market-implied path was a little higher than the MaPS median, the gap between these measures had narrowed since the previous MaPS survey, conducted in mid-October.
For example, there were tentative signs in some of the housing activity indicators that the market might be turning, although some of the recent weakening might be due to millennium effects.
The HSBC composite PMIs in both Brazil and India had increased in June, possibly in part reflecting past policy easing.
On the other hand, it was possible that the substantial scale of the economic stimulus in train could prompt a rapid rebound in economic activity.
Vacancy rates had stabilised over recent months in both economies, albeit at high levels, and wage growth although moderating a little, had remained strong.
Looking forward, the price expectations in the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors remained weak and particulars delivered had fallen again in April.
That weakness reflected a sharp fall in residential investment of nearly 5%.
The measured volume of government output in January had been reduced by sharp falls in education output as schools had closed again.
Two official estimates of Japanese GDP growth had been published during the month.
The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank’s repo rate be cut by 0.50% to 5.5%.
Overseas holiday bookings had begun to recover but inbound tourism had remained weak.
Surveys of labour shortages had indicated a sharp increase in shortages reported in consumer services and a fall in clerical shortages reported in financial services.
A33 Goods trade data had pointed to a negative contribution from net trade in 1998 Q3.
Many banks were due to report their 2008 results soon, and any evidence of larger losses than expected by the markets could cause further financial market volatility.
A18 Since the previous MPC meeting, the sterling ERI had appreciated by 2.3%, reflecting a 3.4% appreciation against the euro.
Following the £55 billion increase in sterling borrowing from banks in March, which had been driven primarily by large companies drawing down on credit facilities, borrowing had decreased by £3 billion in April.
Longer-term nominal spot interest rates had risen modestly over the past month in the United Kingdom, the United States and the euro area.
That slowing had been concentrated in a few countries.
Contacts had reported an improvement in enquiry levels but these enquiries had not yet translated into orders.
Wholesale gas spot prices had initially fallen back in Europe from their peak in mid-December, but had recently risen again amid increasing geopolitical tensions.
Following the Governor’s announcement in his Mansion House speech on 19 July that the MPC would publish more details on its strategy for beginning to sell the gilts held in the Asset Purchase Facility alongside the August Monetary Policy Report, a majority of market participants now expected that such sales would begin shortly after the MPC’s September meeting.
However, their measure for 2004 Q4 had fallen to 2.3% in April, from 2.4% in March.
The annual rate of growth had fallen to 0.7%, the lowest rate since 1992.
This would be expected to reduce uncertainty about the path of the economy, supporting future spending by households and companies.
The annual inflation rate of the GDP deflator at factor cost was estimated to have risen to 3.1% in 2001 Q1 from 1.6% in 2000 Q4.
Overall, Bank staff had revised down their expectations for 2021 Q4 GDP growth to 0.6%, from 1% at the time of the November Report.
Domestic demand had also risen by 0.4% on the quarter, with the change in inventories making no contribution to GDP growth.
HICP energy price inflation had risen throughout the euro-area.
A number of business activity surveys had ticked up in May.
But monitoring processes had been set up which would identify the effect of the New Deal on unemployment.
A4 Retail M4 went up by 0.4% in August, and its twelve-month growth rate fell to 7.0%.
The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) surveys of business activity in manufacturing and services had both fallen in June but remained at healthy levels.
Overall, the Committee concluded that the most likely outlook for investment was slightly weaker than in November, but with some members seeing upside risks.
Second, the depreciation of the exchange rate since its peak in late July would have relieved part of the pressure on exporters’ margins.
The non-manufacturing ISM index had fallen to 57.3 in March from 58.7 in February.
Previous Bank analysis had suggested that settlements do not necessarily lead wage drift; if anything the reverse tends to be the case.
Annual growth in manufacturing unit wage costs had fallen to 2 0% in June from 2 2% in May A36 Whole-economy headline earnings growth, as measured by the Average Earnings Index (AEI), had risen by 0.2 percentage points to 4.8% in June.
There was a broad consensus that the Committee should in principle be concerned about deviations of the level of output from capacity.
The fuels component of the index had fallen by 2.5% in October, largely accounted for by the fall of just over 4% in the average sterling oil price in the same month.
A23 The Nationwide house price index had risen by 2.1% in April, while the Halifax house price index had risen by 1.8%.
According to Eurostat, the volume of retail sales in the euro area had been unchanged on a year earlier in July.
CPI inflation was likely to be somewhat lower in the near term, given the Committee’s judgement to reduce the extent to which sterling’s depreciation was projected to push up import prices.
The latest official data had made that contrast greater.
The most striking development in the past month had been the sharp rise in the price of oil: up over 17% in sterling terms.
In any case, policy would be set at each meeting taking account of the available information; there was therefore scope to reverse any decision to marginally tighten policy should incoming developments warrant it.
The extension of the Government’s employment support schemes in Budget 2021 was expected to limit significantly the near-term rise in the LFS unemployment rate.
The change in required excess return was most obvious for sterling against continental European currencies, rather than the US dollar.
But it usually was at that time of year, so underlying conditions were difficult to assess.
International equity prices had been volatile, falling early in the month but then recovering to end the month a little higher overall largely reflecting movements in the prices of financial-sector stocks.
Pay growth continued to pick up.
Moreover, there had been a significant increase in construction earnings.
CPI inflation in March was 3.1%, with an unexpectedly strong upside contribution from household goods prices in general and furniture in particular.
This return to home markets appeared to have been quite pronounced.
It was common for these measures to move together, but recent movements in medium-term measures were nevertheless noteworthy, given that oil and gas futures curves were consistent with energy price inflation falling back significantly beyond the near-term horizon.
A key question was whether the current low level of CPI inflation reflected underlying changes in the economy, such as an increase in productivity growth, that the Committee had underestimated and which could pose downside risks.
Services output growth had eased to 0.6% in Q1 as expected.
House prices had fallen sharply again, with both the Halifax and Nationwide indices declining by around 5% during the third quarter.
Annual growth of M4 had risen to 8.0% in April, from 7.3% in March.
However, a number of arguments were discussed for not moving Bank Rate by the full extent implied by those projections.
The Bank’s twelve-month AEI weighted mean had been unchanged at 3.0% in September.
If anything, house prices had accelerated recently, and mortgage approvals had risen further.
More recently, retail sales had risen in August, and the fall in July had been revised away.
In the MPC’s latest most likely, or modal, projections, CPI inflation was expected to fall temporarily to the 2% target in 2024 Q2 before increasing again in Q3 and Q4.
Retail sales had risen only modestly in November, but there was anecdotal evidence that while sales growth had also been slow early in December it had picked up close to Christmas, partly encouraged by price discounting.
All members agreed that the likely persistence of the headwinds restraining economic growth following the financial crisis meant that, when Bank Rate did begin to rise, it was expected to do so only gradually and to a level lower than in recent cycles.
In the near term, inflation would remain elevated on account of the increase in the standard rate of VAT to 20% in January 2011.
Energy price movements had been mixed since the MPC’s previous meeting.
The Chair invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that: Bank Rate should be increased by 0.25 percentage points, to 0.75%.
Equity prices, both in the United Kingdom and internationally, had fallen sharply in February, reversing the rises in January.
That might partly have been a result of the increase in banks’ reserves resulting from the MPC’s asset purchase programme.
Recent external estimates were that the ex ante effect on GDP in industrial countries (ie before allowing for the effects of policy accommodation in the countries not immediately affected) might be of the order of 0.75% of GDP in 1998 - rather less in Europe and rather more in the United States and Japan.
Moreover, the improvement was particularly pronounced for loans at loan to value ratios (LTVs) over 75%.
Longer-term interest rates in the United Kingdom, the United States and Germany had fallen modestly on the month.
Different members placed different weights on these considerations.
At this meeting, all members judged that a further easing of monetary policy was warranted.
Food price inflation was projected to fall further in coming months.
Sterling’s effective exchange rate had depreciated a little on the month, but remained near the top of the range it had occupied over the past couple of years.
Although households had in aggregate acquired additional financial assets at a rate which broadly matched their increasing liabilities, the falls in equity market prices had at the same time eroded the value of their existing financial asset holdings.
But it was far from clear that it had been modest enough, because the growth in real wage costs faced by employers had outstripped trend productivity growth.
Industrial production had risen by only 0.1% in March, though the NAPM index of industrial confidence had remained strong, and durable goods orders had increased by 2.0% in March.
There had been revisions to previous Workforce Jobs data.
Some of that reflected the sharp fall in bonuses.
UK GDP growth slowed materially in 2019 compared to previous years and the MPC judges that there is a margin of spare capacity in the economy.
The Euler Trade Indemnity Survey had indicated that competitive pressures had somewhat reduced respondents’ profitability since early 1999.
The twelve-month growth rate of M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had fallen to 11.4% in September, from 11.9% in August.
Although export growth was often erratic from quarter to quarter, the underlying picture was reasonably encouraging.
That contrasted with earlier months, when part-timers had been the largest component.
The European Council had agreed a draft directive on banking resolution and recovery, and euro-area governments had finalised the conditions for any deployment of funds from the European Stability Mechanism to support individual euro-area banks.
Instead, there were links through asset markets.
The retail sales deflator is constructed using RPI data but is based on 1992 weights, whereas the RPI weights are updated and fixed for each year, which might account for some of the difference.
Meanwhile expectations had grown of a reduction in interest rates by the European Central Bank (ECB).
Both had been drifting up in recent months, perhaps reflecting the relative performance of the UK economy.
But loan approvals for house purchase had fallen in January and February, possibly affected by the cold weather.
Global equity prices had dropped sharply in the days immediately prior to this policy meeting and measures of volatility such as the VIX index had increased significantly.
The pace of recovery still depended critically on the interplay of the various underlying tailwinds and headwinds affecting activity.
This was in line with the latest average of a range of Bank staff estimates, although there remained_ significant uncertainty about the extent of the weakness.
Whereas manufacturing output had appeared to be broadly flat last summer, once due account was taken of the effects of the Jubilee holidays on the monthly pattern of output, the underlying trend now seemed to be downwards.
A38 The annual inflation rate of the GDP deflator at market prices had risen to 3.6% in 2002 Q1, from 2.7% in 2001 Q4.
The twelve-month growth rate was 6.2%.
In Japan, it was too early to assess the effects of the material loosening of monetary policy on the economic outlook, although household real consumption had risen sharply in March, and commentators had generally increased their forecasts for growth and inflation since the new government had come to power.
A17 The twelve-month growth rate of notes and coin, adjusted for special factors, had risen to 6.0% in October, from 5.8% in September.
There was time to wait and see if signs of earnings and price pressures emerged.
Government funding levels had been agreed for the remainder of the fiscal year, thereby averting a federal government shutdown, but the $85 billion of sequestration cuts to the annual budget had been left in place.
As previously announced, and as described in a market notice of 7 March 2013, the Committee had agreed at its previous meeting to reinvest the £6.6 billion of cash flows associated with the redemption of the March 2013 gilt held in the Asset Purchase Facility.
Although the extent of the final pass-through to domestic prices was uncertain, that appreciation would contribute to disinflationary pressure.
Further out, risks to GDP were judged to be broadly balanced.
There had been some deterioration in consumer confidence between the two waves of the January GfK survey, which straddled the Committee’s policy meeting, and that might suggest an impact from the most recent interest rate increase.
The Wilshire index had increased by around 8% since the Committee’s April meeting, and although the rise in the Eurostoxx index had been less than 5%, German equities had risen by almost 10%.
A30 According to the Labour Force Survey (LFS), there had been a sharp increase in employment of 110,000 (0.4%) in Q3, following growth of 0.2% in Q2.
The FLS had already been introduced with the aim of supporting the supply of bank credit, and would be kept under review.
The indicators were mixed.
While some of the weakening in recent activity data could prove erratic, Bank staff now expected GDP to rise only slightly in 2023 Q3.
A UK-specific explanation therefore seemed to be required.
But many Agencies had reported continued strength in output of oil and gas equipment, consumer goods and construction-related products.
There were also risks associated with easing policy during a period of sustained above-target inflation and there were concerns about how quickly inflation would fall back to target.
Agents’ reports continued to suggest that inward migration was playing a role in curbing labour shortages.
Among respondents to the NMG household survey, 30% of employees currently furloughed had thought it at least quite likely that they would lose their job, compared to around 20% of other employees.
The MPC’s most recent economic projections, set out in the May Inflation Report, assumed a smooth adjustment to the average of a range of possible outcomes for the United Kingdom’s eventual trading relationship with the European Union and were conditioned on a path for Bank Rate that rose to around 1% by the end of the forecast period.
Nonetheless, available indicators of businesses’ expectations and those inferred from financial markets had remained stable.
It was not possible, however, precisely to disentangle the factors driving these exchange rate movements.
In the third quarter there had been a marked accumulation of manufacturing inventories of finished goods, while retail inventories had been growing steadily over the year.
Overall, it was too early to tell whether the reduction in the rate of unemployment, or the pace of absorption of labour market slack more broadly, was beginning to ease off.
The implications for future price developments were unclear.
A fuller plan for UK tax and spending was due to be published on 17 November in the Autumn Statement.
As expected, twelve-month CPI inflation had increased a little to 0.1% in May and fallen back to 0.0% in June.
The Committee judged that the equilibrium unemployment rate remained at around 4¼%.
A19 Most of the upward revision to the expenditure measure had come from consumption and investment.
Bank staff expected GDP growth of 0.6% in Q2, a little weaker than previously expected.
It was highly probable that business sentiment had been affected by the continuing financial and political tensions within the euro area.
Total pay had increased by more, reflecting the increased contribution of bonus payments, which was likely to fall back in the second quarter.
A24 The current account balance was -£3.2 billion in 1998 Q1, the first quarterly deficit since Q3 and the largest since 1992 Q4.
The income and expenditure release of the National Accounts also included a sharp fall in the figure for companies’ operating profits in the first quarter, which followed a fall in the fourth quarter.
This, together with improvements in business survey output and expectations indicators, had led Bank staff to raise their GDP growth nowcast for 2017 Q1 to 0.5%, also 0.2 percentage points higher than in November.
The Chancellor had announced, on 5 January, one-off top-up grants for retail, hospitality and leisure businesses worth up to £9,000, and a discretionary fund of around £600 million to support other impacted businesses.
Euro-area industrial confidence had stabilised in January, close to its historical average.
The Japanese index of tertiary activity had fallen by 0.7% on the month in December, and Q3.
The Economist dollar non-oil commodity price index had risen by 1.5%.
Absent further movements in global commodity prices or the exchange rate, these effects on twelve-month CPI inflation were expected to dissipate so that inflation was likely to pick up notably towards the end of the year.
Despite weaker data on particulars delivered, leading indicators such as mortgage approvals data pointed to relatively stable conditions in the housing market.
Retail sales had grown by a surprisingly strong 1.3% in April.
The outlook for UK activity, and the balance of the effects of the Omicron variant on demand and supply, would also depend on the responses of other policymakers in the United Kingdom and abroad.
On balance, market forecasts for 2000 were for the sterling-dollar exchange rate to remain broadly stable, and for the euro to appreciate against both sterling and the dollar.
A53 In reports outside the survey, Agents had noted falls in manufacturing employment and a further easing in service sector employment.
A snap survey by the Institute of Directors immediately following the referendum had found that a third of firms expected to cut investment, with half of these expecting the reductions to be “significant”.
Higher oil prices might depress consumer and investment spending.
The fall had been largely accounted for by lower contributions from the household expenditure and net export categories.
In sum, although the data so far had been insufficient to estimate with confidence the quantitative effect on GDP and the precise timing of the slowdown, the uncertainty flowing from the referendum result was likely to be negative for near-term activity.
The ECB’s LTRO had reduced some of the most immediate risks facing European banks, but concerns remained about the indebtedness and competitiveness of some euro-area countries.
In November, core inflation had increased to 1.3%, although that increase had in part appeared to reflect a new method for calculating the German package holiday price index.
In the CBI Distributive Trades Survey, the balance of retailers reporting positive annual growth in sales volumes had fallen to +17, from +26 in February.
Stepping back, and as part of the preparation of the May Inflation Report projections, the Committee had taken stock of its assumptions regarding the supply side of the economy, including: the outlook for labour supply, productivity, the degree of spare capacity within the economy and, therefore, the outlook for domestic costs, and wages in particular.
Following the imposition of social distancing measures, monthly GDP data for April had confirmed that the reduction in activity related to the Covid-19 shock would be unprecedented in scale.
The Institute for Supply Management (ISM) manufacturing index had risen to 49.8 in June, from 49.4 in May, while the non-manufacturing ISM index had risen to 60.6 in June, from 54.5 in May.
Furthermore, annual growth in regular pay per hour had remained stable.
Expectations of short-term interest rates had also risen by around 60 basis points in the euro area.
At the two-year horizon, they had fallen by 26 basis points.
Although M4 growth had now reached 12%, M4 lending growth had not kept pace but rather remained steady, at around 9%.
The Government has announced a series of substantial fiscal support measures to alleviate some of the severe cashflow problems facing businesses and households.
While sterling had risen since the Committee’s July meeting, it was still about 4% below the path projected in the May Inflation Report; and there remained a risk of further falls since the economy was still relatively uncompetitive at the current real exchange rate.
Prior to its policy meeting, the MPC had been consulted ahead of the decisions by the Bank and HM Treasury to extend access to the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) until early 2018.
From mid-2023, inflation was expected to fall sharply, conditioned on the elevated path of market interest rates, and as previous increases in energy prices dropped out of the annual comparison.
A52 Short-term interest rate expectations had fallen further since the previous meeting of the Committee.
Further out, the responses of companies and households would depend on developments in the next stage of the Brexit process, including negotiations about the nature of, and the transition to, the United Kingdom’s future trading relationships.
New results from the DMP suggested that the majority of companies reviewed their investment decisions at least once a quarter or more frequently, although a majority also took over one quarter to implement any change in plans.
To the extent that the linkage between sterling and the dollar had weakened, sterling’s effective exchange rate might be less susceptible to future movements in the dollar against third currencies.
But it had still been weak.
In part, the slowdown in domestic demand in recent months might have reflected a supply shock.
The twelve-month growth rate had fallen below 10% in March, to 9.8%, and the six-month and three month annualised growth rates were slightly lower than this.
That member thought that there was mounting evidence that firms were able to pass on cost increases to the prices they set and noted also that nominal domestic demand had been growing for some time at near to the top of its typical range prior to the recession.
Indications for domestic demand in Q3 remained strong, judging by the retail sales data, the CBI Distributive Trades Survey, and reports from the Bank’s regional Agents, but the GfK consumer confidence measure had fallen back in September and the CIPS services survey, while remaining well above 50, was also slightly lower.
Export growth had been stronger than anticipated in April and May.
Construction new orders had fallen by 8.0% in the three months to January compared to the previous three months.
Elements of both explanations seemed to be evident and helped account for low productivity growth and the lack of more substantial downward pressure on domestic costs.
The UK instantaneous forward OIS curve was now fully pricing in a 25 basis point rate cut during the first half of 2020.
A53 Costs of materials had generally been falling and the greatest cost concern for most companies had continued to be increases in insurance premia and in regulation.
UK GDP growth was projected to pick up a little in early 2020.
A continuation of the financial market turbulence could adversely affect credit conditions to the extent that there was a deterioration in the terms on which banks could access funds.
CPI inflation had risen further above target in August, to 2.4%.
CPI inflation is expected to return to close to the 2% target in the near term, but to increase slightly in the second half of this year, to around 2½%, owing to the unwinding of energy-related base effects.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve had operationalised a number of new facilities financed by the CARES Act.
The non-manufacturing ISM had also risen, to 54.2 in December from 51.3 in November.
Export prices had risen more sharply - by 0.7% to all countries in April and by 0.5% to non-EU countries in May.
The recent fall in sterling, if sustained, might postpone the point at which inflation started to fall back sharply towards the target.
Inventory levels and the inventory/shipments ratio had both fallen in December.
This was a precautionary step to provide additional flexibility in the Bank’s provision of liquidity insurance, complementing banks’ ability to draw on their own liquidity buffers.
There was little news on pay pressures – which remained subdued – or on the degree of tightness in the labour market.
The sharp pick-up in borrowing for consumption, from 2% of personal disposable income at the start of 1999 to almost 5% in Q3, coupled with house prices and equity prices well above the central projection in the November Inflation Report, would tend to support robust consumption growth.
Well publicised job cuts in a range of sectors, whether or not directly affected by general economic conditions, had probably increased awareness of the changing outlook.
The euro-area data had been broadly as expected.
As regards prices, there were signs that pressures were beginning to build after a long period of subdued inflation: core inflation on both the CPI and PCE measures had picked up quickly in recent months and was now close to 2%.
On the corporate side, the Bank of England’s Credit Conditions Survey for Q1 had shown an improvement in the expected availability of corporate credit.
There were signs of some rebalancing in the composition of world demand, with a pickup in the pace of euro-area and Asian growth and a possible slowdown in the United States.
That primarily reflected the very substantial rise in wholesale gas futures prices that had occurred since the May Report, most recently due to Russia’s restrictions of gas supplies to European markets in July and due to the risk of further curbs.
But there had been very little change to the pattern of growth through The unusually large discrepancy between the output and expenditure measures of GDP in Q1, seen in the earlier estimate, had been revised down.
For two members, economic circumstances continued to justify an immediate rise in Bank Rate.
The euro-area Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing had risen slightly in October, to 49.1, from 48.9 in September.
Ten-year real spot rates had risen internationally.
Against this, banks’ funding costs, an important influence on mortgage rates, had risen since May and it was possible that mortgage rates would shortly begin to rise.
Oil prices had reached another record high, and wheat prices had risen sharply.
Over the medium term, higher oil prices would tend to restrain demand, if it took the oil producers longer to spend their additional revenue than it took those whose real incomes were squeezed to reduce their expenditure.
The recently announced electricians’ settlement was a possible exception, but it appeared to have consolidated certain existing supplementary payments so that the net settlement might have been rather less than had been reported.
Some forward-looking indicators suggested continued tightening.
For the services sector, the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) survey’s balance of business confidence regarding profitability had risen to +47 in 2003 Q4, from +40 in Q3, the highest level since 1997 Q3.
Within that total, Japanese exports to the rest of Asia had increased by 29.2% on a year earlier; export values to China alone had risen by 47.3% over the period.
Robust lending growth had been driven by the continuing strength in lending to households and a rise of some £3 billion in lending to other financial corporations (OFCs) on the month.
Sterling’s recent movements relative to the dollar and the euro had, however, been less consistent than before.
Equity prices and bond yields had fallen, perhaps suggesting some faltering in expectations of a recovery in domestic demand.
There was a range of views among these members regarding the risks around the assumptions on persistence embodied in the May CPI projection.
A20 UK equities in all capitalisation groups had risen since the Committee’s January meeting.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
The MPC only expected to adjust the terms and length of the Scheme should macroeconomic conditions warrant it, and would not make the Scheme less generous during the initial 18 month drawdown window.
The circumstances since the referendum on EU membership, and the accompanying depreciation of sterling, had been exceptional.
The negative skew (measured by the difference between mean and mode) in the probabilities attached to future levels of the FT-SE 100, which had worsened dramatically with the outbreak of the Asian crisis, had returned to its five year average level over the month.
In 2019, monetary policy was eased by a number of central banks, including the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank (Chart 2.7), in response to a weakening outlook for growth.
Non-gilt issuance, which had been low in March, had returned in April to a level close to the average from October to February.
The contribution to GDP growth from stockbuilding in Q4 had been 0.1 percentage points.
Over the month as a whole, the FTSE All-Share index was up slightly.
To the upside, it was possible that the unemployment rate might continue to fall more briskly than assumed causing increased pressure on pay rates relative to productivity, and therefore on medium-term inflation.
A net balance of around 30% of respondents serving the public sector had expected investment to be higher than in the previous twelve months, and a somewhat larger net balance of these respondents expected an increase in employment.
There was also uncertainty over the extent to which net exports would support growth and the pace at which that support would materialise.
This depreciation of the ERI had reflected a 1.9% depreciation of sterling against the euro and a 1.7% appreciation of sterling against the US dollar.
It was possible that these new data could lead the ONS to revise down its preliminary estimate for GDP growth of -1.5% that it had published in January.
A27 The CIPS Report on Services had reported a rise in all indices in March: the output index had risen from 49.5 to 53, the first positive reading since October 1998; the incoming new business index had also risen above 50 to 53.9, the highest level since June 1998 and above the average for 1998 as whole; and the business expectations index had risen to 76.4 from 72.1 in February.
Non-financial corporations had issued new bonds at a record rate during 2012 so far and March had seen the first sub-investment grade issue by a UK company since Summer 2011.
Output had risen by 0.8% during the first quarter and the manufacturing and non-manufacturing PMIs for April were consistent with continuing growth in the second quarter.
Uncertainty about the result of the referendum had continued to have a strong effect on sterling exchange rates, with some sharp movements in sterling during the month following the release of opinion polls.
The ONS were continuing to do further work to extend the analysis, by adding to the detail and assessing the sensitivity of the results.
The Bank’s Agents’ score measures a different concept: firms’ expected change in headcount, which takes into account the number of employees leaving.
The market implied path for Bank Rate now averaged a little under 5% over the next three years.
As in the United States, producer price inflation had increased, reaching 4.9% in January.
Clothing sales had, however, remained weak, and this had resulted in early discounting.
The sterling effective exchange rate index (ERI) had fallen by around ½% during the month, reflecting a 1½% depreciation of sterling against the dollar.
Nevertheless,_ the Committee continued to expect inflation to fall back thereafter as the temporary impact of various factors waned, and the margin of spare capacity in the economy continued to dampen inflationary pressures.
But there was some tentative evidence that consumer spending might have moderated during the quarter: the CBI Distributive Trades survey suggested some easing in March, consumer confidence had fallen slightly, and unsecured lending had dropped back a little in February.
JPMorgan’s global manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index had risen further to 55.0 in December, compared with a low of 33.9 a year earlier.
The KPMG/REC survey had indicated that staff availability had increased further in May.
Non-farm payrolls had risen by 268,000 in January, following a (downwardly revised) increase of 19,000 in December.
The GfK consumer confidence balance had fallen slightly in June, with a decline in the reported willingness to make a major purchase.
It was then expected to decline to some way below the 2% target in years two and three of the projection.
In the United Kingdom, there was little to alter the view that output was likely to be broadly flat in 2011 Q4 and 2012 Q1.
CPI inflation fell further in May, to 0.5%.
This was 0.3 percentage points weaker than had been expected by Bank staff at the time of the August Report, and well below the 0.7% average quarterly growth rate recorded in High-frequency indicators had nevertheless painted a somewhat stronger picture.
In the immediate run-up to the MPC’s February meeting, the market-implied path for Bank Rate had reached around 1.7% by mid-2023.
Nevertheless, the forward-looking prospect depended heavily on the US.
This reflected a 1 7% depreciation of sterling against the US dollar and a 0 5% appreciation of sterling against the euro.
Data on global economic activity have generally been in line with the Committee’s August Inflation Report projections, with growth in the United Kingdom’s major trading partners expected to continue at a modest pace over the next three years.
It had fallenb y around 1/4% since 9 July but had risen bynearly 24% since 2 August 1996.
The composite CIPS output index in December had fallen to its lowest level since May 2013, while the activity balances in the Q4 BCC survey had picked up to close to their post-crisis highs.
But smoothed estimates of earnings, which attempt to adjust for uneven bonuses, also increased slightly in November.
That could have reflected the relaxation of constraints on workers’ choice of hours, allowing more to opt to go part-time, or labour hoarding by employers during a cyclical slowdown; a reversal of the trend was more likely if the latter were the case.
Taken together with the rise in the twelve month growth rate of Divisia money between 2000 Q4 and 2001 Q1, the household money and credit data were consistent with a robust outlook for consumption growth and the housing market.
The Committee discussed recent developments with particular emphasis on the external environment; the Chancellor’s announcement on the Economic and Fiscal Strategy Report; domestic demand; output and unemployment; and nominal variables, particularly prices and earnings.
The increases in stocks of purchases and finished goods reported in the January IHS Markit/CIPS manufacturing survey had been the highest, or close to the highest, since the survey began in 1992.
Net trade was estimated to have contributed nearly half of UK growth during 2017.
But the output components of the July CIPS Purchasing Managers’ Indices suggested a stronger recovery – close to trend in Q3.
The MPC’s central projection implied that a margin of spare capacity was likely to remain until the end of next year.
Either higher government expenditure or higher export volumes would in turn imply a higher GDP estimate.
On Japan there was great uncertainty about the likely path of real activity given the fall in output in 1998 Q1, and other forecasters were still revising down their projections for 1998.
There were some signs that labour demand may have softened, as expected in the May Report.
The Committee also examined projections for GDP growth and CPI inflation based on the assumptions that the official interest rate remained constant at either 4.5% or 4.75%.
The fact that Bank Rate had been cut from 5% in September to 2% meant that there was a substantial monetary stimulus already in the system.
But, set against those factors, net trade had reduced growth in the first quarter.
Some members believed that the balance of risks to GDP growth was weighted slightly more on the downside in the second half of the forecast period.
In the United States, consumer price inflation fell to 2.0%, from 2.3% in April; for Japan, May’s figure was -0.4%; and in the euro area inflation on the harmonised measure had fallen back to 1.0%.
A clear contrast remained between ONS and survey data in recent years.
The Committee’s discussions focused on the news for consumption and investment.
The possibility of a substantial further retrenchment by the household sector was perhaps one of the biggest downside risks facing the economy.
Since a large share of consumer spending happened around the Christmas period it was possible that a move this month would have a larger effect in supporting activity in the short run than a delayed move, without damaging the prospects for inflation over the medium term.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had fallen to 2.6% in June, from 2.9% in May, in line with the Committee’s expectation at the time of the May Inflation Report.
Committee members attached different weights to these candidate hypotheses, with some noting that it was possible that market participants had reappraised the economic outlook, downside risks and central bank policy responses since the start of the year.
Credit risk appeared to have been a factor behind the very recent increase in inter-bank lending rates.
To that extent, the negative contribution of net trade to UK output growth would tend to be smaller than from a more generalised adverse shock to global demand.
The labour market was still quite tight but was no longer obviously tightening, and underlying pay pressures appeared stable.
Euro-area retail sales had fallen in May, but this was a volatile series.
There had been some evidence of companies delaying pay rises and switching to more flexible forms of pay from contacts of the Bank’s Agents, who had reported a continuing gradual weakening in overall pay pressures, rather than a sharp recent reduction.
Household credit conditions were assumed to remain tighter over the November Report forecast period than had been projected in August.
In observing the market-implied path for Bank Rate, the Committee notes that, in the November Monetary Policy _Report central projections, CPI_ inflation is projected to be below the 2% target at the end of the forecast period, and would probably fall a little further beyond that point, given the margin of spare capacity that is expected to emerge.
Since 2008, however, households’ spending had fallen relative to income, such that the savings rate had risen to a level similar to that seen in the early 2000s.
On the second question, there was a risk that the period of elevated inflation could persist for longer than the Committee expected.
All members agreed that the likely persistence of the headwinds restraining economic growth following the financial crisis means that, when Bank Rate does begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in recent cycles.
A38 Manufacturing output prices excluding duties (PPIY) had risen by 0.3% in July, while the annual inflation rate had risen to 1.3%, from 1.1% in June.
Japanese workers’ household expenditure had increased by 3.9% in the year to February, boosted by the extra day in February 2000, but nonetheless pointed to higher private consumption in Q1.
Both the Conference Board and the University of Michigan measures of consumer confidence had fallen in April: the Conference Board measure had fallen to 108.8, from an upwardly-revised 110.7 in March, and the University of Michigan measure had fallen to 93.0 in April, from 95.7 in the previous month.
The Committee agreed a remote attendance procedure for MPC meetings during the period of the Covid-19 outbreak in the United Kingdom, should it be required.
Labour productivity had remained well below the level associated with a continuation of its pre-crisis trend, which appeared to suggest a substantial amount of underutilised capacity within companies.
The economic data in the United States, and the consumer price index (CPI) figures in the United Kingdom, had been weaker than the market had expected.
The GfK consumer confidence index had been broadly stable in April (+1.9 compared to +3.2 in March).
Activity indicators in a number of peripheral euro-area countries had remained weak, and there had been further evidence of differentiation by financial market participants between them.
It remained the case, however, that changes in term premia had accounted for only a small proportion of the overall rise in longer-term advanced economy government bond yields over the past two years, relative to the contribution from the rise in expected policy rates.
A broadly flat position was the best assessment of the short-term trend.
The agreement in December to establish a Single Resolution Board and Single Resolution Fund for euro-area banks might also reduce the prospect of adverse feedback to the wider economy from banking sector stress.
But the extent to which the downward pressures on inflation would be offset by the boost to import prices from the lower exchange rate was uncertain.
The average standard variable mortgage rate was unchanged at 5.49%.
A42 CPI inflation had fallen by 0.1 percentage points to 1.3% in February.
A38 Manufacturing output prices excluding duties (PPIY) had been unchanged in May, while the annual inflation rate had fallen by 0.1 percentage points to 0.2%.
A40 Manufacturing contacts had continued to report a further slight strengthening in overall demand from export markets.
As inflation had fallen back, the near-term outlook had at various points been jolted by sharp movements in both directions in the prices of commodities; it was not sensible in such an environment to ascribe a high probability to any particular short-run projection.
The sectoral breakdown of business investment had indicated that private manufacturing investment had fallen by 13.9% in Q3, the largest fall since records began, while private service sector investment had decreased by 3.9% on the quarter.
This might lead them to be less willing to invest in gaining market share by keeping prices low, as they would have less recourse to external sources of funds should they run into cash-flow difficulties.
Most other forecasters did not appear to assume a continuation of a downward trend in the stock-output ratio.
In an alternative scenario that is conditioned on energy prices following forward curves throughout the forecast period and as set out in the November Report, CPI inflation falls back towards the target more rapidly than in the MPC’s central projection, and is materially lower over the second half of the forecast period.
A43 House price growth appeared to have slowed further in most regions.
Anecdotal evidence suggested that the foreign exchange market on balance expected a reduction in repo rate, so that if such a reduction were made it was unlikely that sterling would immediately fall much further.
More timely data were available for some individual economies; German industrial production had risen by 1.0% in April, but that was still 1.3% lower than a year ago, while French industrial production had fallen by 0.3% in April, and had been flat on the year-on-year comparison.
Once duties and petroleum products were excluded, output price inflation was broadly stable at around 1½%.
Measures of expected inflation derived from prices in financial markets had fallen fractionally over the month.
The incoming new business index had risen slightly, to 60.6, the highest balance since May 1997.
Four members (Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted against, preferring an increase in the repo rate of 25 basis points.
As a way of highlighting the growing tension between asset prices and the smooth Brexit conditioning assumption, the Committee was publishing stylised sensitivities of its latest projections to changes in asset prices that were likely to be more consistent with that assumption.
At the start of the Committee meeting itself, members were made aware of information that had subsequently become available, and that information is included in this Annex.
It then falls below the target in the medium term, as an increasing degree of economic slack reduces domestic inflationary pressures, alongside declining external cost pressures.
External forecasters’ projections are higher on average than the MPC’s central projection at the one-year horizon, but lower three years ahead.
A16 A fall in real forward interest rates derived from the yield curve had accounted for the fall in nominal forward rates at the long end.
Third-quarter growth in non-Japan Asia had rebounded from the weak second-quarter outturn, reinforcing the view that that weakness had reflected the temporary effects of SARS-related disruption.
If the pricing power of firms increased as the degree of spare capacity was removed, there was a risk that firms would seek to restore their profit margins by pushing up prices.
The preview of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) survey showed_ that the sales-to-stock ratio had fallen, while the net balance of estate agents reporting price increases had fallen to a level comparable with that recorded during 1989 H2.
The implications of that for inflation would depend in part on whether activity remained subdued thereafter or began to rise gradually.
A50 Manufacturing employment had declined at a more rapid pace than in the previous month, due to lower activity in the sector.
Survey indicators of current business prices were weak, but household and UK financial market inflation expectations had remained relatively steady.
Recent regulatory statements and actions by the PRA, FPC and FCA might also have led to a tightening of credit conditions for some borrowers, although it was too early to judge how pronounced this would prove to be.
An increasing number of manufacturers had begun to consider investing abroad.
For mortgages, however, the standard variable rate had risen by almost as much as the repo rate.
There were upside risks to public sector pay, as public spending increased, which might spill over to the private sector.
The increase in mortgage rates so far during this cycle had, however, already led to higher aggregate interest payments by households, and this metric was likely to rise further.
Gilt-OIS spreads had continued to decline, particularly at maturities of less than ten years.
But this was offset by a 5.6% rise in government investment and a 1.0 percentage point contribution from valuables.
Online retail sales had risen by 18% in April, and payments data implied a further pickup subsequently.
That was despite a further weakening in survey indicators of output since the start of the year, which by themselves suggested somewhat weaker activity.
Taken together, the indicators did not point to a marked weakening of GDP growth between Q1 and Q2, though the balance of evidence suggested that the outcome might, if anything, be a little softer than expected at the time of the May Inflation Report.
German data had also shown strong industrial orders growth in recent months, especially in the external sector.
The January non-farm payrolls data had shown a contraction in employment and downward revisions to the level and growth of employment during 2007.
Combined with the indications from more timely survey data, retail spending was likely to rise modestly over the third quarter as a whole.
There had been little movement in inflation expectations over the month.
This release was consistent with data which would be published in “2003 National Accounts – The Blue Book” on 24 October.
Movements in oil prices also seemed consistent with a general slowing in demand prospects.
The CBI/Grant Thornton service sector survey, however, had pointed to mixed prospects for the service sector.
The strong pickup in pay settlements reported to the Bank’s Agents, and the recent broadening from goods price to services price inflation, suggested that these developments were now being reflected in domestic costs and prices, which could make CPI inflation more persistent than was expected in the February Report central projection.
The annual growth in the official ONS measure of unit wage costs had fallen by 0.3 percentage points to 3.3%.
The extent to which GDP recovered would also be affected by developments in the economy’s supply capacity.
There was a risk that inflation would fall less rapidly in the near term than the Committee had anticipated in its February Inflation Report central projection.
Part of the pick up in November had reflected special effects, such as a temporary increase in cash holdings relating to government Winter Allowance payments.
Core inflation had dropped to 0.6% from 0.7%.
The fall in LFS unemployment had been more than accounted for by short-term unemployment, and the rate of inflows to the claimant count was little changed.
Input prices excluding food, drink, tobacco and petroleum had risen by 0.4% in July and the annual rate of inflation had fallen to 3.5% from 4.3% in June.
Interest rates had risen slightly in the euro area, probably reflecting the fall in the amount of excess reserves within the Eurosystem following the European Central Bank’s most recent market operations.
On 31 July, the stock of UK government bonds held for monetary policy purposes was £690 billion.
But other factors might also have been important, including a slowing in the growth rates of both housing and net financial wealth, and temporary effects such as wet weather in June and reduced incentives to buy motor vehicles.
Market contacts reported increasing doubt that the Greek Government would be able to access private capital market funding by the spring of 2012 as planned.
The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank’s repo rate should be reduced by 25 basis points to 4.50%.
Consistent with this view, some survey indicators of wage growth had been rising for some time, most notably the REC survey measure of the pay growth of new employees.
The level of global GDP in 2021 Q4 is likely to be broadly in line with the November Report projection, but consumer price inflation in advanced economies has risen by more than expected.
This would tend to increase the relative prices of those assets, and hence wealth, and would, by stimulating the demand for corporate credit instruments, improve the supply of funds to the corporate sector.
The slowdown might be amplified by financial institutions’ responses to increased financial fragility.
Further out, international nominal forward rates derived from yields on government bonds had changed less beyond the five-year horizon.
A2 The preliminary estimate of US GDP growth for 2002 Q1 had been 1.4%, the same as the advance estimate.
But it was possible that the faster growth in the past was indicative of a more rapid rate of underlying productivity growth, which would continue into the future; that might imply lower future inflationary pressure than in the central projection.
In time, any further recovery in productivity would be likely to feed into real wage growth.
Considerable risks remained around that central projection.
However, a large reduction in Bank Rate now would increase the upside risk to inflation.
Since it remained above the 50 ‘no change’ level, it signalled further expansion in manufacturing activity, but the export orders balance fell below the 50 threshold for the first time since September, indicating a slowdown in export orders.
In contrast, those firms which had reported a slower pace of expected inflation this year had suggested that competitive pressures and productivity had been the main causes.
In Spain, unemployment had continued to rise, reaching nearly 21%, and Ireland had announced further fiscal consolidation measures.
GDP in China had increased by around 6¾% in 2015 and there had been further evidence of rebalancing away from investment and towards consumption.
In an environment of heightened uncertainty, businesses were likely to postpone investment decisions.
The CIPS construction report also showed an increase in employment: its March number was the highest since May 1997.
New housing starts had risen by nearly 15% in the three months to August compared with the preceding three months.
However, rising German import prices in September and higher euro-area producer price inflation in August and September had pointed to inflationary pressures in the pipeline.
House price inflation had edged up slightly.
Little of this strength had reflected borrowing by telecommunications companies, which appeared to have borrowed primarily through issuing securities in the market.
A12 The number of loan approvals for house purchase, after adjusting for the number of working days in the month, had fallen to 115,000 in December compared with 121,000 in November.
German manufacturing orders had fallen in January by 3.9% on the month.
Other indicators of household spending had been softer, however.
Overall, the growth ofO F I ' s money had been dominated by life assurance and pension funds and, to a lesser extent, securities dealers.
There had been further increases in the sterling price of oil and the wholesale gas futures curve had shifted upwards.
Another view accepted the best collective judgment of the central projection, but regarded the balance of risks to inflation as clearly on the upside, on account of the possibility of a faster depreciation in the exchange rate and stronger domestic demand growth than assumed in the central projection.
There had been modest upside news on the near-term prospects for the United States but a further deterioration in euro-area indicators and continued slowing in emerging market economies.
In particular, members discussed whether there were costs to rapid reversals of policy; eg cutting rates very shortly after having raised them.
The US dollar had fallen by 4.5% against the yen but risen by 0.3% against the euro.
Prior to the MPC meeting there had been some recovery to nearly $50 per barrel, but they had fallen back on the first day of the meeting.
In the United States, the November Senior Loan Officer survey showed an increased net balance of banks reporting tighter credit conditions for loans to commercial and industrial companies compared with three months earlier, and weaker demand for loans from both the corporate and household sectors.
Money and credit data had provided ambiguous signals too.
And measures of breakeven rates of inflation at three- and five-year horizons had also increased.
Net trade had made no contribution to French GDP growth in 2002 Q1, but both exports and imports had rebounded strongly following sharp falls in 2001 Q4: exports had risen by 2.1% and imports by 2.3%.
The LFS employment rate had been unchanged, with the inactivity rate rising slightly.
Such operations were a natural extension of the Committee’s usual monetary policy operations.
It was possible that the National Accounts data had underestimated export growth, either because of the uncertainty associated with fraudulent activity or because the United Kingdom was a major exporter of services, the values and volumes of which were naturally much harder to measure accurately.
Beyond this, there was an additional increase in total inactivity of 30,000.
One year overnight index swap (OIS) rates, one year forward had, for example, risen early in the month before falling on the back of a combination of weaker-than-expected wages data, smaller-than-expected revisions to the outlook in the May Inflation Report and falls in shorter-term rates internationally.
The price of Brent crude oil had fallen by 15% in sterling terms since the previous MPC meeting and by 35% since mid-June.
Surveys remained generally, but not uniformly, strong, with the CIPS services business activity index at its highest level since 1997 and the manufacturing PMI at its highest since the end of 1999; and construction was also up strongly.
The ONS estimated that around 20,000 fewer students entered the claimant count in July than in previous years, probably because of tighter eligibility rules following the introduction of the Jobseeker’s Allowance.
Both interest rates and the exchange rate had fallen back after the Minutes had been published on August 16.
The Committee’s latest projections assumed by convention that equity prices would rise from their current level in line with nominal GDP, and that the effects on activity and prices of their recent fall would be typical of past experience.
And over half of the respondents to the latest CBI Industrial Trends survey had reported that materials or components were a factor limiting production over the next three months, with about a third of respondents noting that skilled labour was also a limiting factor, both of which were close to historical series’ highs.
The trade deficit deteriorated in May to £1.2 billion from £0.7 billion in April mainly due to oil and erratic trade with non-EU countries.
Labour market indicators remained difficult to interpret.
And it was possible that they presaged a more sustained period of weak spending growth, perhaps as the impacts of the fiscal consolidation and near-term above-target inflation on household finances became more readily apparent.