Check your browser settings and network. This website requires JavaScript for some content and functionality.

Videoconference – 6 October 2020


			Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
			Ian Harper AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Allan Moss AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Catherine Tanna
		
Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor, Financial System), Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic),
				Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Ellis Connolly (Deputy Secretary), Alexandra Heath (Head, International
				Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial
				Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
Members commenced their discussion of the international economy by reviewing economic and health
				outcomes across a range of countries. Countries that had struggled to contain the coronavirus, and/or
				had imposed severe nationwide lockdowns, had experienced larger contractions in output in the first half
				of the year. Members noted that Australia's economic and health outcomes this year had compared
				favourably with the international experience.
In their discussion of developments over recent weeks, members noted that a number of countries,
				including in Western Europe, were experiencing a second wave of COVID-19
				cases. Most countries had imposed targeted restrictions in response, rather than nationwide lockdowns as
				had been the case earlier in the year. More broadly, timely readings on global activity and labour
				markets, including job advertisements, were pointing to a gradual recovery in the global economy, but
				with significant spare capacity remaining. This was likely to keep underlying global inflation pressures
				low.
In turning to the recovery in China and other east Asian economies, members noted that exports and
					industrial production had both recovered, but at different speeds. The extent of supply disruptions,
					differences in industry composition and changes in demand had all contributed to this pattern. Members
					noted that demand for China's exports had picked up. Elsewhere in east Asia, changing trade
					patterns highlighted the varied nature of the economic shock induced by the pandemic. Economies most
					involved in the production of semiconductors and other technology items for export, such as South
					Korea, had recorded a strong recovery in industrial production. By contrast, in those economies more
					geared to the global automotive market, such as Japan and Thailand, industrial production had
					experienced a more subdued recovery.
Members commenced their discussion of domestic economic developments by reviewing the very large
					contraction in activity in the June quarter. Excluding public demand, expenditure had declined very
					sharply. Consumption fell by 12 per cent, driven by a halving in spending on discretionary
					services. Dwelling investment fell by 7 per cent and business investment declined by
					4 per cent. These contractions in investment had been less than expected. Activity in the
					construction industry had not been disrupted to the extent initially anticipated, while the accelerated
					depreciation allowance had encouraged more business spending on vehicles and other equipment than
					initially expected.
In comparing consumption in the June quarter in Australia with that in other advanced economies,
					members noted that domestic consumption of durable goods had been positive and stronger than elsewhere,
					while domestic consumption of non-durable goods and services had experienced large declines more in
					line with the experience abroad. Members also noted that indicators of consumption in the September
					quarter had been stronger than expected.
Members discussed the significant increase in household savings in the June quarter and the
				implications of this for the outlook. The sharp increase in savings reflected the record decline in
				household consumption, mainly driven by constraints on certain types of consumption owing to the
				restrictions on activity, as many services could not be offered for sale. At the same time, household
				income had increased, supported by a number of policy measures, including the JobKeeper program and the
				Coronavirus Supplement paid to JobSeeker recipients. There had been some substitution toward the
				consumption of goods and services not affected by restrictions (such as home office equipment and
				household goods), but the overall effect of the restrictions on activity, combined with large income
				transfers from the government, had been to reduce consumption relative to household income. A higher
				level of precautionary savings also accounted for part of the increase in household savings. In
				addition, household cash flow had been boosted by the significant volume of superannuation
				withdrawals.
In discussing the implications of the increase in savings for the outlook, members noted that savings
				behaviour in the period ahead could differ markedly across households. Some people were likely to
				increase their consumption (relative to income) as remaining restrictions on activity were lifted, while
				households concerned about potential job losses would be inclined to maintain higher-than-usual levels
				of savings as insurance against lower income in the future.
Members discussed a range of other policy changes that had supported economic activity in recent
					months. Activity in the detached housing market had picked up, particularly in Western Australia, as a
					result of the Australian Government's HomeBuilder package and state government incentives. The
					instant asset write-off scheme had also contributed to the stronger-than-expected outcome for
					non-mining business investment in the June quarter.
In turning to the labour market, members noted the substantial effect of the Stage
					4 restrictions in Victoria, while conditions in the labour market in other parts of the country
					had continued to improve. Jobs, employment and hours worked had recently declined in Victoria to around
					levels previously recorded in May. For the country as a whole, however, members noted that the
					deterioration in the labour market through the pandemic had been somewhat less severe than had been
					expected. The unemployment rate was now expected to peak below the 10 per cent level
					projected under the baseline forecast scenario in the August Statement on Monetary Policy.
					Nevertheless, substantial spare capacity remained in the labour market and its recovery over the medium
					term was expected to be gradual.
Members concluded their discussion of economic developments with a review of how businesses had
					responded to the pandemic. A recent survey indicated that some of the changes made by firms were likely
					to be retained as a permanent feature of their business models, including, for example, the way that
					products and services are offered, such as the increased use of online distribution channels.
					Information from business liaison contacts also suggested that, relative to the global financial
					crisis, many firms had responded faster in reducing investment and employment, although this may have
					been because the shock to activity was significantly larger. Members noted that cost control and major
					levels of government assistance had supported the health of the business sector in aggregate, although
					the future viability of some firms remained uncertain.
Members were briefed on the evolution of financial stability risks in the Bank's regular
				half-yearly assessment. An unprecedented policy response had quickly restored financial market
				functioning in the period soon after the onset of the pandemic. But with the economic recovery expected
				to take some time, financial stability risks were now more related to declining credit quality.
Financial asset prices had rebounded from their lows in March, in part because of expectations of an
				extended period of low risk-free interest rates. However, there had also been a sharp fall in the
				compensation investors receive for risk. This was despite uncertainty stemming from the shape of the
				recovery and a rise in political tensions internationally, as well as expectations of rising
				insolvencies and defaults. For some heavily affected sectors, lost output would not be recovered quickly
				and some businesses could face difficulty servicing their debts. These factors raised the risk of a
				sharp fall in asset prices. Globally, there had been a decline in credit quality prior to the pandemic,
				which increased risks for investors, particularly those with leverage. Of note, there had been an
				increase in the share of investment-grade bonds with a lower credit rating, and a substantial increase
				in the share of leveraged loans with few covenants.
Banks in the advanced economies had started the year with high levels of capital and liquidity as a
				result of reforms that had followed the global financial crisis of over a decade earlier. Their balance
				sheet strength had enabled banks to act as a shock-absorber for the real economy, rather than magnifying
				the shock as they had during the global financial crisis. Policy actions, including decisions that loans
				with repayment deferrals be treated as performing and restrictions on shareholder pay-outs, had
				contributed to banks' capital ratios remaining high. However, in some jurisdictions, banks had
				entered the period with structurally low profitability; this would make it more difficult if they needed
				to raise equity in stressed times and would be likely to make those banks more cautious in expanding
				their lending. These risks were particularly high for those European countries where low bank
				profitability occurred in tandem with high levels of government debt, since a fall in sovereign debt
				values would erode bank capital and lead investors to question the government's ability to support
				troubled banks.
Members noted that many businesses in Australia had increased their cash buffers in 2020. Prior to the
				pandemic, firm-level data suggested that around half of businesses had enough cash to pay their expenses
				for less than one month. However, by mid 2020, support measures provided by the government,
				landlords and lenders had boosted businesses' cash buffers, with estimates suggesting that a
				significant share of businesses could cover at least six months of expenses. Listed companies had larger
				buffers than private companies and unincorporated businesses. Members also noted that, for some
				businesses, their best survival strategy would be to hibernate until economic conditions had
				sufficiently normalised. Business failures had been substantially lower in 2020 than in preceding years
				because of insolvency moratoriums and the various support measures. However, business failures were
				expected to rise, particularly for small businesses.
Risks for some types of commercial property were high as declining demand had increased the chance of
				falling property values. Retail property vacancy rates had been rising prior to 2020 because of
				structural changes in the retail sector. Efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus had
				accelerated this trend in the first half of 2020. Office vacancy rates had also increased given the
				decline in economic activity, although this had been from low levels of vacancies, particularly in
				Sydney and Melbourne. Nevertheless, an increase in office supply coupled with uncertainty about future
				working conditions (and therefore office demand) increased the risk of falls in office property prices,
				particularly for secondary-grade buildings. Members noted that demand for industrial property had been
				strong prior to the pandemic, driven by increasing e-commerce, and that, if anything, this had since
				been reinforced. Banks' direct commercial property exposures had declined since the global
				financial crisis, although members noted there was uncertainty about the size of banks' indirect
				exposures through lending to non-banks that subsequently lent to property investors, as well as the use
				of commercial property as collateral for business lending.
Many households had increased their liquidity buffers in 2020. This reflected a reduction in living
				expenses and, more so for some renting households, an increase in income from government payments. In
				the early 1990s' recession the unemployment rate had increased by less for households with
				mortgages than for households that rent, but in 2020 the unemployment rate had increased by a similar
				amount for both types of households. The unemployment rate for households with mortgages, nevertheless,
				remained lower than for renters. Members noted that repayments had been deferred on around
				7 per cent of housing loans, a slight decline from the peak earlier in the year. Loans with a
				repayment deferral were more likely to have a higher loan-to-valuation ratio and to have been extended
				to those employed in industries relatively more adversely affected by the pandemic. Demand for housing
				had moderated slightly, with only relatively small falls in housing prices in Sydney and Melbourne.
				Housing prices had increased in all other cities in September. Most borrowers for housing had large
				amounts of equity in their properties, with only 3 per cent of borrowers estimated to have
				negative equity.
Banks in Australia had increased their provisions in the first half of 2020 to account for expected
				future losses resulting from the pandemic. Banks' non-performing loan ratio was low, but had been
				increasing gradually since the start of the year. This had reflected a decline in credit quality for
				housing loans to both owner-occupiers and investors. The increase in the non-performing loan ratio for
				personal lending was partly due to a reduction in outstanding personal credit, particularly credit card
				balances, as those borrowers in a stronger financial position had been repaying their debts. Both large
				and small banks had high levels of capital. Stress tests of the banks indicated they had sufficient
				capital to withstand an economic contraction that was far more severe than expected. Members noted that,
				given their strong balance sheets, banks were well placed to continue lending and thereby support the
				economic recovery.
Members commenced their discussion of international financial markets by noting that financial
				conditions had continued to support the global economy over the preceding month. Central banks in the
				advanced economies had left their policy rates unchanged, but financial market prices implied that some
				central banks were expected to ease policy further. In the case of some central banks, such as the
				European Central Bank, this was in response to weaker-than-expected economic conditions and rising
				downside risks to the economic outlook. In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Bank of
				England, the expectation of further easing had followed guidance from these central banks that they were
				preparing for the possibility of negative policy rates.
Central banks in the advanced economies had also continued to purchase substantial amounts of
				government debt in the secondary markets. At its September meeting, the US Federal Reserve had left the
				pace of asset purchases unchanged, but acknowledged that asset purchases were being undertaken to foster
				accommodative financial conditions, in addition to sustaining market functioning.
Low policy rates and large asset purchase programs had contributed to sovereign bond yields in major
				advanced economies remaining low and stable. Members noted that longer-term yields for Australian
				Government Securities (AGS) had been higher than in almost all other advanced economies, although there
				had been some narrowing of the interest rate differential between Australia and other major advanced
				economies in recent weeks. The recent narrowing in yield differentials had contributed to a broad-based
				depreciation of the Australian dollar over the previous month, as had an increase in risk aversion and a
				decline in some commodity prices, which had been related to rising concerns about the prospects for
				global output growth. Nevertheless, the Australian dollar had remained just below its peak of the
				previous few years. While members noted that the Australian dollar exchange rate was broadly consistent
				with its fundamental determinants, a lower exchange rate would provide more stimulus to the Australian
				economy in the recovery phase.
In emerging markets, financial conditions had also been supported by accommodative policy settings.
				Financial conditions in China had remained broadly accommodative, although they had tightened in recent
				months together with the economic recovery there. Growth in total social financing had remained stronger
				than the previous year, consistent with the stated goal of the authorities. The Chinese renminbi had
				appreciated over the preceding couple of months. However, other emerging market economies had remained
				vulnerable to a further deterioration in their economic outlook because of the ongoing increase in COVID-19 cases, pre-existing macroeconomic fragilities and a reliance on external
				financing, which limited the scope for additional fiscal stimulus.
Domestically, the Bank's policy measures had continued to underpin accommodative financial
					conditions. Financial market prices implied that investors now expected the cash rate to decline to
					below 10 basis points, compared with earlier expectations that the cash rate would remain at
					around its current level of 13 basis points for some time. Money market rates and bond yields had
					also declined in line with this change in market expectations.
The Bank had purchased bonds in the secondary market in early September in support of the 3-year AGS
					yield target. Subsequently, the 3-year yield had moved well below 20 basis points as market
					participants' expectations for further policy actions by the Bank had increased. Members noted
					that investor demand for recent AGS issuance had been strong and that spreads of semi-government yields
					to AGS had remained narrow.
Members also noted that banks had drawn down nearly all of their initial allowances of
					$84 billion from the Term Funding Facility by the 30 September deadline. This was supporting
					historically low bank funding costs. From the start of October, banks were able to draw on the new
					supplementary allowance of $57 billion in total, as well as additional allowances, which amounted
					to $59 billion at the time of the meeting.
Interest rates on housing and business loans remained historically low. Business credit had decreased
					a little further in August as large businesses continued to repay revolving credit facilities, which
					they had drawn down in March and April for precautionary purposes. Members noted that, notwithstanding
					this, large businesses had issued more corporate bonds over the year to date than the average of recent
					years, as had been the case in other economies. Large businesses had also increased their credit limits
					at banks. Meanwhile, lending to small and medium-sized businesses had remained little changed. Weakness
					in business credit growth appeared to be driven mostly by lower demand in response to weak economic
					conditions and the uncertain environment, although the availability of credit to businesses had also
					tightened a little following the onset of the pandemic.
Growth in credit for owner-occupied housing had remained steady in recent months. Commitments for
					housing loans to owner-occupiers had picked up further in August across all states, consistent with a
					general increase in activity in the housing market. By contrast, credit to investors in housing had
					remained weak, although it had stopped declining in August. Following an earlier tightening in response
					to the pandemic, more recently constraints on the supply of housing finance had eased slightly.
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economy was gradually recovering,
				but that most economies were still some way from the output levels that prevailed before the pandemic.
				The continuation of the recovery was dependent on containment of the virus. The recovery was most
				advanced in China, where conditions had improved substantially over preceding months. Globally,
				inflation remained very low and below central bank targets.
The Australian economy had experienced the largest peacetime economic contraction since the 1930s.
				Nevertheless, members noted that the decline in output in the June quarter had been smaller than in most
				other countries and smaller than had been expected. A recovery was under way in most of Australia,
				although the second COVID-19 outbreak in Victoria and associated
				restrictions on activity had been having a major effect on the economy in that state. Labour market
				conditions had improved somewhat over the preceding few months, with the unemployment rate likely to
				peak at a lower rate than earlier expected. Nevertheless, both unemployment and underemployment were
				expected to remain high for an extended period. The recovery was likely to be slow and uneven, and
				inflation was expected to remain subdued for some time.
Members agreed that the Board's policy package was continuing to support the Australian economy by
				underpinning very low borrowing costs and the supply of credit to households and businesses. There was a
				very high level of liquidity in the Australian financial system and the policy package had helped to
				lower funding costs. Authorised deposit-taking institutions had drawn down $83 billion of low-cost
				funding through the Term Funding Facility and had access to a further $114 billion under the
				facility. Members noted that the Australian banking system, with its strong capital and liquidity
				buffers, had remained resilient and was helping the economy traverse the current difficult period.
Over the prior month, the Bank had purchased AGS in support of the Board's 3-year yield target of
				around 25 basis points. Government bond markets had been operating effectively, also during a
				period of significant increase in issuance. The Bank stood ready to purchase AGS and semi-government
				securities in the event of a recurrence of market dysfunction.
Members recognised that the substantial, coordinated and unprecedented easing of fiscal and monetary
				policy in Australia was helping to sustain the economy through the current period. Members noted that
				public sector balance sheets in Australia were strong, which allowed for the provision of continued
				support, with the Australian Government Budget for 2020/21 to be
				announced that evening. The Secretary to the Australian Treasury briefed members on the main features of
				the Budget. Members considered that fiscal and monetary support would be required for some time given
				the outlook for the economy and the prospect of high unemployment.
The Board discussed the case for additional monetary easing to support jobs and the overall economy. As
				in previous meetings, members discussed the options of reducing the targets for the cash rate and the
				3-year yield towards zero, without going negative, and buying government bonds further along the yield
				curve. These options would have the effect of further easing financial conditions in Australia.
In considering the case for further monetary measures, members discussed monetary policy developments
				abroad and their implications for financial conditions in Australia, through the yield curve and the
				exchange rate. Members noted that the larger balance sheet expansions by other central banks relative to
				the Reserve Bank was contributing to lower sovereign yields in most other advanced economies than in
				Australia. Members discussed the implications of this for the Australian dollar exchange rate.
Members also discussed how much traction further monetary easing might obtain in terms of better
				economic outcomes. They recognised that some parts of the transmission of easier monetary policy had
				been impaired as a result of the restrictions on activity in parts of the economy. However, as the
				economy opens up, members considered it reasonable to expect that further monetary easing would gain
				more traction than had been the case earlier. Members also considered the effect of lower interest rates
				on community confidence and on those people who rely on interest income.
Members discussed the possible effect of further monetary easing on financial stability. A further
				easing would help to reduce financial stability risks by strengthening the economy and private sector
				balance sheets, thereby lowering the number of non-performing loans. This benefit would need to be
				weighed against any additional risks as investors search for yield in the low interest rate environment,
				including those resulting from higher leverage and higher asset prices, particularly in the housing
				market. On balance, the Board thought it likely that there were greater financial stability benefits
				from a stronger economy, while acknowledging that risks in asset markets had to be closely
				monitored.
The Board also considered the nature of the forward guidance regarding the cash rate. Over recent
				months, the Board had communicated that it would ‘not increase the cash rate target until
				progress is being made towards full employment and it is confident that inflation will be sustainably
				within the 2–3 per cent target band’. Given the higher level of uncertainty
				about inflation dynamics in the current economic environment, the Board agreed to place more weight on
				actual, not forecast, inflation in its decision-making. Members indicated that they would also like to
				see more than just progress towards full employment before considering an increase in the cash rate, as
				the Board views addressing the high rate of unemployment as an important national priority. Members
				recognised that while inflation can move up and down for a range of reasons, achieving inflation
				consistent with the target is likely to require a return to a tight labour market.
Members agreed that this evolution in forward guidance would best be announced in a speech by the
				Governor on 15 October. This would allow for greater context to be provided than was possible in
				the post-meeting statement. The Board remains of the view that it would be appropriate to remove the
				yield target before the cash rate itself is raised.
The Board affirmed its commitment to supporting jobs, incomes and businesses in Australia. Its actions,
				including the decision in September to expand the Term Funding Facility, were keeping funding costs low
				and assisting with the supply of credit. It agreed to maintain highly accommodative policy settings as
				long as required and to continue to consider how additional monetary easing could support jobs as the
				economy opens up further.
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:

					The Reserve Bank of Australia supports the
					Foundation for Children.
				