The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC)held its second quarterly meeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago. After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committeeheld that the Chinese economy maintained a sound and rapid developmentmomentum, but the inflationary pressure was noticeable and the BOP imbalancesstill remained despite the generally upbeat situation. Global inflationarypressure continued to mount, the world economy slowed down, and more uncertainand disabling factors emerged. In accordance with the overall arrangement ofthe State Council, the PBC properly managed the priorities, pace and intensityof financial macro control. In general, the Chinese economy and financialsector performed well. It was noted that adverse factors in the global economy and severenatural disasters in China added new uncertainties to China’s economic performance, but thefundamentals remained unchanged. Efforts should be made to fully implement thescientific approach to development, to take maintaining relatively rapideconomic growth and curbing excessive price increase as top priority, and toattach great importance to containing inflation. At the same time, the urgencyof economic restructuring should be fully recognized, and coordination of themonetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy andfinancial regulatory policy should be enhanced, to accelerate economicrestructuring and promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments. Weighing the monetary policy stance and measures for the comingperiods, the Committee held the view that efforts should be made to keep thecontinuity and stability of the monetary policy, take more preemptive, targetedand flexible financial macro control measures, properly manage the focus, paceand intensity of these measures and various monetary policy instruments in linewith the macroeconomic adjustment policies of the State Council, so as tocreate a benign monetary environment for sound and rapid economic development.It is necessary to improve the credit structure in the principle of encouraginggrowth in some sectors while discouraging it in others, to increase financialsupport for agriculture, rural areas and farmers, post-quake reconstruction,students, consumption, those industries that have created lots of jobs but arein difficulties, to support balanced economic development across regions, to guidefinancial institutions to provide proper financial products and services and render more lending support to small- and medium-sizedenterprises. The market-based interest rate reform should be pursued, and theleverage role of interest rate should be played out. The principle of makingthe RMB exchange rate reform a self-initiated, controllable and gradual processshould be followed to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at anadaptive and equilibrium level. Improvement of the foreign exchange managementregime reform should be effected by strengthening the oversight overcross-border capital flow. Vigorous actions should be taken to push aheadfinancial reform and innovations to improve the competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resources allocation.