On 18 March 2016, the Board of Directors of the Bank of Russia decided to keep its
key rate
at 11.00% p.a. Despite certain stabilisation in financial and commodity markets and a slowdown in inflation, inflation risks remain high. These stem from the current developments in the oil market, persistently high inflation expectations and some uncertainties surrounding budget configuration. To enable the accomplishment of inflation targets, the Bank of Russia may conduct its moderately tight monetary policy for a more prolonged time than previously planned. The Bank of Russia predicts that, consistent with this decision, annual inflation will total less than 6% in March 2017, to reach the 4% target in late 2017.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors took as a premise the expectations for oil prices which are lower than its December forecast. The current oil market still features a continued oversupply, on the backdrop of a slowdown in the Chinese economy, more supplies originating from Iran and tighter competition for market share. This is why the certain recovery in crude prices seen in the recent weeks may prove to be unsustainable. In recognition of this, the Bank of Russia assumed in its baseline scenario the average forecast oil price of $30 per barrel in 2016, with its gradual rise to $40 per barrel to 2018.
Despite growing oil prices and ruble strengthening in the latest period, the accumulated weakening of the ruble, impacted by the drop in oil prices, between late 2015 and early 2016, is still putting pro-inflationary pressure on the economy, contributing to continued high inflation expectations. Meanwhile, inflation slowdown is continuing. Under the Bank of Russia estimates, the annual consumer price growth rate is down from 9.8% in January 2016 to 7.9 % as of 14 March 2016. This is lower than the forecast for inflation for the year ahead, which, the Bank of Russia released in its March 2015 press release (circa 9%). Alongside with monetary policy, instrumental in the slowdown of consumer prices are the Government decisions as regards indexation of wages and pensions, as well as declining global food prices. In 2Q 2016, as the Bank of Russia forecast suggests, quarterly inflation will continue to decline. However, annual inflation may accelerate temporarily in the middle of the year as a result of the low base effect. Provided there are no new shocks emerging, subsequently annual inflation is set to resume its decline. Slower consumer price growth will be triggered by weak demand and gradually descending inflation expectations, driven by, inter alia, the moderately tight monetary policy. The Bank of Russia forcasts that, consistent with the decision, annual inflation will total less than 6% in March 2017, to reach the 4% target in late 2017.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia took into account the macroeconomic fundamentals which suggest a less severe downturn than previously estimated considering this level of oil prices. The floating exchange rate serves to partially set off the negative impact of the external shocks on the economy. The weakening of the ruble has resulted in Russian products gaining competitiveness, while it also helped economic growth in individual industries. These include agriculture, the food industry, chemicals and mining. Employment data and production capacity utilisation have recently been steady.
The economic adjustment to the low level of commodity prices is expected to continue. The Bank of Russia forecasts assume the economic downturn to slow down to 1.3%-1.5% in 2016. Also, it is expected that quarterly GDP growth rates will enter positive territory between late 2016 and early 2017. Going forward, the advancing processes of import substitution and non-energy export expansion will help a gradual economic recovery.
The Bank of Russia Board of Directors has recognised that, as a result of the Reserve Fund spending to cover budget deficit, banks show decreased demand for the Bank of Russia’s refinancing. Hence, we see softening of monetary conditions, impacted by reduced structural deficit of liquidity even if the key rate is unchanged.
The risks remain that inflation may exceed the target in late 2017. These relate to a further worsening in the oil market developments; persistent elevated inflation expectations; the global food price performance; changed rates of indexation of regulated prices, wages and pensions, as well as the uncertainty around a balanced federal budget over the medium term. To enable the accomplishment of inflation targets, the Bank of Russia may conduct its moderately tight monetary policy for a more prolonged time than previously planned.
The Bank of Russia Board of Directors will hold its next rate review meeting on
29 April 2016.
The press release on the Bank of Russia Board decision is to be published at 13:30 Moscow time.
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia major operations
1
(% p.a.)
Purpose
Type of instrument
Instrument
Term
Rate since 16.06.15
Rate since 03.08.15
Liquidity provision
Standing facilities 
(fixed interest rates)
REPO;
Overnight loans;
Lombard loans;
Loans secured by gold;
Loans secured by non-marketable assets and guarantees;
FX swaps (ruble leg)
1 day
12.50
12.00
Open market operations (minimum interest rates)
Loans secured by non-marketable assets,
auctions
2
3 months
11.75
11.25
REPO auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
,
1 week
11.50
(key rate)
11.00
(key rate)
Liquidity absorption
Open market operations (maximum interest rates)
Deposit auctions
from 1 to 6 days
3
,
1 week
Standing facilities (fixed interest rates)
Deposit operations
1 day,
call
10.50
10.00
Memo item:
Refinancing rate
4
I
Information on interest rates on the Bank of Russia operations is given in the Table ‘
Interest rates on the Bank of Russia operations’
.
2
Floating interest rate linked to the level of the Bank of Russia key rate.
3
Fine-tuning operations.
Information notice ‘On the procedure for conducting fine-tuning operations’
.
Information notice ‘On fine-tuning operations to absorb liquidity’
4
The Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to equate from 1 January 2016 the refinancing rate with the Bank of Russia key rate set as of the respective date.
Starting from 1 January 2016, the independent value of the refinancing rate will not be set.
Refinancing rate values prior to 01.01.2016
The reference to the Press Service is mandatory if you intend to use this material.