In short, since the end of 2007, inflation has diverged from the targets path.
The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB have evolved in line with the headline index.
On a twelve-month trailing basis, the three core inflation measures continued to follow the behavior of headline inflation.
As a consequence, all core inflation measures stand above the central value for the inflation target.
Moreover, it bears emphasizing that the behavior of diffusion indices suggests increased dissemination of the inflationary process, confirming the analysis present in previous Copom Minutes.
It also bears highlighting the continuity of upward pressures over wholesale industrial prices, a process that began in the second half of 2007 and does not signal accommodation.
The data already released for the last months point, in short, to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, despite at a more moderate pace and subject to possible limits to supply expansion.
Despite the strong fall observed in May, there are no sufficient evidences of inflection in the expansion process of capital goods production, which has been mainly driven by the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of economic growth.
On its turn, the dynamism of durable consumer goods production reflects, predominantly, credit conditions, which remain more favorable than historical patterns.
The existence of signs pointing to pressure over the availability of production factors suggests that accommodation in the pace of industrial activity expansion can be greatly associated to productive capacity restrictions, added up to imports penetration increase.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
As a result, the average unemployment rate in the first five months of the year was 1.6 p.p.
In the first half of the year, employment reached a record high of 1,361.4 thousand hires, an evidence of the labor market heat.
Besides the process of formalization in the labor market, these data evidence the strong dynamism in labor force demand.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expansion cycle of retail sales is expected, and will continue to be underpinned by employment and income growth, credit expansion and the maintenance of consumer confidence at high levels.
Sector indicators, for instance, relative to automobile sales in June, corroborate this assessment.
The maintenance of installed capacity utilization rates at historically high levels occurs in several sectors despite investments accumulated in the last twelve months.
In short, recent data indicate that, although investment has been contributing to soften the increasing trend of capacity utilization rates, the maturation of investment projects has not been sufficient, until now, to significantly limit existing mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and domestic demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to present deceleration at the margin, a trend that was already expected, and is in line with assessments present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes.
Regarding the external scenario, the world economy still shows divergent pressures.
On the one hand, even though economic activity, in general, has been stronger than anticipated in the majority of countries in the first semester, which in some cases resulted in upward revisions in growth projections for the year, the more recent data shows some signs of weakening, especially in mature economies.
This trend should continue during the second semester.
On the other hand, the increase in the prices of raw material, and the pressures of heated demand over the capacity of supply expansion, which are particularly evident in emerging economies, have resulted in strong acceleration of current inflation, significantly impacting, in several cases, inflationary expectations.
In addition, a severe financial crisis in the U.S. and, at a lower extension, in Europe, is added up to this difficult macroeconomic scenario.
In this context, although the existence of strong inflationary pressures is cause of concern for the majority of monetary authorities, policy reactions, aiming to control demand, have occurred unsynchronized, situation that tends to persist.
Specifically, the US economy seems to have entered a process of economic stagnation since the last quarter of 2007, and still suffers the impact of the crisis in the real estate sector, with spillover effects on the labor market, whose weakening, in combination with higher oil prices, affects consumer confidence, contributing importantly to depress consumption.
Even if the influence of monetary and fiscal stimulus can reduce the risk of a significant contraction in activity, the dominant scenario continues to point to a more consistent recover only from Even after significant strengthening of the capital basis of relevant financial institutions, uncertainties still remain about the length and amplitude of the effects of the US subprime mortgages market crisis over US and European banking system and over credit conditions for households and corporate.
The systemic risk perception increased again in the last weeks, as financial problems have worsened due to a cyclic deterioration in credit quality, which tends to reinforce the tightening of financial conditions, increasing the risk of slowdown intensification.
The dominant view seems to be that the economic activity in Europe - despite the better-than-expected performance at the start of the year, anchored in the German economy - and in Japan might also decelerate in the second half of the year.
In the central economies, therefore, the prospects for adoption of monetary tightening policies seem limited.
On the other hand, despite some moderation at the margin, economic growth in emerging economies is still strong and, so far, it has apparently been little affected by the US mortgage crisis, offsetting the effects of economic deceleration in mature economies.
In fact, in light of pressures over the availability of production factors, inflation acceleration points to the continuity of monetary tightening policies in emerging economies.
However, the policies aimed at reducing the external vulnerability of the economy have been successful, contributing to mitigate, but not to eliminate, the effects of the external scenario difficulties over the Brazilian economic activity, whose dynamism has essentially been driven by domestic demand.
Oil prices, systematic source of uncertainty stemming from the international scenario, continue highly volatile and are still in high historical levels.
This behavior reflects structural changes in global energy markets, which have blocked the recovery of inventory levels traditionally observed, in addition to recurrent geopolitical tensions.
Despite significant uncertainties inherent to oil prices forecasts, the main scenario considered by the Copom forecasts unchanged domestic gasoline prices in 2008, although the probability of materialization of an alternative scenario is relevant.
However, apart from the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, one should recognize that the consistent elevation of international oil prices impacts domestic economy both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the deterioration of inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate based on the 360-day swap rates estimates a 131bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008 and 87bps spread in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion continues quite robust, and is at least partially the cause of the short-term inflationary pressures, despite strong imports growth and the favorable investment performance.
However, in general terms, the influence of the external scenario on the future trajectory of Brazilian inflation continues subject to contradictory effects and highly uncertain.
On the one hand, the prospects of a possible more pronounced deceleration of global activity in the coming months points to an accommodation of both commodities prices and external demand.
On the other hand, the recent trajectory of price indices both in mature and in emerging economies evidences the existence of mismatches between the supply and demand growth, and consequently, of significant inflationary risks to the global economy.
In light of the deterioration of inflation prospects, in a more uncertain environment, the Committee evaluates that the risk of materialization of a less benign scenario continues to increase.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years.
Particularly, monetary policy should act so that initially limited impacts on price indices, partially derived from relative prices adjustments that occur in global scale, do not cause persistent deterioration of inflation dynamics due to worse expectations.
The Copom thinks that the maintenance of monetary stability is an essential condition for the relative prices system to continue efficiently guiding the necessary adjustments on current consumption and production patterns of the economy.
The Copom considers that the probability that inflationary pressures initially limited represent risks to domestic inflation trajectory has increased, as the heating of domestic demand and market of factors, as well as the possibility of emergence of supply restrictions in some sectors, may increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
The Committee evaluates that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the propagation of initially localized pressures to consumer prices, depend in a critical manner on inflation expectations, which increased significantly in the last weeks and continue to be carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth highlighting that although the external sector induces some discipline in tradable goods inflation, imports prices have been increasing strongly; furthermore, heated domestic demand may trigger more intense inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector - in services prices, for instance.
In this context, the Copom will act aiming to ensure that inflation control gains achieved in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Committee will continue to carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as of inflation expectations within the forecast period, prepared to promptly adjust the monetary policy stance in order to avoid the consolidation of a scenario in which one-off price adjustments become persistent or generalized.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longterm stable macroeconomic environment will contribute for the maintenance of the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception that has been occurring in the last years.
The Copom thinks that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that in Brazil inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path, even in light of global inflationary pressures.
For this to materialize, however, it is necessary that forward-looking inflation indicators, particularly the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, converge throughout the relevant period for the monetary policy.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
During the coming months, despite the more moderate credit growth pace due to an increase in funding costs, and real payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, the dissemination of pressures stemming from adjustments in relative prices, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated effects in the last months of 2008 and in The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
It should be noticed that the possible accommodation of commodities prices could contribute to avoid that inflationary pressures intensify even more.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be underpinned, among other factors, by income and credit growth, continues to present significant risks to inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent and prompt reduction of the mismatch between the expansion of supply of goods and services and the increase of demand continues to be vital to the assessment of different possibilities of monetary policy stance.
International evidence and Brazilian experience indicate that higher inflation rates lead to higher risk premium, shorter planning horizons and, as a consequence, lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, in the current circumstances, there is the risk that economic agents start to attribute higher probability that inflation increases will become persistent, which would reduce the efficacy of the monetary policy.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the economy heating signals, as illustrated by the acceleration of some wholesale prices and the evolution of core inflation measures, and by the fast increase in inflation expectations, the risks for the materialization of a benign inflationary scenario, in which IPCA would remain in line with the targets path, are relevant.
In fact, the deterioration of the forward-looking scenario is already present in the inflation projections considered by the Committee.
The Copom also considers that the persistence of significant mismatch between the paces of expansion of aggregate supply and demand has increased the risk for the inflationary dynamics.
In these circumstances, monetary policy should act vigorously through the adjustment of the basic interest rate while the balance of risks to the inflationary dynamics requires, in order to, on the one hand, reduce such mismatch and, on the other hand, avoid that inflationary pressures initially localized on price indices lead to persistent deterioration of expectations and of the inflation forward-looking scenario.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the prospective price dynamics and the balance of risks associated to its projections.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backingup economic activity dynamism, including sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as income growth, are still perceived.
On its turn, the contribution of the external sector to a benign inflationary scenario, in light of robust domestic demand growth and the increase of global inflationary pressures, seems to become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority should act in order to avoid that short-term uncertainties contaminate longer time horizons.
Evidently, if the risk profile changes in a matter that implies shifts in the basic inflation prospective scenario considered at the present moment, the Committee will promptly adjust the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The IPCA core inflation measures decelerated month-on-month, but accelerated on a 12-month trailing basis.
The higher IPA increase in June reflected a more significant high of agricultural prices, while industrial prices showed deceleration.
July preliminary figures, coming from IGP-10 and IPC-S, pointed towards the continuity of the deceleration of wholesale industrial prices, civil construction and consumer prices, particularly food.
Conversely, wholesale agricultural prices showed new inflationary pressure, influenced by price increases in soy, cattle and corn.
Still regarding the production of capital goods, the month-on-month decrease was due to the behavior of serialized product sub sectors for industrial use, transportation equipment and mixed use.
The indicator stood 3.5 p.p. above the level registered in the same month of 2007, reflecting the elevations of 3.7 p.p. in the ISA and 3.4 p.p. in the IE.
The Nuci increased 1.7 p.p. year-over-year in June, with increases of 5.1 p.p.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 309.4 thousand new formal jobs were created in June 2008, totaling 1,361.4 thousand new jobs in the first half of the year.
External Environment Inflation rise remains as the main international outlook concern, adding uncertainties to the environment in which economic growth deceleration predominates.
In addition to the restore of financial sector turmoil and the concerns with banks and mortgage companies solvency, there are worries regarding the possibility of more drastic contamination of emerging markets.
The commodities markets, including oil, remain steady driven by the strong demand and by the pressured supply.
Inflation rates have been reaching their highest levels observed since the last decades in both on yearly and monthly bases, due to the rises in food and energy prices.
These rises have concerned central banks in light of the possibility of transmission to wages and expectations.
Business feeling remains cautious in the majority of the countries, while consumer expectations have been deteriorating.
Stock market indices declined to bear market, rising concerns that shocks generated by high-risk mortgage crisis can lead the US economy to a sharper deceleration, restraining global growth.
The US economy continues to face uncertainties regarding the prospects for markets, economy and inflation.
Liquidity in the big mortgage funding institutions was under observation, motivating the approval of a plan by federal authorities to help them.
According to the Federal Reserve, there are more concerns related to inflation than to economic growth, despite there are still significant risks of lower economic growth.
In the external scenario, oil prices reached historically high levels and the concerns regarding US banks financial health continued, causing risk aversion increase.
In the domestic outlook, the persistence of current inflation rates at elevated levels and the deterioration of inflationary expectations also contributed to the interest rate rises.
Between June 2 and July 21, one-, three-, and six-month rates went up by 58 bps, 62 bps and 68 bps, respectively.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates increased by 77 bps, 82 bps, and 75 bps, respectively.
In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, from June 3 to July 21, weekly five- and seven-month fixed rate repo operations, borrowing.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 39 overnight repo operations, borrowing.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
