Similarly to headline inflation, the three IPCA core inflation measures trended upwards in December.
It bears emphasizing that year-over-year headline inflation acceleration in 2007 was followed by two of the three core inflation measures.
On a twelve-month trailing basis, despite remaining below the central target, all inflation core measures accelerated in December, compared to November, standing at levels remarkably higher than the record lows reached in previous months.
For December, the effects of end-year celebrations can result in a new retreat in the month-on-month industrial production.
However, the trend for the start of 2008 points to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, which will continue to be favored by the several incentive factors that influence economic activity, such as employment and credit expansion, the monetary easing already implemented, the fiscal impulse and, in some sectors, the recovery of reduced inventory levels.
The solid expansion of capital goods production is, to a large extension, due to the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of domestic demand growth, which has reflected both the improvement of income and the expansion of credit, underpinned by the perception of macroeconomic stability consolidation.
On its turn, the dynamism of durable consumer goods production reflects, predominantly, the remarkable improvement in credit conditions, when compared to historical patterns.
It should be highlighted that the emergency of signs pointing to consistent pressure over the availability of production factors, as suggested in some industrial surveys, indicates that possible reductions in the pace of industrial activity expansion could be associated to productive capacity restrictions.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
It is worth noticing that the unemployment rate in November reached a record low for the series, started in March 2002, both for the observed and for seasonally adjusted series.
In line with the positive developments in labor market, and with credit expansion, retail sales continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
The steady growth of retail sales in the year reflects the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expanding cycle is expected, and will continue to be underpinned by employment and income growth, credit expansion and the maintenance of consumer confidence at high levels.
Without the seasonal adjustment, the rate stood 1.6 p.p. above the level registered in the same month of 2006, while the average installed capacity utilization rate in the year through November stood 1.8 p.p. above the observed in the same period of 2006, and 1.0 p.p. and 1.6 p.p. above the average rates registered in the same periods of 2004 and 2005, respectively.
The reduction of idle capacity occurs in several sectors, despite the significant increase of investment.
The most recent data indicate that although investment has been contributing to soften the trend of increasing capacity utilization rates, it has not been sufficient to stop this process.
Considering the recent behavior of capacity utilization rates, the timely maturation of investment projects will be crucial to avoid relevant mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and domestic demand in the relevant forecast period for monetary policy.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continued to present robust performance in 2007, despite the expected deceleration at the margin, in line with the evaluations present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes about important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade.
Regarding the external scenario, economic deceleration becomes more effective in the US, although high uncertainties still remain, particularly concerning its magnitude and duration.
Despite encouraging Q3 2007 US GDP figures, more recent data, particularly on labor market and consumption, as well as confidence indices and other leading indicators, point to significant slowdown.
Although uncertainties still remain about the length and amplitude of the effects of the US subprime mortgages market crisis over US and European financial institutions and, consequently, over credit conditions for households and corporate, the dominant opinion points out to a transitory deceleration.
This assessment reflects, to some extent, the expectation that the monetary policy stance implemented in the US, to which fiscal incentives can be added, will smooth the US economic weakening.
Prospects for economic growth in Europe and Japan have also deteriorated, despite not provoking the same degree of concerns that surround the US economic activity.
On the other hand, strong economic growth in main Asian emerging economies, which so far have been apparently little affected by the US mortgage crisis, have offset the effects of economic deceleration in mature economies.
In fact, pressures over production factors availability have triggered inflationary pressures and tight monetary cycles in many emerging economies.
For mature economies, prospects for monetary policy are more diverse.
Economies presenting more moderate inflationary pressures concerns and more evident credit contraction tend to present additional monetary policy easing.
On the other hand, in economies where inflation rates are above their respective targets, the scope for reaction to the contraction caused by the credit crisis seems more limited.
However, Brazilian economic activity does not seem to have been significantly impacted by the persistent deterioration on global financial markets confidence, and although not decoupled from external economic developments, should sustain its growth trajectory, essentially driven by domestic demand.
Oil prices, a systematic source of international uncertainty, remained at historically high levels, despite below the record high observed at the start of 2008, and also continued highly volatile.
This behavior reflects, in addition to structural changes in global energy markets, recurrent geopolitical tensions.
Despite significant uncertainties inherent to oil prices, the main scenario considered by the Copom forecasts unchanged domestic gasoline prices in 2008, as observed in However, apart from the trajectory of domestic gasoline prices, one should recognize that the elevation of international oil prices impacts the domestic economy, both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as by the deterioration of inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a 48bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008, under the benchmark scenario.
The swap rate trajectory points to a 50bps spread in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the intensity of demand expansion continues quite robust, being responsible at least partially for the inflationary pressures observed in the short-run, despite the imports growth and the benign investment behavior.
Even in the context of moderate deceleration of global growth this year and the higher volatility observed in global markets since mid-2007, the Committee believes that the prospects for Brazilian external financing in the forecast period suggest, according to newly available information, that the balance of payments should not represent imminent risk to the inflation scenario.
On the other hand, relevant inflationary pressures continue to be present both in mature and emerging economies, evidencing the existence of inflationary risks on the global outlook.
The Copom reaffirms the vision that, for the Brazilian inflation, an alternative scenario of more intense and generalized global deceleration would cause a risk factor of ambiguous signal.
On the one hand, decreasing net exports would act as a factor to restrain aggregate demand.
Moreover, the potential decrease of some important commodities prices could contribute to a lower domestic inflation.
On the other hand, the above-mentioned alternative scenario could unfavorably impact inflation prospects through two mechanisms.
In the case of deceleration in the mature economies that comprise the global financial markets center, risk aversion could increase, resulting in decreased demand for Brazilian assets and depreciation of their prices.
Moreover, in the medium run, a possible reduction of net exports could similarly affect the price sustainability of certain Brazilian assets.
Therefore, although inflation prospects remain in line with the targets trajectory, additional uncertainties surround the inflation path, and the risk of materialization of a less benign inflationary scenario increased.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of positive results reached in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that emerging local inflationary pressures will represent risks to the domestic inflation trajectory has increased, because the heated demand and market of factors, in addition to the possibility of existence of supply restrictions in some sectors, can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
The Committee understands that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the generalization of the local pressures initially focused on consumer price inflation, depend mostly on inflation expectations, which remain carefully monitored.
Additionally, although the external sector can restrain the inflationary pressures in the tradable sector, the heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector, for instance, such as in the services sector.
In this context, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as inflation expectations within the forecast period, discriminating between one-off and persistent or generalized price increases, and promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consolidation of a long-lasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception that has occurred in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, do not point to persistent imbalances.
The Committee emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
In the monetary easing cycle, started in September 2005, the Selic rate has already been reduced by 850 b.p., with the bulk of the reduction concentrated in the last nine months.
Consequently, neither has the activity level completely mirrored the effects of the interest rates cuts yet, nor have the effects of economic activity on inflation completely materialized.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, credit growth and real payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, activity level should also reflect the effects of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for the next quarters.
Consequently, the lagged remaining effects of interest rates cuts on an increasingly robust aggregate demand will add up to other factors that will continue to contribute on a significant way to this expansion.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated effects in the second half of 2008 and later.
The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
This factor, together with the external sector, has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be sustained, among other factors, by the remaining impulse derived from the monetary policy easing implemented until September 2007, continues to present risks to inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent reduction of the mismatch between the rhythm of expansion of supply of goods and services and demand is even more relevant to the assessment of different possibilities of monetary policy stance.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom adopts a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the lags in the transmission mechanisms and has been the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections, the balance of risks associated to the forward-looking scenario and especially the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
At the current moment, characterized by the deterioration in the balance of inflationary risks, prudence assumes an even more important role in this process.
The Copom evaluates that signals of economy heating and inflation expectations increase heightened the risks for the concretization of the benign inflationary scenario, in which inflation would remain consistent with the targets path, as reflected in the projections.
In this context, even considering that, at the moment, the maintenance of the basic interest rate is the most adequate decision, the Committee affirms that is ready to adopt a different stance, by adjusting the monetary policy instruments, in the case of consolidation of a divergent scenario between projected inflation and the targets path.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine price prospective dynamics and the balance of risks associated to its projections.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up economic activity dynamism, including sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as the monetary easing already implemented, are still not fully perceived.
The contribution of the external sector to a benign inflationary scenario, in light of robust domestic demand growth, seem to become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority must remain vigilant to avoid that short-term uncertainties contaminate longer time horizons.
If the risk profile deteriorates in a matter that implies shifts in the inflation basic prospective scenario, the Committee will promptly adjust monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
Similarly, fuel prices pressured the December IPCA, due to the increase in the price of alcohol.
The several IPCA core inflation measures increased in December, both on a month-on-month and on a year-over-year basis.
The remaining groups presented yearly changes below the IPC-Br average.
Retail sales performance reflects the continuity of payroll growth, better credit conditions, the impacts of social programs and the recovery of the agricultural sector.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, employment decreased by 319.4 thousand formal jobs in December.
In November, manufacturing employment stayed unchanged month-on-month, according to CNI data seasonally adjusted by the BCB.
The average tenure of credit operations for individuals reached 440 days in December, compared to 368 in the same month of the previous year.
The average tenure of personal credit operations totaled 460 days, an 88day extension relative to December 2006, reflecting the increasing share of payroll-deducted contracts.
In addition, it bears emphasizing the elevation of the twelve-month trailing average tenure of vehicles and real estate financing acquisition operations, to 593 from 540 days and to 2199 from 1562 days, respectively.
Risks of global economic deceleration are increasing, reinforced by the downward revisions for 2008 global growth.
Since the middle of 2007, inflationary pressures stemming from food and energy prices have increased.
In addition, central banks of emerging economies, which remain resistant to the financial crisis spillovers, started to interrupt or revert the monetary easing policy.
In 2007, Brazilian external trade continued the ongoing expansion, and reached record highs both in exports and in imports.
In the period between the December and January Copom meetings, the future interest rates increased, especially in medium and longer terms.
This movement was driven by the release of above-than-expected data for inflation and activity; the increase of inflation expectations; as well as the non-prorrogation of CPMF, which created uncertainties regarding the fulfillment of the fiscal targets.
In the external scenario, significant losses of financial institutions, still related to the US subprime mortgage market crisis and the increasing concern of recession in the US economy, despite the release of incentive fiscal measures, provoked strong falls in the stock markets and heightened risk aversion.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates increased 0.51 p.p., 0.88 p.p. and 0.82 p.p., respectively.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 30 borrowing and two lending overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures up to two working days.
