The three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB have evolved in line with the headline index, notwithstanding the non-uniform characteristic.
On the other hand, the smoothed and non-smoothed trimmed means core inflation have shown relative stability, under this criterion, in the last months.
As a consequence, all core inflation measures stand above the central value for the inflation target.
Moreover, it bears emphasizing that the behavior of the IPCA diffusion index, whose average is the highest recorded since 2004, continues to suggest dissemination of the inflationary process, confirming the analysis present in previous Copom Minutes.
It also bears highlighting the continuity of upward pressures over wholesale industrial prices, a process that began in the second half of 2007 and does not show consistent signs of accommodation.
The data already released for the last months point, in short, to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, despite some accommodation at the margin may occur, due to restrictions to supply expansion in some sectors, as well as to the effects of the monetary policy change in Brazil and to the deceleration of external demand.
The recovery of the capital goods production in June and July more than offset the strong fall occurred in May, evidencing the strength of this segment, which has been mainly a result of the consolidation of favorable prospects for the continuity of macroeconomic stability.
On its turn, the expansion of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, credit conditions, which remain more favorable than historical patterns.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
In addition to the process of formalization in the labor market, these data evidence the strong dynamism in labor force demand.
In line with the positive developments in the labor market and with credit expansion, retail sales still continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
The steady growth of retail sales has, therefore, reflected the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expansion cycle of retail sales is expected, favored by the increase in fiscal transfers, employment and income growth, credit expansion and the maintenance of consumer confidence at high levels.
Notwithstanding, as time goes by, the change in the monetary policy stance will be relevant to restrain the retail sales expansion pace.
The maintenance of installed capacity utilization rates at historically high levels occurs in several sectors despite investments occurred in the sector in the last twelve months.
In fact, recent data about the absorption of capital goods still dont allow the conclusion of inflexion in the investment expansion trend.
In short, evidences suggest that, although investment has been importantly contributing to soften the increasing trend of capacity utilization rates, the maturation of investment projects has not been sufficient, so far, to significantly limit the existing mismatches regarding the evolution of supply and domestic demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to register deceleration at the margin, a trend that has already been expected, and which is in line with assessments present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes.
As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, imports have been growing faster than exports, both due to the strengthening of the BRL and to the robust expansion of domestic absorption, notwithstanding the elevated price levels of several commodities included in the Brazilian export basket.
Regarding the external scenario, the global economy still shows divergent pressures, with more evident signs of deceleration and still high inflation rates.
The prevailing interpretation still points to the expansion, at a moderate pace, of economic activity in 2008 and 2009, but data released in the last few weeks indicate a more intense cooling of activity in mature economies, mainly in the Euro area, the United Kingdom and Japan, while signs of economic activity deterioration also appeared in the US, despite the fiscal and monetary stimuli previously adopted.
The secondary effects derived from the increase in raw materials prices, and the pressures of heated demand over supply expansion capability, which are particularly evident in emerging economies, have sustained current inflation rates at high levels, with significant consequences, in several cases, over inflation expectations.
Furthermore, a severe financial crisis in the USA and, to a minor extent, in Europe, must be added to this adverse scenario.
In this context, although the presence of inflationary pressures has been a concern for an important number of monetary authorities, their policy reactions have been heterogeneous, and this situation tends to persist.
The US economy, specifically, started to decelerate in the last quarter of 2007 and it still continues to suffer the impacts of the housing sector crisis, with spillover effects on the labor market, whose weakening, together with the increase in the prices of oil by-products, has reduced consumers confidence, significantly contributing for depressing expenditure.
Although fiscal and monetary stimuli have limited the risks of a deeper activity contraction, the dominant expectation still indicates a more consistent recovery only from 2009 on.
Even after an important reinforcement of the capital base of significant financial institutions, uncertainties about the extension and length of the US mortgage crisis developments over the local and European banking systems still prevail, as well as about the impacts over the credit availability for business and households in those regions.
Systemic risk perception is still high, as financial problems have aggravated due to a cyclical deterioration in credit quality, which tends to tighten financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of more intense economic deceleration.
In this context, US government intervention in large mortgage companies can be seen as a necessary condition, although probably insufficient to overcome such crisis.
Most common opinion among analysts indicates that activity in Europe and Japan should decelerate throughout the second half of In developed economies, therefore, prospects for the adoption of tightening policies seem limited; on the other hand, although showing some moderation at the margin, emerging countries growth remains strong and, up to now, was apparently little affected by the mortgage crisis in the US, partially counterbalancing the activity deceleration in mature economies.
In fact, due to the pressure over the availability of production factors, the inflation elevation pointed to the maintenance of monetary tightening policies in several emerging economies.
Nevertheless, policies aiming at the reduction of external vulnerability of Brazilian economy have been successful, contributing to reduce, though not eliminate, the effects of the external environment on local economic activity, which has been driven essentially by domestic demand.
Future markets and the consensus among analysts suggest that oil prices could stabilize around current levels.
However, uncertainty concerning these evaluations is remarkably high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging countries, on the supplys reaction to stimuli derived from previous changes on relative prices, besides geopolitical issues that affect oil prices.
Nonetheless, despite the great uncertainty regarding oil prices trajectory, the main scenario adopted by the Copom, which assumes unchanged gasoline prices in 2008, remains plausible.
However, it bears highlighting that, no matter the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, international oil prices at historically high levels affect domestic prices both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as by the deterioration they may cause on economic agents inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, on the benchmark scenario, based on the 360day swap rates estimates a 173 bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008 and 106 bps in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion continues quite robust, and it is at least partially responsible for the inflationary acceleration observed since the end of 2007, despite strong imports growth and the favorable investment performance.
In general terms, the influence of the external scenario on the future trajectory of Brazilian inflation continues to be subject to contradictory effects and surrounded by significant uncertainties.
On the one hand, the prospects of more pronounced deceleration of global activity in the upcoming months, which are apparently consolidating, point to an accommodation of both commodities prices and external demand, and can also influence local financial conditions.
On the other hand, the cooling trend has caused an increase in risk aversion, impacting the demand for Brazilian assets, and consequently, depreciating their prices.
In this scenario, the additional reduction of net exports can occur, with similar effects over the behavior in the prices of certain Brazilian assets.
Moreover, the recent trajectory of price indices still evidences the existence of mismatches between the supply and demand growth, and consequently, of significant inflationary risks, in several economies, even though the intensity is now probably lower than in the middle of last year.
In light of the deterioration of inflation prospects occurred in the last months, in a more uncertain environment, the Committee evaluates that the risk of materialization of a less benign scenario is still high.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years.
Particularly, monetary policy should act so that initially limited impacts on price indices, partially derived from relative prices adjustments that occur in global scale, do not cause persistent deterioration of inflation dynamics due to the worsening of expectations.
The Copom thinks that the maintenance of monetary stability is an essential condition for the relative prices system to continue efficiently signaling the necessary adjustments on current consumption and production patterns of the economy.
The Copom considers that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures represent risks to domestic inflation trajectory continues to be high, as the heating of domestic demand and market of factors, as well as the possibility of emergence of supply restrictions in some sectors, may increase the pass-through of wholesale prices to consumer price inflation.
The Committee evaluates that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the propagation of initially localized pressures to consumer prices, depend in a critical manner on inflation expectations, which remain in levels incompatible with the inflation target path and continue to be carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth highlighting that although the external sector exerts some discipline on tradable goods inflation, imports prices have hiked in a strong manner.
Furthermore, heated domestic demand may trigger more intense inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector - in services prices, for instance.
In this context, the Copom will act aiming to ensure that inflation control gains achieved in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Committee will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as of inflation expectations within the forecast period, and will be prepared to promptly adjust the monetary policy stance in order to avoid the consolidation of a scenario in which one-off price adjustments become persistent or generalized.
The maintenance of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longterm stable macroeconomic environment will contribute for the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception.
The Copom thinks that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability, even in light of global inflationary pressures, that inflation in Brazil will evolve according to the targets path in For this higher probability to continue to materialize, however, it is necessary that forward-looking inflation indicators, particularly the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, converge throughout the relevant period for the monetary policy.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
During the coming months, credit growth, despite the more moderate pace due to an increase in funding costs, and real payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
The effects of governmental transfers expected for this and the next quarters should also add up to the factors that will sustain demand.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated domestic demand, the dissemination of pressures stemming from adjustments in relative prices, also over the labor market, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
Moreover, it bears noticing that the accommodation of commodities prices, whose more consistent evidence appeared in the last weeks, could contribute to avoid that inflationary pressures intensify even more.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be underpinned, among other factors, by income and credit growth, continues to present significant risks to the inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent and prompt reduction of the mismatch between the expansion of supply of goods and services and the increase of demand continues to be vital to the assessment of different possibilities of monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to higher risk premium, shorter planning horizons and, as a consequence, to the reduction of potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, in the current circumstances, there is the risk that economic agents start to attribute higher probability that inflation increases will become persistent, which would reduce the efficacy of the monetary policy.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the economy heating signals and the behavior of inflation expectations, the risks for the materialization of a benign inflationary scenario, in which IPCA would resume the evolution in line with the targets path, are relevant.
In fact, the deterioration of the forward-looking scenario is still present in the inflation projections considered by the Committee.
The Copom also considers that the persistence of significant mismatch between the paces of expansion of aggregate supply and demand continues to represent risk for the inflationary dynamics.
Under these circumstances, monetary policy should continue to act through the adjustment of the basic interest rate, while the balance of risks to the inflationary dynamics requires.
This adjustment aims, on the one hand, to reduce such mismatch and, on the other hand, to avoid that inflationary pressures initially localized over price indices lead to persistent deterioration of expectations and of the inflation forward-looking scenario.
Such scenario would have potential contractionary impacts, also through financial deleverage consequences over credit conditions, which would add up to the lagged effects of monetary policy over the countrys economic activity, with implications for the projected inflation scenario.
Indeed, those Copom members understood to be more appropriate, at this early time, to raise the basic interest rate by 50 b.p.
Most Committee members, however, currently understand that in spite of the deterioration on the global economic growth prospects, the risks to the materialization of a benign inflation scenario in the country have not presented enough improvement yet.
In particular, those members understand that up to now there is not enough evidence of reduction of mismatch between the demand and supply expansion rhythms, as perceived by the intense use of productive factors, and that the expectations anchorage to the target path still needed to be reinforced.
In such context, those Committee members understood to be more appropriate to raise the basic rate by 75 b.p.
Five votes were for the monetary policy action, while three votes were in favor of elevating the Selic rate by 50 b.p.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to the projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking prices dynamics, as well as the balance of risks associated to their projections.
Domestic demand has continued to expand strongly and supports the economic activity dynamics, including sectors less exposed to external competition, when the effects of stimuli factors, such as income growth, are still acting over the Brazilian economy.
On its turn, the external sector contribution to a favorable inflationary scenario, in light of the strong rhythm of domestic demand expansion, of global inflationary pressures, as well as depreciation in the prices of Brazilian assets, have become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over the productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority should act in order to avoid that the higher uncertainty detected in short-term horizons disseminate to longer-term horizons.
Evidently, if the risk profile changes in a matter that implies shifts in the basic inflation prospective scenario considered at the present moment, the Committee will promptly adjust the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
Those variations mainly reflected the normalization of imports procedures after the interruption of the services during part of the second quarter of the year.
Seventeen out of the twenty-seven activities surveyed recorded production increase in July.
The indicator stood 0.9 p.p. above the level registered in the same month of 2007, reflecting the elevations of 1.4 p.p. in the IE and 0.4 p.p. in the ISA.
Out of the items related to the current situation, demand level, mainly domestic, and current situation of business continue to present favorable evaluation.
Businessmen keep confident about increasing production in the quarter ended in October.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 203.2 thousand new formal jobs were created in July 2008, totaling 1,564.6 thousand new jobs in the year.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 299 days, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 467 days.
External Environment In the international outlook, the concerns regarding inflation and global demand deceleration are increasing, specially, the smaller growth of industrialized economies.
Emerging economies maintain robust growth, specially the Asian economies, although they record activity level cooling, compared to the high expansion rates recorded in Moreover, it cannot be discarded greater economic activity cooling in these countries, in case the global economic deceleration is more intense and persistent.
Regarding inflation, the recent fall of commodities prices, including oil prices, can provoke the accommodation of prices at a lower level in the middle run.
However, available data confirm that the annual inflation levels remain high and the risks to inflation are greater in the short run, in face of the possibility of pass-trough of this trend to wages and expectations.
The international financial market turmoil remains, although with less intensity.
The strong commitment of important central banks to provide the necessary liquidity to the good run of the interbank market, as well as the prospect that significant part of the losses has been already registered by the financial institutions, have been fundamental for the recent performance of financial market.
The deceleration observed in several current inflation indices and the fall in the prices of commodities also contributed to decrease the longer terms yield curve.
However, since the beginning of September, the decrease movement of longer terms yield curve was partially reverted by the worsening of the external outlook, with the dollar appreciation and the increase of risk aversion as a result of the fear of global economy deceleration.
Between July 21 and September 8, one-, three-, and six-month rates increased by 83 bps, 78 bps and 61 bps, respectively.
Moreover, two- and three-year rates fell by 57 bps, and 69 bps, respectively.
In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, from July 22 to September 8, weekly five- and sevenmonth fixed rate repo operations, borrowing.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 35 overnight repo operations, borrowing.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
