As a consequence, all core inflation measures stand above the central value for the inflation target.
Moreover, it bears emphasizing that the behavior of the IPCA diffusion index, whose average is the highest recorded since 2004, continues to suggest dissemination of the inflationary process relatively disseminated, confirming the analysis present in previous Copom Minutes.
It also bears highlighting the continuity of upward pressures over wholesale industrial prices, a process that began in the second half of 2007 and does not show consistent signs of accommodation.
The data already released for the last months point, in short, to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, despite some accommodation at the margin may occur, due to restrictions to supply expansion in some sectors, as well as to the effects of the monetary policy change in Brazil and to the international financial turmoil.
The strength of capital goods production until August has reflected the consolidation of favorable prospects for the continuity of macroeconomic stability.
On its turn, the expansion of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, credit conditions, which remained, until recently, more favorable than historical patterns.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
The steady growth of retail sales had been reflecting, in short, the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be favored by fiscal transfers, as well as by employment and income growth, but it also will be affected, in case of persistence, by the changes in the access to credit supply, which cannot be fully associated to the monetary policy stance, and by the deterioration of consumer confidence.
In fact, recent data about the absorption of capital goods was still inconclusive about an inflexion in the investment expansion trend.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to register deceleration at the margin, an already anticipated trend, and which is in line with assessments present in previous Inflation Reports and Copom Minutes.
The increased risk aversion, observed since mid-September, after the bankruptcy of an important US financial institution, led the authorities in the US, Europe and Oceania to intervene in an unprecedentedly way in their financial systems, using wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in money markets.
Although systemic risk perception is still high, such initiatives, accompanied by programs to reinforce the capital base of relevant financial institutions, seem to have managed to restore the functioning of the interbank markets.
The international liquidity contraction contributed to a deleverage process by asset managers, which in turn has been pressuring down the prices of financial assets.
In the environment of increased risk aversion and shortage of capital flows, pressures on emerging economies currencies have intensified.
In this context, the recent announcement of the currency swap agreements between the US Federal Reserve and the Central Bank of Brazil, as well as with the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the Bank of Korea and the Bank of Mexico, should contribute to mitigate - without, however eliminate - the impacts of international financial turmoil on emerging markets.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, the contraction trends seem to be gradually prevailing over the inflationary pressures, which, however, are still present.
The dominant view still points to the expansion, at a moderate pace, of global economic activity in 2008 and 2009, but data released in the last weeks indicate a more intense and generalized cooling of activity in mature economies.
There are evidences that the deeper weakening of economic activity in Europe and parts of Asia was predominantly due to the negative shock in the terms of trade caused by the elevation of commodities prices, which could be reversing.
On the other hand, the problems in the financial system have been aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in credit quality, which may reinforce the contraction in financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of intensification of deceleration.
The US economy, specifically, started to decelerate in the last quarter of 2007 and it still continues to suffer the impacts of the housing sector crisis, with spillover effects on the labor market, whose weakening, together with the negative wealth effect associated to the fall in the prices of financial assets, has affected the consumers confidence, significantly contributing for depressing expenditure.
The prevailing interpretation is that the activity in Europe and Japan may continue to lose dynamism in the next months.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity is decelerating considerably, inflationary pressures have reduced relatively fast.
On the other hand, in emerging economies, where the secondary effects of raw materials price increases over consumer prices and the heated demand pressures over the supply expansion capacity had been more intense, the inflationary pressures have been more persistent.
In this context, the monetary policy stance is mainly expansionist in mature economies, whereas in emerging economies, which have been affected by the exchange rate depreciation trend, in addition to the facts mentioned above, the situation seems to be more heterogeneous.
Future markets have followed the prices of oil in the spot market.
However, uncertainty concerning oil prices is remarkably high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging countries, on the supplys reaction to stimuli derived from previous changes on relative prices, in addition to geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the great uncertainty inherent to the projections of oil prices trajectory, the main scenario adopted by the Copom, which assumes unchanged gasoline prices in 2008, remains plausible.
However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the reduction of international oil prices can affect domestic prices both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, on the benchmark scenario, based on the 360day swap rates estimates a 147 bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008 and 85 bps in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion continues quite robust, and it is at least partially responsible for the inflationary acceleration trend, despite strong imports growth and the favorable investment performance.
Additionally, the increase in risk aversion and the unprecedentedly constraints observed in liquidity conditions in the international markets impose some adjustment in the balance of payments which, despite the increase in Brazilian economy external resilience, can increase the inflationary pressures, especially in the short run.
In general terms, the influence of the external scenario on the future trajectory of Brazilian inflation continues to be subject to contradictory effects, which can act with distinct intensity throughout time and surrounded by significant uncertainties.
On the one hand, more generalized deceleration of global economic activity in the upcoming quarters points to an accommodation of both commodities prices and external demand, therefore influencing negatively the local financial conditions.
On the other hand, the trend of economic cooling has caused an increase in risk aversion, impacting the demand for Brazilian assets, and consequently, depreciating their prices.
In this scenario, the additional reduction of net exports can occur, with similar effects over the behavior in the prices of certain Brazilian assets.
Moreover, the recent trajectory of price indices still evidences the existence of significant inflationary risks, in several economies, despite the remarkably lower intensity compared to the middle of In light of the deterioration of inflation prospects occurred in the last months, in a more uncertain environment, the Committee evaluates that the risk of materialization of a less benign scenario is still high.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years.
Particularly, monetary policy should act so that initially limited impacts on price indices do not cause persistent deterioration of inflation dynamics due to the worsening of expectations.
The Copom reaffirms that is still high the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risks to domestic inflation trajectory.
The heating of domestic demand and markets of factors, despite under higher uncertainty, as well as the possibility of emergence of supply restrictions in some sectors, may facilitate the passthrough of wholesale prices to consumer price inflation.
The Committee evaluates that the materialization of this pass-through and the generalization of pressures initially localized on consumer price indices depend critically on inflation expectations, which remain in levels incompatible with the inflation targets path and continue to be carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth pointing that although the external sector had been imposing some discipline on tradable goods inflation, the heating of domestic demand has pressured the prices of non-tradable items, as services.
In this context, the Copom will act to ensure the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
Doing so, the Copom will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as of inflation expectations within the forecast period, being ready to promptly adjust the monetary policy stance in order to avoid the consolidation of a scenario in which one-off price readjustments become persistent or generalized.
The maintenance of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longterm stable macroeconomic environment will contribute for the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception.
The Copom thinks that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance is essential to increase the probability that inflation in Brazil evolves once again according to the targets path in For this higher probability to continue to materialize, however, it is necessary that forward-looking inflation indicators, particularly the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, converge throughout the relevant period for the monetary policy.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
This viewpoint is even more important in periods of higher uncertainty.
In particular, the effects of the international crisis on the domestic financial conditions indicate that the contribution of credit to support domestic demand may decline more intensively than the magnitude of what would happen exclusively by the monetary policy effects.
Additionally, the intensification of international crisis seems to have caused a negative effect on consumers and businesses confidence.
If this situation persists, the strength of economic activity would increasingly depend on real payroll expansion and the effects of governmental transfers expected for this and the next quarters.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the signs of still heated domestic demand at the end of the third quarter, the dissemination of pressures derived from relative prices adjustments, including the labor market, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
Moreover, it bears noticing that the accommodation of commodities prices, whose consistent signs emerged last weeks, could contribute to avoid even more intense inflationary pressures.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion continues to present important risks to the inflationary dynamics, to which may be added, particularly in the short run, the risks derived from the trajectory of Brazilian assets prices, in a process of decreasing external funding.
In this context, the prompt and consistent reduction of the mismatch between the growth of aggregate demand and supply of goods and services continues to be crucial to the assessment of different possibilities for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to higher risk premium, to shorter planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, in the current circumstances, there is the risk that economic agents start to attribute higher probability that inflation acceleration become persistent, reducing the efficacy of monetary policy.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the economic heating signs regarding, for instance, labor market available data and the industry capacity utilization rates, and the behavior of inflation expectations, the risks for the materialization of a benign inflation scenario, in which IPCA would resume evolution in line with the targets path, continue relevant.
Indeed, an unfavorable forward-looking scenario is still present in the inflation projections considered by the Committee.
The Copom also thinks that the persistence of a significant mismatch between the growth paces of aggregate supply and demand continues to represent risk for the inflationary dynamics, but evaluates that the expected trajectories of domestic consumption and investment have become more uncertain.
Under these circumstances, monetary policy should act according to the requirements of the balance of risks of the inflationary dynamics, through the adjustment of the basic interest rate, although not necessarily in a continuous way, aiming, on the one hand, to reduce that mismatch and, on the other hand, to avoid that inflationary pressures initially restricted to some prices indices lead to a persistent deterioration of expectations and of the inflation forward-looking scenario.
Finally, the Committee thinks that the consolidation of more restrictive financial conditions could intensify the effects of monetary policy over aggregate demand and, throughout time, over inflation.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to the projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forwardlooking prices dynamics and the balance of risks associated to their projections.
Domestic demand continues to increase vigorously, supporting the economic activity strength, including sectors less exposed to external competition, at a moment when the effects of stimuli factors, such as income growth, are still influencing the Brazilian economy.
In addition, the contribution of the external sector to a favorable inflationary scenario, in light of the strong depreciation in the prices of Brazilian assets and the apparent reduction in the countrys capacity to import, has become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment on the economys productive potential still need to consolidate.
In this context, the monetary policy should act so to bring inflation back to the targets path already in 2009, in order to avoid that the higher uncertainty detected in shorter-term horizons disseminate to longer-term periods.
IPCA core inflation indices increased in the last twelve months through September, while the core inflation by exclusion and the smoothed trimmed means core inflation measures accelerated over the same period.
The milder variation of IPC-Br in September reflected the persistent decrease in the prices of food and beverages and deceleration in the prices of the remaining components of the index, except for clothing.
The September IPA result reflected the less sharpen fall in agricultural prices, while industrial prices showed deceleration.
Partial indexes on October inflation show acceleration relative to September results for both wholesale and consumer price inflation.
As for wholesale, according to IGP-M results for the second ten-day period of October, agricultural and industrial prices indicate stronger growth than on the previous month.
According to these two comparison basis, there was generalized growth in all segments, with highlights for office material and equipment; other personal and domestic outlays; and furniture and home appliances.
The indicator stood 2.3 p.p. below the level registered in the same month of 2007, reflecting the retractions of 3.2 p.p. in the ISA and 1.3 p.p. in the IE.
Among the components related to the Current Situation, the levels of both global demand and current business situation remained high.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 282.8 thousand new formal jobs were created in September 2008, a record high for the historical series for any period, considering month-on-month, year-to-date or twelve-month periods.
In the first nine months of the year, employment reached 2,086.6 thousand new jobs.
Compared to September 2007, unemployment declined 1.4 p.p.
The survey also showed that the number of unemployed remained stable in the six main metropolitan regions.
External Environment After Lehman Brothers declared insolvent, instability increased in the international financial markets, once risk aversion and lack of liquidity affected more decisively real economy funding, mainly in the US.
The financial crisis assumed more generalized aspect world wide, spreading geographically.
Credit channels were obstructed by uncertainty and liquidity and solvency problems that emerged subsequently.
In addition to that, the exchange rate depreciation movement, simultaneous in various economies, found international trade in contraction, or, in the best hypothesis, in a situation of important deceleration.
Due to the deterioration of the international financial crisis and the widening of global recession risk, governments and central banks of developed economies committed themselves to an aggressive movement in defense of the soundness of their respective financial systems.
In this sense, they increased the deposits guarantees, expanding the government guarantees on interbank operations and committed to support all the banks considered systemically important, even encompassing capitalization.
In Europe, rescue plans aiming to recapitalize banks and defreeze the credit market are being approved.
It is important to highlight that the resources will be provided from each respective countrys budget and there isnt forecast of creation of any single fund.
Regarding single measures, only uniformed intervention rules were adopted, which intend to avoid distortions in the regional banking market.
Recent data point to the reduction of inflationary pressures in the global economy.
With the substantial fall in the prices of oil and agricultural commodities, and the increase of unemployment, the inflationary process already records turning points in the majority of mature economies.
In the US, this behavior is intensified by the dollar appreciation.
In China, despite the increase in domestic energy prices, inflation cooling is confirmed.
The period was characterized by high volatility and increased risk aversion in the international markets, as a result of the development of the financial crises in the US and in Europe and of the fear of global economy deceleration.
The risk aversion boosted the generalized reduction of the leveraged positions in several markets, generating high losses in the international stock exchanges and the dollar appreciation.
Under this scenario, the future interest rate in domestic markets recorded sharp increase, intensified by the BRL depreciation against the dollar.
Between September 8 and October 27, one-, three-, and six-month rates increased by 47 bps, 38 bps and 72 bps, respectively.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates increased by 146 bps, 268 bps, and 359 bps, respectively.
From October 6, the BCB offered traditional FX swap auctions on a daily basis, in which assumes a long position in domestic interest rate and a short position in FX.
In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, from September 9 to October 27, weekly five- and seven-month fixed rate repo operations, borrowing.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 36 overnight repo operations, borrowing.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
