It bears emphasizing the acceleration of industrial prices, which began in the second half of 2007 and seems to have intensified lately.
The scenario of solid expansion of capital goods production observed in 2007, mainly driven by the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of economic growth, underpinned by the perception of macroeconomic stability consolidation, seems to persist in this year.
On its turn, the dynamism of durable consumer goods production reflects, predominantly, the remarkable improvement in credit conditions, when compared to historical patterns.
It should be highlighted that the appearance of signs pointing to pressure over the availability of production factors, as suggested in some industrial surveys, indicates that possible reductions in the pace of industrial activity expansion could be associated to productive capacity restrictions.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
The retail sector recorded 13.8 thousand new jobs.
The agricultural sector created 25.2 thousand new jobs, a record high for the period, due to the activities related to sugar cane plantations in the Mid-South region and to the soybean plantations.
In line with the positive developments in labor market and with credit expansion, retail sales continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
The steady growth of retail sales has reflected the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expanding cycle is expected, and will continue to be underpinned by employment and income growth, credit expansion and the maintenance of consumer confidence at high levels.
Sector indicators, for example, relative to automobile sales in the first quarter of the year, corroborate this assessment.
The reduction of idle capacity, in relation to the margins usually observed, occurs in several sectors despite the significant increase of investment.
Recent data indicate that, although investment has been contributing to soften the increasing trend of capacity utilization rates, it has not been sufficient to contain this process.
In this context, the timely maturation of investment projects will be crucial to limit mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and domestic demand in the relevant forecast period for monetary policy.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to present robust performance, compared to historical patterns, despite the already expected deceleration at the margin, in line with assessments present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes about important structural changes in Brazilian foreign trade.
As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, imports have been growing faster than exports, both due to the strengthening of the BRL and to the robust economic activity in the country, despite the increases in the prices of several commodities included in the Brazilian export basket.
Regarding the external scenario, the process of economic deceleration in the US has consolidated, as evidenced by the economic activity data in the last quarter of 2007 and first quarter of 2008, but uncertainties regarding its magnitude and duration still remain.
More recent data about the housing market and consumer goods demand, as well as confidence indices and other leading indicators, point to a significant slowdown.
Uncertainties still remain about the length and amplitude of the effects of the US subprime mortgages market crisis over US and European financial institutions and over credit conditions for households and corporate.
Despite the dominant opinion still seems to point out to a transitory, but possibly intense deceleration, the negative assessments have become more disseminated.
These assessments reflect, to some extent, uncertainties about the capacity of the monetary policy stance implemented by the central bank in the US, to which fiscal incentives will be added, to smooth in a timely manner the US economic weakening, in light of persistent difficulties in the financial system.
Despite the reduction of systemic risk perception, due to the Federal Reserve stance and the recapitalization of important institutions, such difficulties, on their turn, could be worsened by a cyclic deterioration in credit quality, which would reinforce the already evident trend to financial contraction, increasing the risk of slowdown intensification.
Prospects for economic activity in Europe and Japan, notwithstanding some favorable indicators in Germany, have also deteriorated, despite not provoking the same degree of concerns that surround the US economic activity.
On the other hand, strong economic growth in main Asian emerging economies, which so far have been apparently little affected by the US mortgage crisis, has offset the effects of economic deceleration in mature economies.
In fact, pressures over production factors availability have triggered inflationary pressures in many emerging economies, many of which are consequently in the midst of monetary tightening cycles.
For mature economies, prospects for monetary policy are more diverse.
Economies presenting more moderate inflationary pressures and more evident credit contraction tend to present additional monetary policy easing.
On the other hand, in economies where inflation rates are at high levels relative to their respective targets, the scope for reaction to the contraction caused by the credit crisis seems more limited.
Even if the prices of Brazilian assets present, at different magnitudes, sensitivity to the international scenario, Brazilian economic activity does not seem to have been significantly impacted by the persistent deterioration on global financial markets confidence, and, despite not decoupled from external economic developments, Brazilian economy should sustain its growth trajectory, essentially driven by domestic demand.
This behavior reflects structural changes in global energy markets, which have blocked the recovery of inventory levels traditionally observed, in addition to recurrent geopolitical tensions.
Despite significant uncertainties inherent to oil prices forecasts, the main scenario considered by the Copom forecasts unchanged domestic gasoline prices in 2008, despite the probability of materialization of an alternative scenario has increased.
However, apart from the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, one should recognize that the elevation of international oil prices impacts domestic economy both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the deterioration of inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the 360-day swap rates replacing the model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a 83bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008, under the benchmark scenario.
The swap rate trajectory points to a 55bps spread in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the intensity of demand expansion continues quite robust, showing acceleration in some segments and regions in the first quarter of 2008, and is responsible, at least partially, for the inflationary pressures observed in the short-run, despite strong imports growth and the benign investment behavior.
Even in the context of moderate deceleration of global growth this year and the higher volatility observed in global markets since mid-2007, the Committee believes, according to available information, that the balance of payments should not represent imminent risk to the inflationary scenario.
On the other hand, there are signs that relevant inflationary pressures are intensifying both in mature and emerging economies, evidencing the existence of inflationary risks on the global outlook.
The Copom reaffirms the view, stated in previous minutes, that an alternative scenario of more intense and generalized global deceleration represents an ambiguous risk factor for the Brazilian inflation.
On the one hand, by reducing net exports it would act as a factor to restrain aggregate demand.
Moreover, the potential decrease of some important commodities prices could contribute to a lower domestic inflation.
On the other hand, the above-mentioned alternative scenario could unfavorably impact inflation prospects through two mechanisms.
In the case of deceleration in the mature economies that comprise the global financial markets center, risk aversion could increase, resulting in decreased demand for Brazilian assets and depreciation of their prices.
In addition, in the medium run, a possible reduction of net exports could similarly affect the price sustainability of certain Brazilian assets.
Due to the deterioration of inflation prospects, in a more uncertain scenario, the Committee evaluates that the risk of materialization of a less benign inflationary scenario increased.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of positive results reached in the last years.
Particularly, monetary policy should act so that impacts initially focused on price indices do not result in persistent deterioration of inflation dynamics through a worsening in expectations.
The Copom considers that the probability that emerging local inflationary pressures will represent risks to the domestic inflation trajectory has increased, because the heated demand and market of factors, in addition to the possibility of existence of supply restrictions in some sectors, can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
The Committee understands that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the generalization of the local pressures initially focused on consumer price inflation, depend in a critical manner on inflation expectations, which increased significantly in the recent weeks, and continue to be carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that although the external sector can restrain the inflationary pressures in the tradable sector, heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector, for instance, such as in the services sector.
In this context, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will continue to carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as inflation expectations within the forecast period, promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance in order to avoid the consolidation of a scenario where one-off adjustments become persistent or generalized price increases.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longlasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the continuous progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception that has occurred in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, converge during the relevant time for monetary policy.
The Committee emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, credit growth and real payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, the effects of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for this and the next quarters should also add up to the factors that will sustain demand.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated effects in the second half of 2008 and in The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
This factor, together with the external sector, has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures, which would be even more intense in their absence.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be sustained, among other factors, by fiscal transfers and by income and credit growth, continues to present risks to inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent reduction of the mismatch between the rhythm of expansion of supply of goods and services and the increase of demand is even more relevant to the assessment of different possibilities of monetary policy stance.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom adopts a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the time lags in the transmission mechanisms and has proved to be the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections, the balance of risks associated to the forward-looking scenario and especially the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
At the current moment, characterized by the deterioration in current and expected inflationary dynamics, prudence assumes an even more important role in this process.
In the current circumstances, there is the risk is that economic agents start to attribute higher probability that inflation increases will become persistent, which would reduce the efficacy of the monetary policy.
Therefore, the Copoms assessment, backed by international experience, is that the performance of monetary policy tends to be more effective to reach their goals more quickly, when the deterioration of inflationary dynamics is in its early stages, rather than when it is consolidated.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of signals of economy heating, as illustrated by the acceleration of some wholesale prices and the evolution of core inflation measures, and by the fast increase in inflation expectations, the risks for the concretization of a benign inflationary scenario, in which IPCA would remain consistent with the targets path, are relevant.
In fact, the deterioration of the forward-looking scenario is already present in the Committees inflation projections.
The Copom also considers that the persistence of the mismatch between the paces of expansion of aggregate supply and demand tends to increase the probability of such scenario to materialize.
In these circumstances, monetary policy should act through the adjustment of the basic interest rate in order to, on the one hand, contribute to the convergence between the paces of expansion of aggregate supply and demand, and on the other hand, avoid that inflationary pressures initially focused on price indices lead to persistent deterioration of expectations and of the inflation forward-looking scenario.
By remaining ready to act as the balance of risks to inflation dynamics so requests, the Committee believes that it is, in fact, helping to sustain economic growth, which requires stability, predictability and consequent extension of the planning horizon for businesses and families, as well as to protect the substantial increases in real income of workers observed in recent years.
The Committee understands that the decision to promptly implement significant part of the adjustment in the basic interest rate will contribute to the timely reduction in the risks for the inflation scenario, reducing, therefore, the magnitude of the total adjustment to be implemented.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prospective price dynamics and the balance of risks associated to its projections.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up economic activity dynamism, including sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors are still perceived.
On its turn, the contribution of the external sector to a benign inflationary scenario, in light of robust domestic demand growth, seems to become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority should act so that to avoid that short-term uncertainties contaminate longer time horizons.
If the risk profile deteriorates in a matter that implies shifts in the basic inflation prospective scenario, the Committee will promptly adjust monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
Trimmed means core inflation measures accelerated and, for seasonal reasons, the core excluding household food and regulated prices decelerated in March, while on a twelve-month trailing basis the three measures increased, compared to February.
The three index components accelerated in the month, with highlights to food prices, both at wholesale and consumer levels.
At the wholesale level, both agricultural and industrial prices increased in March, highlighting the elevations in the prices of tomato, composed fertilizers, bovines, iron ore, in natura milk, while soybean, manioc, coffee, corn and poultry were the main negative drivers.
According to the same comparison basis, expected employment and output both increased eleven points, showing the continuation of favorable expectations of businessmen for the near future.
Nuci also grew 1.4 p.p.
According to the same firms, the current level of the domestic demand and the expected returns of new investments were the key drivers for investment decisions.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 205 thousand new formal jobs were created in February 2008, totaling 347.9 thousand year-to-date, a record high for the month and for the two-month period.
The average tenure of non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, reached 369 days in February, compared to 371 in January and 302 in the same month of the previous year.
The perception of a longer and more severe deceleration in the US economic activity has increased and negative spillovers on global economic performance have been expected.
The Federal Reserve recognizes a slight recession in the first semester in the US economy, followed by a modest recovery in the second half of the year.
In Europe, the fears regarding the UK real estate market increased.
Economic growth in the Euro Area cooled in the last three months of 2007, as government and consumer expenditures reduced.
At the beginning of 2008, it is important to notice, the persistent characteristic of inflation, even in light of global deceleration.
Food and energy remain driving inflation, which spreads worldwide.
Similar situation concern the central banks in Latin America, Russia and Philippines, among others.
In the US, activity cooling has offset inflationary pressures stemming from food and energy prices, added to the effect of the devaluated exchange rate.
Imports, both in value and in daily average terms reached record highs for the month.
This movement was mainly driven by the economic agents perception about the March Copom Minutes and the Quarterly Inflation Report, the release data for inflation above market expectations, the increase of inflation expectations and the worsening of the external outlook.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates increased by 95 bps, 88 bps and 90 bps, respectively.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 30 overnight repoborrowing operations.
The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures up to two working days.
