The data already released for the last months point, in short, to the interruption of the industrial production expansion cycle, mainly due to the deterioration of global economic prospects and its effects over the Brazilian economy.
The recent slowdown in capital goods production has been reflecting the intensification of the international financial turmoil and its consequences over business confidence.
On its turn, the cooling in the pace of expansion of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, tighter credit conditions and the deterioration of consumer expectations.
Labor market continues to present favorable performance, but with signs of accommodation in the generation of formal employment.
As a result, the average unemployment rate in the first ten months of the year was 1.6 p.p.
In October and November, expanded retail sales data should evidence the effects of credit supply restrictions and the deterioration of consumer confidence over vehicle sales, already captured by the data from the National Federation of Distribution of Automotive Vehicles Fenabrave for these months.
The steady growth of retail sales had been reflecting, in short, the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be favored by fiscal transfers, as well as by employment and income growth, but it will also be affected, in case of persistence, by the changes in the access to credit supply, and by the deterioration of consumer confidence.
Without the seasonal adjustment, the Nuci stood 0.1 p.p. above the level registered in October 2007, a record high for the series.
For the capital goods sector, the Nuci showed stability compared to the level observed in November 2007 while for the production of civil construction inputs the Nuci presented a 1.9 p.p. increase.
The reduction on Nuci calculated by FGV seems to be a result of a combination between investment projects maturity with softening on economic activity, which should point to a start of less pressure over the idle capacity level.
Although not widespread, evidences so far suggest to an ongoing process of reduction in the mismatches regarding the evolution of supply and domestic demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to register deceleration at the margin, an already anticipated trend, and which is in line with assessments present in previous Inflation Reports and Copom Minutes.
The reversal on the strengthening trend of the BRL and the softening on the pace of expansion of domestic demand may contribute to a recover on the trade surplus, notwithstanding the reduction on price levels of exports acting on the opposite direction.
The increased risk aversion, observed since mid-September, after the bankruptcy of an important US financial institution, led the authorities in the US, Europe and Oceania to intervene in an unprecedentedly way in their financial systems, using wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in money markets.
Although systemic risk perception has showed moderation, pressures on the functioning of the interbank markets came back resulting from the nearness of the end of the year and the closing of the balance sheets of financial institutions.
The international liquidity contraction has been contributing to a deleverage process by asset managers, which in turn has been pressuring down the prices of financial assets.
In an environment of increased risk aversion and shortage of capital flows, pressures on emerging economies currencies have been kept.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, at least in the short term the contraction trends prevail over the inflationary pressures.
The dominant view still points to the expansion, at a modest pace, of global economic activity in 2009, but data released in the last weeks indicate a more intense and generalized cooling of activity in mature economies and also in some emerging economies.
There are evidences that the deeper weakening of economic activity in Europe and parts of Asia was predominantly due to the negative shock in the terms of trade caused by the elevation of commodities prices, which could be reversing.
On the other hand, the problems in the financial system have been aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in credit quality, which may reinforce the contraction in financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of intensification of deceleration.
The US economy, in particular, entered into recession at the end of 2007 and still continues to suffer the impacts of the housing sector crisis, with spillover effects on the labor market, whose weakening, together with the negative wealth effect associated to the fall in the prices of financial assets, has affected the consumers confidence, significantly contributing for depressing expenditure.
The prevailing interpretation is that the activity in Europe and Japan may continue to lose dynamism in the next months.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity is decelerating considerably, inflationary pressures have reduced fast.
On the other hand, in emerging economies, where the secondary effects of raw materials price increases over consumer prices and the heated demand pressures over the supply expansion capacity had been more intense, the inflationary pressures have been more persistent.
In this context, the monetary policy stance is mainly expansionist in mature economies, whereas in emerging economies, which have been affected by the exchange rate depreciation trend, in addition to the facts already mentioned, the reaction seems to be more heterogeneous.
It is worth pointing that, particularly in mature economies, the authorities are announcing a series of initiatives aimed at sustaining the economic activity, particularly through fiscal incentives, which could contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
Future markets have followed, in general, the prices of oil in the spot market.
However, uncertainty concerning oil prices is remarkably high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging countries, on the supplys reaction to stimuli derived from previous changes on relative prices, in addition to geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the great uncertainty inherent to the projections of oil prices trajectory, the main scenario adopted by the Copom, which assumes unchanged gasoline prices in 2008, remains plausible but with the persistence of the current framework of the oil market, it does not seem prudent to completely disregard the hypothesis that price reductions for oil can occur in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the reduction of international oil prices can affect domestic prices both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion continued quite robust until the third quarter, and it is at least partially responsible for the inflationary acceleration trend, despite strong imports growth and the favorable investment performance in line with assessments present in previous Copom Minutes.
Additionally, the increase in risk aversion and the unprecedentedly constraints observed in liquidity conditions in the international markets impose adjustments in the balance of payments which, despite the increase in Brazilian economy external resilience, can increase the inflationary pressures, especially in the short run.
In general terms, the influence of the external scenario on the future trajectory of Brazilian inflation continues to be subject to contradictory effects, which can act with distinct intensity throughout time and surrounded by significant uncertainties.
On the one hand, more generalized deceleration of global economic activity in the upcoming quarters points to a cooling of both commodities prices and external demand, therefore influencing negatively the local financial conditions.
On the other hand, the economic cooling has caused an increase in risk aversion, impacting the demand for Brazilian assets, and consequently, depreciating their prices.
Moreover, the recent trajectory of price indices evidences the reduction of inflationary external pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in emerging economies, with important implications on domestic inflationary trajectory.
The Committee evaluates that the risk of materialization of a less benign scenario retreated when compared to the risk prevailing months ago, but is still relevant.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years.
Particularly, monetary policy should act to avoid that the deterioration of inflation dynamics observed in 2008 become persistent.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risks to domestic inflation trajectory could be lowering.
The evidences of cooling of domestic demand, and more incipient, of accommodation of pressures on the market of factors, despite under uncertainty, may mitigate the pass- through of wholesale prices pressures to consumer price inflation.
The Committee evaluates that the materialization of this pass-through and the generalization of pressures initially localized on consumer prices depend critically on inflation expectations, which still remain in levels above the inflation targets path and continue to be carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth pointing that, according to recent data and the indicators available so far, the heating of domestic demand was still pressuring the prices of non-tradable items, as services.
In this context, the Copom will act to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The maintenance of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longterm stable macroeconomic environment will contribute for the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance is essential to increase the probability that inflation in Brazil evolve once again according to the targets path in For this higher probability to continue to materialize, however, it is necessary that forward-looking inflation indicators, particularly the expected dynamics of aggregate supply and demand, converge throughout the relevant period for the monetary policy.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
This viewpoint is even more important in periods of higher uncertainty.
In particular, the effects of the international crisis on the domestic financial conditions indicate that the contribution of credit to support domestic demand may decline more intensively and, possibly, more persistently than the magnitude of what would happen exclusively by the monetary policy lagged effects.
Additionally, the intensification of international crisis has caused a negative effect on consumers and businesses confidence.
If this situation persists, the strength of economic activity would increasingly depend on real payroll expansion and the effects of governmental transfers expected for this and the next quarters.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in The Copom highlights the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
Moreover, it bears noticing that the accommodation of commodities prices could contribute to restrain inflationary pressures.
However, the Copom evaluates that, particularly in the short run, the main risk to the inflationary dynamics derives from the trajectory of Brazilian asset prices, in a process of decreasing external funding.
In this context, the pace of reduction of the mismatch between the growth of aggregate demand and supply of goods and services, relevant up to the third quarter, continues to be crucial to the assessment of different possibilities for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to higher risk premia, to shorter planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects on income distribution.
Moreover, in the current circumstances, there is the risk that economic agents start to attribute higher probability to the fact that inflation acceleration become persistent, reducing the efficacy of monetary policy.
On the other hand, the shortage of financing conditions in the economy amplifies monetary policy effects, contributing to promote inflation convergence to the targets path.
This strategy, which will have its results evidenced throughout time, takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with uncertainties inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
Indeed, prospective scenario evolution has started to reflect on inflation projections considered by the Committee.
The Copom also understands that the probability of persistence of mismatch between growth pace of aggregate supply and demand, that continues to represent risk for inflation dynamics, has diminished.
Under these circumstances, monetary policy should be cautiously conducted, aiming to assure inflation convergence to the targets path.
The Copom believes that the consolidation of restrictive financial conditions for a longer period could significantly intensify monetary policy effects over demand and, throughout time, over inflation.
Under these circumstances, the majority of the Committee members, taking into account the balance of risks for economic activity, and therefore for the inflation scenario in 2009, debated the possibility of a 25 bps reduction of the Selic rate.
However, the understanding that inflation central prospective path would still justify the maintenance of the Selic rate unchanged has prevailed.
Other Copom members considered that the still remaining risks for inflationary dynamics, resulting from the possible persistence of inflation increases in 2008 and consequences of the adjusting process of balance of payments are still predominantly conditioning the various alternatives for monetary policy.
The Copom will closely monitor the prospective scenario evolution for inflation in order to timely define the next steps for its monetary policy strategy.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to the projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking prices dynamics and the balance of risks associated to their projections.
There are signs that domestic demand expansion rhythm, which remained expanding at high rates in the third quarter, would be currently contributing less intensely for the economic activity dynamics, in spite of persistence of stimulus factors such as income growth influencing the economy.
On the other hand, the contribution of the external sector to a favorable inflationary scenario, in light of the strong depreciation in the prices of Brazilian assets and the apparent reduction in the countrys capacity to import, has become less effective.
In such environment, the monetary policy should act so to bring inflation back to the targets path already in 2009, in order to avoid that the higher uncertainty detected in shorter-term horizons disseminate to longer-term periods, thus favoring a sustained recovery of economic activity.
Still according to the FGV, businessmen confidence declined in November, as in October.
The index reached the lowest level since July 2003 and fell below 100 points, indicating expectations of declining industrial activity.
Considering use categories, all indicators stood below 100 points.
Consumer goods, that registered the higher confidence level in the observed series, 90.1 points, had a 46 points reduction in comparison to November In the same comparison basis, construction material had the smallest fall, 33.1 points, while capital goods registered the biggest one, 51.9 points, leveling at 76.3 points.
Considering industrial segments, pharmaceuticals and textiles, should be highlighted in the same comparison bases, with 2.8 p.p. and 2.2 p.p. increases, respectively.
The relative stability of the unemployment rate in September and October, in the observed series, reflected the 143 thousand people growth in the PEA and 176 thousand new jobs.
In October, the PME survey shows that the aggravation of the international crisis did not affect yet the labor market in the countrys main metropolitan areas.
In a first moment, the adjustment should happen through the reduction of work shifts and adoption of collective vacations, impacting real earnings, while layoffs will become an option if the crisis lasts for a longer period.
External Environment Global economy and particularly, advanced countries face severe deceleration, and there are clear evidences of recession in many of these countries.
Overall, forecasts for 2009 show contractions of both real GDP growth and inflation indexes.
Global financial crisis has affected both consumer and businessmen confidences.
Data from previous weeks have shown that businessmen confidence has suffered sharply deterioration in many countries.
This situation reflects particularly a generalized decrease in services and manufacturing PMIs recently published.
It is also evident in emerging economies, where the levels of businessmen and consumer confidence have also fallen sharply, giving additional evidences that these countries will suffer the impact of the recession that hits the developed economies.
In the fourth quarter of 2008, global demand retraction sharpened, installed capacity utilization lowered and unemployment increased.
In the other developed economies, labor market conditions also show deterioration.
Price behavior confirms the trend of disinflation started in the third quarter of this year.
This pattern is more evident in economies that present lower level of activity and quicker falls in commodities prices, particularly reflecting the sharp reduction in oil prices.
In the United States, this pattern is reinforced by the dollar appreciation.
However, in some emerging countries, exchange-rate depreciation prevents further price reductions and limits the actions of their central banks.
In this context, the majority of central banks started or intensified monetary easing procedures, based not only on the broadening of the risks of recession, but also on fears of deflation.
In emerging economies from Southeast Asia, that are more dependent upon exports, local central banks have performed cuts in their policy rates in an attempt to mitigate the impact that the negative expectations about the worldwide economy have over their local industrial production.
The deterioration in global macroeconomic conditions may increase the number of emerging countries to perform rate cuts in the near future.
Money Market and Open Market Operations Immediately after the last Copom decision in October, the future yield curve experienced an upward parallel shifting.
The interruption of the tightening monetary cycle and the expectation of a higher inflation in the near term were decisive factors for this movement.
From November on, however, the behavior of the yield curve changed and the interest rates began to show a falling trajectory, mainly influenced by the release of both inflation data below market expectations, and economic data showing a retreat in the economic activity level.
In the beginning of December, the fall in interest rates became more intense especially in the long-term segment.
Between October 27 and December 8, one-, three-, and six-month rates decreased by 50 bps, 78 bps and 168 bps, respectively.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates decreased by 299 bps, 376 bps, and 430 bps, respectively.
In the same period, the BCB borrowed money through 32 overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
