As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
On the other hand, the other use categories expanded in January.
The solid expansion of capital goods production in 2007 was mainly driven by the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of domestic demand growth, reflecting both the improvement of income and the expansion of credit, underpinned by the perception of macroeconomic stability consolidation, which should persist in On its turn, the dynamism of durable consumer goods production reflects, predominantly, the remarkable improvement in credit conditions, when compared to historical patterns.
It should be highlighted that the appearance of signs pointing to consistent pressure over the availability of production factors, as suggested in some industrial surveys, indicates that possible reductions in industrial activity expansion could be associated to productive capacity restrictions.
Labor market continues to present quite favorable performance.
In line with the positive developments in labor market, and with credit expansion, retail sales continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expanding cycle is expected, and will continue to be underpinned by employment and income growth, credit expansion and the maintenance of consumer confidence at high levels.
Sector indicators, for example, relative to automobile sales in January and February this year, corroborate this assessment.
Without the seasonal adjustment, the Nuci in December stood 1.5 p.p. above the level registered in the same month of 2006, while the average installed capacity utilization rate in the year stood 1.8 p.p., 1.7 p.p. and 1.0 p.p. above the observed in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
The reduction of idle capacity, in relation to the margins usually observed, occurs in several sectors, despite the significant increase of investment.
Recent data indicate that, although investment has been contributing to soften the trend of increasing capacity utilization rates, it has not been sufficient to contain this process.
In this context, the timely maturation of investment projects will be crucial to limit relevant mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and domestic demand in the relevant forecast period for monetary policy.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to present robust performance, despite the expected deceleration at the margin, in line with assessments present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes about important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade.
Regarding the external scenario, the process of economic deceleration in the US has consolidated, as evidenced by the economic activity data in the last quarter of 2007, but uncertainties regarding its magnitude and duration still remain.
More recent data about the housing market and consumer goods demand, as well as confidence indices and other leading indicators, point to a significant slowdown.
Uncertainties still remain about the length and amplitude of the effects of the US subprime mortgages market crisis over US and European financial institutions and, consequently, over credit conditions for households and corporate.
Despite the dominant opinion still seems to point out to a transitory, but possibly intense deceleration, the negative assessments have become more disseminated.
This assessment reflects, to some extent, uncertainties about the capacity of the monetary policy stance implemented by the central bank in the US, to which fiscal incentives will be added, to smooth in a timely manner the US economic weakening, in light of persistent difficulties in the financial system.
Such difficulties, on their turn, could be worsened by a cyclic deterioration in credit quality, which would reinforce the trend to financial contraction, increasing the risk of intensifying the slowdown.
Prospects for economic activity in Europe, despite some favorable indicators in Germany and Japan, have also deteriorated, despite not provoking the same degree of concerns that surround the US economic activity.
On the other hand, strong economic growth in main Asian emerging economies, which so far have been apparently little affected by the US mortgage crisis, have offset the effects of economic deceleration in mature economies.
In fact, pressures over production factors availability have triggered inflationary pressures in many emerging economies, many of which are in the midst of monetary tightening cycles.
For mature economies, prospects for monetary policy are more diverse.
Economies presenting more moderate inflationary pressures and more evident credit contraction tend to present additional monetary policy easing.
On the other hand, in economies where inflation rates are above their respective targets, the scope for reaction to the contraction caused by the credit crisis seems more limited.
However, until this moment, Brazilian economic activity does not seem to have been significantly impacted by the persistent deterioration on global financial markets confidence, and, despite not decoupled from external economic developments, Brazilian economy should sustain its growth trajectory, essentially driven by domestic demand.
This behavior reflects, in addition to structural changes in global energy markets, recurrent geopolitical tensions.
Despite significant uncertainties inherent to oil prices, the main scenario considered by the Copom forecasts unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, apart from the trajectory of domestic gasoline prices, one should recognize that the elevation of international oil prices impacts domestic economy both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the deterioration of inflation expectations.
Furthermore, there are some evidences that international investors are assuming positions in commodities to hedge against the risk of inflation acceleration.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a 46bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2008, under the benchmark scenario.
The swap rate trajectory points to a 50bps spread in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the intensity of demand expansion continues quite robust, and may even have accelerated since the beginning of 2008, and is responsible, at least partially, for the inflationary pressures observed in the short-run, despite strong imports growth and the benign investment behavior.
Even in the context of moderate deceleration of global growth this year and the higher volatility observed in global markets since mid-2007, the Committee believes, according to newly available information, that the balance of payments should not represent imminent risk to the inflation scenario.
On the other hand, there are signs that relevant inflationary pressures are intensifying both in mature and emerging economies, evidencing the existence of inflationary risks on the global outlook.
The Copom reaffirms the vision that, for the Brazilian inflation, an alternative scenario of more intense and generalized global deceleration represents an ambiguous risk factor.
On the one hand, reducing net exports would act as a factor to restrain aggregate demand.
Moreover, the potential decrease of some important commodities prices could contribute to a lower domestic inflation.
On the other hand, the above-mentioned alternative scenario could unfavorably impact inflation prospects through two mechanisms.
In the case of deceleration in the mature economies that comprise the global financial markets center, risk aversion could increase, resulting in decreased demand for Brazilian assets and depreciation of their prices.
In addition, in the medium run, a possible reduction of net exports could similarly affect the price sustainability of certain Brazilian assets.
Therefore, although inflation prospects remain in line with the targets trajectory, additional uncertainties surround the inflation path, and the risk of materialization of a less benign inflationary scenario increased.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of positive results reached in the last years.
The Copom considers that the probability that emerging local inflationary pressures will represent risks to the domestic inflation trajectory is relevant, because the heated demand and market of factors, in addition to the possibility of existence of supply restrictions in some sectors, can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
The Committee understands that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the generalization of the local pressures initially focused on consumer price inflation, depend mostly on inflation expectations, which remain carefully monitored.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that although the external sector can restrain the inflationary pressures in the tradable sector, heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector, for instance, such as in the services sector.
In this context, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will continue to carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as inflation expectations within the forecast period, discriminating between one-off and persistent or generalized price increases, and promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consequent consolidation of a longlasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the continuity of the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception that has occurred in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious and timely monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, do not point to persistent imbalances.
The Committee emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
Activity level has not completely mirrored the remaining effects of the interest rates cuts implemented in 2007, as well as the effects of the economic activity on inflation have not completely materialized.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, credit growth and real payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, the effects of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for this and the next quarters should also add up to the mentioned factors that will sustain demand.
Consequently, the lagged remaining effects of interest rates cuts on an increasingly robust aggregate demand will add up to other factors that will continue to contribute on a significant way to this expansion.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated effects in the second half of 2008 and later.
The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
This factor, together with the external sector, has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be sustained, among other factors, by fiscal transfers and the remaining impulse stemming from the monetary policy easing implemented until September 2007, continues to present risks to inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent reduction of the mismatch between the rhythm of expansion of supply of goods and services and the increase of demand is even more relevant to the assessment of different possibilities of monetary policy stance.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom adopts a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the lags in the transmission mechanisms and has been the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections, the balance of risks associated to the forward-looking scenario and especially the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
At the current moment, characterized by the deterioration in the balance of inflationary risks, prudence assumes an even more important role in this process.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of signals of economy heating and inflation expectations increase, despite short-term favorable developments, the risks for the concretization of a benign inflationary scenario, in which inflation would remain consistent with the targets path, as reflected in the projections, are relevant.
Even considering that, at the moment, the maintenance of the basic interest rate is the most adequate decision, the Committee affirms that is ready to adopt a different monetary policy stance, in the case of consolidation of a divergent scenario between projected inflation and the targets path.
The Copom also considers that the persistence of the mismatch between the paces of expansion of aggregate supply and demand tends to increase the probability of such scenario to materialize.
In this context, the Copom analyzed the option of adjusting the Selic target rate at this moment.
Such adjustment would contribute to reinforce the anchoring of expectations not only for 2008, but also in the mediumterm, and to reduce the mismatch between aggregate demand and supply trajectories.
However, the prevailed understanding considered that, at this moment, the balance of risks to the central prospective inflation path would justify the maintenance of the basic rate at its current level.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prospective price dynamics and the balance of risks associated to its projections.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up economic activity dynamism, including sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as the monetary easing already implemented, are still not fully perceived.
On its turn, the contribution of the external sector to a benign inflationary scenario, in light of robust domestic demand growth, seems to become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority must remain vigilant to avoid that short-term uncertainties contaminate longer time horizons.
If the risk profile deteriorates in a matter that implies shifts in the basic inflation prospective scenario, the Committee will promptly adjust monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The seasonal influence of education in the IPCA-15 change in February accelerated the monthly change of the core inflation excluding household food and regulated prices.
The trimmed means cores changes remained stable in the month and accelerated in twelve months.
Among the index components, wholesale and consumer prices decelerated month-on-month.
The reduction in the IPA-M inflation rate in February reflected the behavior of agricultural prices, and the industrial prices inflation was almost unchanged relative to the previous month.
The positive results of retail sales evidenced the payroll increase, favorable credit conditions, the impacts of assistance programs and the agricultural sector recovery.
This decrease should be considered as punctual, and does not implicate in inflexion of industrial activity growth.
These indicators show the continuation of favorable expectations of businessmen for the near future.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 142.9 thousand new formal jobs were created in January 2008, a record high for the month.
The elevation reflected a seasonal pattern, as the number of employed workers usually declines in January, due to the dismissal of workers temporarily employed at the end of the year, mainly in commerce.
Additionally, due to the favorable economic conditions, the number of unemployed workers seeking for jobs in January increased, expanding the PEA.
The average tenure of credit operations reached 369 days, exceeding a year for the first time.
The deceleration in the US economy, the financial and capital markets swings and the effects of commodities prices rises increased the risk of deceleration in global economy.
The US economic conditions, which indicated economic activity deceleration until the end of 2007, started to suggest the possibility of output contraction in the first quarter of 2008, driven by economic forecasts contaminated with risks stemming from the real estate sector, the labor and credit markets.
The Fed recognized that, although the interbank market functioning has improved, there are relevant difficulties in other markets, and credit conditions became more restrictive, in general.
One cannot discard that the current US economic situation can generate new rises in delinquency in US financial institutions, increasing the restrictions to credit concessions and additionally weakening economic activity.
GDP data for the fourth quarter of 2007 recorded deceleration in the Euro Area and growth in Japan, although recent indicators signaled economic cooling in the latter.
Even if activity decelerates to some extent, the emerging economies continued to grow in the last quarter of last year, with prospects of expansion in At the start of the year, increases in the prices of commodities, especially oil, have been key drivers of inflationary pressures and a delicate economic outlook.
Inflation indicators did not show any cooling, which would provide central banks scope for the monetary easing necessary to combat the worsening of the financial crises and its spillovers effects on real economy.
The Chinese economy continues to follow a robust growth trajectory.
These results, both in value and in daily average reached record highs for the month.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 29 borrowing overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures of two working days.
