At its meeting today, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of Bank Negara Malaysia decided to maintain the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) at 3%.
The global economy continues to expand amid resilient labour markets and continued recovery in global trade. Looking ahead, global growth is expected to be sustained by positive labour market conditions, moderating inflation and less restrictive monetary policy. Global trade recovery is expected to continue, supported by both electrical and electronics (E&E) as well as non-E&E products. The growth outlook remains subject to downside risks, mainly from further escalation of geopolitical tensions, heightened volatility in global financial markets and slower growth momentum in major economies.
For the Malaysian economy, the latest indicators point towards sustained strength in economic activity driven by resilient domestic expenditure and higher export activity. Going forward, exports are expected to be supported by the global tech upcycle, continued strength in non-E&E goods and higher tourist spending. Employment and wage growth, as well as policy measures, remain supportive of household spending. The robust expansion in investment activity would be sustained by the progress of multi-year projects in both the private and public sectors, the higher realisation of approved investments, as well as the implementation of catalytic initiatives under the national master plans. These investments, supported by higher capital imports, will raise exports and expand the productive capacity of the economy. Budget 2025 measures will provide additional support to growth. The growth outlook is subject to downside risks from lower-than-expected external demand and commodity production. Meanwhile, upside risks to growth mainly emanate from greater spillover from the tech upcycle, more robust tourism activity, and faster implementation of investment projects.
Headline and core inflation remain modest, averaging 1.8% year-to-date. Going into 2025, inflation is expected to remain manageable, amid the easing global cost conditions and the absence of excessive domestic demand pressures. Nevertheless, the inflation outlook remains subject to the details of the implementation of announced domestic policy measures. Upside risk to inflation would be dependent on the extent of spillover effects of domestic policy measures, as well as global commodity prices and financial market developments.
Ringgit performance continues to be primarily driven by external factors. The outcome of the US elections could heighten volatility in the near term. Looking ahead, the narrowing interest rate differentials between Malaysia and the advanced economies is positive for the ringgit. Malaysia’s favourable economic prospects and domestic structural reforms, complemented by ongoing initiatives to encourage flows, will continue to provide enduring support to the ringgit.
At the current OPR level, the monetary policy stance remains supportive of the economy and is consistent with the current assessment of inflation and growth prospects. The MPC remains vigilant to ongoing developments to inform the assessment on the domestic inflation and growth trajectories going into 2025. The MPC will ensure that the monetary policy stance remains conducive to sustainable economic growth amid price stability.
The meeting also approved the schedule of MPC meetings for 2025. In accordance with the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009, the MPC will convene six times during the year. The Monetary Policy Statement will be released at 3:00 p.m. after each MPC meeting.