Furthermore, the war in Ukraine impacts the supply of natural gas, thus bringing additional uncertainty to the European economic scenario, whereas, in China, the deterioration of the real estate sector, coupled with the policy to fight Covid-19, negatively impact the countrys growth prospects.
Inflation rates figures in some advanced economies released in the period suggest the persistence of strong pressures, although an incipient normalization in the supply chains and accommodation in the prices of leading commodities is already observed recently.
Coupled with the adjustment of inventories of industrial goods, these developments might imply the moderation of inflationary pressures related to goods.
On the other hand, the degree of slack in the labor market in these economies suggests that inflationary pressures in the sector of services might take long to dissipate.
Central banks in developed and emerging countries have adopted a more contractionary stance against increased inflation.
The acceleration in the process of normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies, the increase in risk aversion, and the change in the growth outlook have impacted financial conditions in both advanced and emerging economies, affecting the volatility of assets and economic growth prospects.
The Committee continues monitoring the risks involving a global deceleration in a highly pressured inflationary environment.
Indicators related to both formal job openings and employment and unemployment rates suggest a rapid normalization in the labor-intensive sectors after the pandemic.
Consumer inflation remains high, with increases spread among several components, and continues to be more persistent than anticipated.
The Committee judges that the uncertainty in its assumptions and projections is higher than usual.
The Committee evaluates that the global inflationary scenario is still challenging.
Pressures stemming from both persistently high demand for goods, as well as supply shocks linked to the war in Ukraine, China's Covid-19 policy, and policies restricting trade in agricultural products in commodity-producing countries, might have long-term consequences and lead to more persistent inflationary pressures.
However, the re- evaluation of future global demand has led to price declines of leading commodities as well as the prospects of reduced imbalance in the industrial goods market.
Copom, even so, reiterates that some geopolitical and particular issues in these markets still deserve attention.
The Committee discussed the impacts of the global synchrony in the process of stimulus withdrawal.
Copom noticed a more accelerated pace in the process of monetary policy adjustment in advanced economies, as well as the commitment stated in the communication of major central banks to reduce inflationary pressures.
It was observed that this movement elevated the market volatility, unevenly impacting several assets and increasing risk aversion.
In addition, given the persistence of the inflationary process in advanced economies and the consequent responses by several central banks, the Committee evaluates that the probability of alternative scenarios incorporating a sharper deceleration of global economic activity increased.
The uncertainty about the energy scenario in Europe, the dynamics of sectors more sensitive to interest rates in the United States, and the prospects of a more gradual growth in China contribute to this scenario.
In the domestic scenario, Copom evaluates that temporary policies aimed to support income could provide stimulus to aggregate demand and the extension of these policies might increase the countrys risk premia and inflation expectations as they pressure aggregate demand and worsen the fiscal trajectory.
The Committee reiterates that there are several channels by which fiscal policy may affect inflation, including its effect on activity, asset prices, and inflation expectations.
Labor market data, especially concerning the pace of job openings and the unemployment rate, surprised in the period and indicate a faster-than-anticipated narrowing of the estimate of the output gap.
However, the Committee evaluates that economic slackness persists.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that evaluations about the output gap, especially about the component related to the labor market, are always subject to uncertainty, notably in the current situation in which the economy is still normalizing after the pandemic and with remarkable heterogeneity across sectors in this process.
Copom will continue monitoring and evaluating the output gap in the next releases.
The Committee still considers that activity should decelerate in the coming quarters when the lagged impacts of monetary policy will be more strongly felt.
It emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee assesses that the possibility that fiscal policies that support aggregate demand become permanent heightens the upside risks of the inflationary scenario.
The Committee assesses that the still uncertain and volatile current scenario requires serenity when evaluating the prospective risks.
Therefore, the Committee decided to emphasize the projections for 12-month inflation in the first quarter of 2024, which reflects the relevant horizon, smoothens out the primary effects from tax changes, but incorporates their second-round effects on the relevant inflation projections for monetary policy decisions.
The 12-month inflation projection for the first quarter of 2024 which incorporates the secondary effects of the tax changes as well as the cumulative effects of keeping interest rates at a significantly contractionary level is consistent with the strategy of inflation convergence to around the target over the relevant horizon.
The Committee noted that inflation projection for 2024 is also around the target.
It was emphasized that the current monetary tightening cycle was quite intense and timely and that, due to the long and variable monetary policy lags, much of the expected contractionary effect and its impact on current inflation are still to be seen.
These impacts should become clearer in the activity indicators for the second half of the year, but the Committee anticipates that measures to sustain aggregate demand, which will be implemented in the short term, may make it difficult a more precise evaluation about the stage of the economic cycle and the impacts of monetary policy.
The Committee noted that the short-term inflationary dynamics remains challenging, with increasing core inflation measures in an environment of surprises in current activity, and that its projections continued to deteriorate, even though the scenario is surrounded by uncertainty and volatility above the usual.
It was emphasized that the rise in expectations and medium-term projections was concentrated in the inflation of administered prices, due to the temporary nature of some tax measures.
Moreover, given the persistence of recent shocks, the Committee will remain vigilant and will assess whether the prospect of maintaining the Selic rate by itself for a sufficiently long period will ensure such a convergence.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects the uncertainty around its scenarios for prospective inflation, an even higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks and is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2023 and, to a lesser extent, Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee considers that, given its inflation projections and the risk of a deanchoring of long-term expectations, it is appropriate to continue advancing in the process of monetary tightening significantly into even more restrictive territory.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist in its strategy until the disinflation process and the expectation anchoring around its targets consolidate.
The Copom emphasizes that it will remain vigilant and that future policy steps could be adjusted to ensure the convergence of inflation towards its targets.
It also stresses that the uncertainty of the current scenario, both domestic and foreign ones, coupled with the advanced stage of the current monetary policy cycle, and its cumulative impacts yet to be observed, require additional caution in its actions.
