Negative growth revisions were also noted for China, partially reflecting the zero-Covid policy adopted by that country.
Central banks in developed and emerging countries have adopted a more contractionary stance against increased inflation, although, in some of these economies, current interest rates are still at levels evaluated as expansionary.
The repricing of monetary policy in advanced economies, the increase in risk aversion, and the change in the growth outlook have affected financial conditions in both advanced and emerging economies.
The Committee has also discussed the growing risks involving a global deceleration in a highly pressured inflationary environment.
Indicators related to the labor market continue to recover and the release of the 2022Q1 GDP pointed to a higher-than-expected pace of activity, raising the statistical carry-over for this year.
Household consumption continues to contribute positively, while, in 2022Q1, Gross Fixed Capital Formation contributed negatively.
Consumer inflation remains high, with increases spread among several components, and continues to be more persistent than anticipated.
The inflation of services and of industrial goods remain high, and the recent shocks continue to cause a strong increase in food and fuel-related components.
Recent readings were higher than expected and the surprise came in both the more volatile components and on items associated with core inflation.
The Committee assesses that the global inflationary scenario continues to be marked by inflationary pressures stemming from both persistently high demand for goods and supply shocks linked to the war in Ukraine and China's Covid-19 policy.
The Committee further believes that recent policies restricting trade in agricultural products in commodity-producing countries, coupled with the effects of the war in Ukraine, bring additional risk to global inflationary pressures.
In the Copoms view, these developments might have long-term consequences and lead to more persistent inflationary pressures.
The Committee then discussed the growing risks involving a sharper global deceleration in a highly pressured inflationary environment.
The Committee already anticipates a slowdown in global activity in the coming quarters, due to geopolitical tensions and the monetary policy tightening, as well as financial conditions underway in several central economies.
The Committee believes that the global synchrony in the process of stimulus withdrawal introduces additional risks to markets and may boost its impact on the prospective scenario.
In this context of global deceleration, Copom considers a possible reversion, even if partial, of the increase in international commodities measured in local currency observed in recent quarters.
The Committee reinforces that uncertainty about the future of the country's fiscal framework and fiscal policies that support aggregate demand may bring an upside risk to the inflationary scenario and to inflation expectations.
The Committee believes that recent domestic activity data, which have prompted a positive revision to 2022 growth, still reflect, for the most part, the post-pandemic normalization process of the economy, both in the higher consumption of services and in the utilization of the excess savings observed over historical records, and the transitory fiscal stimulus provided in the first half of the year.
The Committee assesses that activity should decelerate in the coming quarters when the lagged impacts of monetary policy will be more strongly felt.
The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee assessed that the tax measures under the approval process imply a sizable reduction in inflation in the current year, although they raise by a smaller magnitude inflation in the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
The Committee assesses that the uncertain and volatile current scenario requires serenity when evaluating the risks.
It was emphasized that the current monetary tightening cycle was quite intense and timely and that, due to monetary policy lags, much of the expected contractionary effect and its impact on current inflation are still to be seen.
It was emphasized that the current monetary tightening cycle was quite intense and timely and that, due to monetary policy lags, much of the expected contractionary effect and its impact on current inflation are still to be seen.
Still, Copom observed deterioration in both the short-term inflationary dynamics and the longer-term projections, even though the scenario is surrounded by higher than usual uncertainty and volatility.
Thus, the strategy of convergence around the target requires a more contractionary interest rate than that used in the reference scenario for the entire relevant horizon.
Given the persistence of the recent shocks, the Committee evaluated that only the perspective of maintaining the Selic rate for a sufficiently long period would not assure, at this moment, the convergence of inflation around the target in the relevant horizon.
The Committee then chose to signal a further adjustment, of equal or smaller magnitude.
This strategy was deemed more appropriate to ensure the convergence of inflation over the relevant horizon, as well as the anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations, while reflecting the already implemented monetary tightening, reinforcing the cautious monetary policy stance, and emphasizing the uncertainty of the scenario.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects the uncertainty around its scenarios for prospective inflation, an even higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks and is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee considers that, given its inflation projections and the risk of a deanchoring of long-term expectations, it is appropriate to continue advancing in the process of monetary tightening significantly into even more restrictive territory.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist in its strategy until the disinflation process and the expectation anchoring around its targets consolidate.
The Committee stresses that the growing uncertainty of the current scenario, coupled with the advanced stage of the current monetary policy cycle, and its impacts yet to be observed, require additional caution in its actions.
The Copom emphasizes that its future policy steps could be adjusted to ensure the convergence of inflation towards its targets and will depend on the evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks, and on inflation expectations and projections for the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
