Despite the recent reduction, especially on items which are more volatile and affected by tax measures, consumer inflation remains high.
Items related to industrial goods, reflecting the more intense decrease in producer prices and the reduction of pressures in global value chains, also showed deceleration, albeit still slow.
The Committee discussed the speed of the global disinflation process.
On the one hand, the relaxation of pressures on global production chains, as well as the recent drop in commodity prices, indicate that the movement should continue in the short term, especially in the industrial goods, energy, and food segments.
On the other hand, the Committee discussed that, given the spread of inflationary pressures to the services segment, which has a more inertial nature, in an environment of tight labor markets in several countries, the disinflation process should be non-linear and slower than that observed in recent episodes.
Thus, the Committee continues to assess that the commitment and determination of central banks to reduce inflationary pressures and anchor expectations consolidate a global scenario of longer tightening of financial conditions, with interest rates at the end of the tightening cycle maintained for a sufficiently long period at contractionary levels, raising the risk of a more pronounced global deceleration.
The Committee discussed two recent facts while analyzing the international markets.
Firstly, it continues to assess that markets are more sensitive to developments that affect fiscal fundamentals, due to the combination of higher interest rates and sovereign debt at historically high levels.
In addition, the Committee discussed the lower liquidity present in sovereign bond markets, possibly due to greater uncertainty in the interest rate dynamics, the reversal of long-term asset purchase policies and regulatory changes.
These issues require monitoring and may also impact assets from emerging economies more strongly.
Data on economic activity in Brazil continues to indicate a more moderate pace of marginal growth.
The release of the third quarter GDP figures indicates a reduction in the pace of growth, especially in some of the more cyclical components.
Nevertheless, growth was observed in all demand components and, in the supply side, growth in industry and services.
Moreover, labor market data also indicate a reduction in the pace of job openings, but still with positive marginal net hirings.
The set of released data, including the drop in confidence indicators and the reduction in credit granting, together with the lagged effects of monetary policy, reinforce the Committee's expectation of a slowdown in the pace of economic activity, which should worsen over the coming quarters.
The inflationary outlook was then discussed, based on the more recent information.
Some members noted the benign movement of commodities in BRL, highlighting additional downside risks ahead.
Other members emphasized the volatile nature of these prices in an environment of pressured inventories.
Finally, all members evaluated that current inflation did not surprise significantly in relation to expectations or substantially changed the understanding about future inflation dynamics.
Moreover, they emphasized that disinflation in services and core inflation components with greater inertia will require increased attention and perseverance in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee discussed extensively the impacts of different fiscal scenarios on inflation.
In its analysis, the Committee reiterated the different channels through which fiscal policy can affect inflation not only via the primary effects of aggregated demand but also via asset prices, the degree of economic uncertainty, inflation expectations, and neutral interest rate.
The Committee evaluated that changes in parafiscal policies or the reversal of structural reforms that lead to a less efficient allocation of resources might reduce the power of monetary policy.
In the different exercises analyzed, it was evaluated that the final effect, either on inflation or on activity, will depend on both the combination and the magnitude of the fiscal and parafiscal policies.
Furthermore, it was highlighted that the existence of economic slack and the confidence in the debt sustainability are determining factors for an expansionary fiscal policy to achieve the aimed impacts on the economic activity.
The Committee believes that there is still a lot of uncertainty about the prospective fiscal scenario and that the moment requires caution in risk assessment.
The Committee reiterates that it will continue to monitor future fiscal policy developments and their potential impacts on prospective inflation dynamics.
It emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee will closely monitor future developments in fiscal policy and, in particular, its effects on asset prices and inflation expectations, with potential impacts on the dynamics of future inflation.
The 12-month inflation projection for the second quarter of 2024, in the scenario using the interest rate trajectory extracted from the Focus Survey, remains consistent with the strategy of inflation convergence to around the target over the relevant horizon.
The Committee decided again to emphasize the six-quarter-ahead horizon for its projections, and stresses that this decision is conditional on the temporary nature of the taxes.
Moreover, the Committee continues to consider that inflation projection for 2024 is also around the target.
This assessment reflects the lower-than-normal visibility of the forward-looking scenario, which increases the uncertainty of the point projections communicated by the Committee over longer horizons.
Copom anticipates that, if the alternative scenario of maintaining tax exemption on fuels in 2023 materializes, it will again emphasize usual horizons that include the first quarter of However, it assesses that there will be no relevant impacts on the conduct of monetary policy since the primary effects of such measures are already being disregarded.
Copom began by discussing the evolution of the broad array of data monitored, the projections, inflation expectations, output gap, and the balance of risks.
Copom's inflation projections showed a slight increase over the relevant horizon due to both an increase in the projection for the inflation of market prices in shorter terms and a revision of the projection for the inflation of administered prices over longer terms.
The uncertainty about future fiscal dynamics, and its consequences on inflation dynamics, was discussed, and the uncertain environment was deemed to require serenity in assessing these risks.
Services inflation showed some moderation but remains at high levels, and the Committee believes that the disinflation process of this component will become clearer over time.
Copom chose to maintain the interest rate, reinforcing the need to evaluate, over time, the cumulative impacts to be observed of the intense and timely monetary policy cycle already undertaken.
The Committee reinforced that it is necessary to remain vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a sufficiently long period will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
The Committee emphasizes that it will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects the uncertainty around its scenarios for prospective inflation, an even higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2023 and Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee will remain vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a sufficiently long period will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
The Committee reinforces that future monetary policy steps can be adjusted and will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
