Besides, the labor market continued to expand, although not completely reverting the real income decline observed in recent quarters.
Despite the recent reduction in prices of more volatile items and the impacts of tax measures, consumer inflation remains high.
The recent releases have been strongly influenced by the reduction in administered prices, due to both the decrease in taxes and, to a lesser extent, the drop in international fuel prices.
In addition, items related to industrial goods, reflecting the decrease in producer prices and the reduction of pressures in global value chains, also showed an incipient decline.
September 20-21 the relevant horizon, mitigates the primary effects from the tax changes but incorporates their second-round effects.
The Committee judges that the uncertainty in its assumptions and projections is higher than usual.
Given the persistence of the inflationary process and the rise in inflation projections in several economies, the Committee assesses that the risk of a sharper deceleration in global economic activity has increased.
This perception is reinforced by the monetary policy responses required to ensure the reanchoring of inflation, as well as the determination present in the communication from major central banks to reduce inflationary pressures.
The Committee assesses that a more tightening global monetary policy stance would have a disinflationary impact in Brazil in the medium term, as it leads to a widening of the global gap and less pressure on the prices of commodity and goods in general.
However, it points out that the possible impacts of such repricing on assets in the short term add uncertainty about the effect on Brazilian inflation.
Measures of the degree of slack in the economy have great uncertainty.
Currently, the analysis of some activity indicators, especially in the labor market, has led to the discussion if the output gap is narrower than that currently used by Copom in its reference scenario.
The Committee discussed the transmission channels and the effect of monetary policy on activity.
Copom assessed that the pass-through of the Selic rate to the final rates of different types of credit has occurred as expected, although new corporate credit remain more robust than expected.
The Committee continues to evaluate that a large part of the impact of monetary policy is still to be observed, both in economic activity and inflation, and that there was no substantial change in the transmission channels of monetary policy.
The Committee discussed the pace of disinflation of services and how inflation of less volatile items would behave in the coming quarters.
It evaluated that there are several factors that may affect the path of services inflation, among them the drop in current inflation itself, which reduces the inertial effect on these items, and the more positive projections for economic activity, which raises the risk of more persistent pressures in this segment.
In this regard, the Committee believes that continued monitoring of these factors is necessary to assess whether the maintenance of interest rate rates for a sufficiently long period will be enough to ensure inflation convergence.
In the domestic scenario, Copom believes that the permanent increase in spending and the uncertainty about its trajectory from next year on may increase the country's risk premia and inflation expectations as they put pressure on aggregate demand and worsen the fiscal path expectations.
The Committee reiterates that there are several channels by which fiscal policy may affect inflation, including its effect on activity, asset prices, degree of uncertainty in the economy, and inflation expectations.
There has been a drop for 2023, but much of the movement observed is in items related to administered prices, possibly due to uncertainty about the tax recomposition of federal taxes.
Some members of the Committee emphasized that there was an increase in longer-term expectations in much of the emerging countries, reflecting the magnitude and persistence of the global shocks still underway.
Finally, all members agree that it is the monetary authority's primary and fundamental role to conduct a monetary policy consistent with the anchoring of longer-term expectations, continuously strengthening its credibility, and reducing the future disinflationary cost.
September 20-21 The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The twelve-month inflation projection for the first quarter of 2024, in the scenario using the interest rate trajectory extracted from the Focus survey, remains consistent with the strategy of inflation convergence to around the target over the relevant horizon.
Moreover, the Committee continues to consider that inflation projection for 2024 is also around the target.
This assessment reflects the lower-than-normal visibility of the prospective scenario, which increases the uncertainty of the specific projections communicated by the Committee over longer horizons.
The Committee decided again to emphasize the six-quarter-ahead horizon for its projections, and stresses that this decision is conditional on the temporary nature of the taxes.
Copom anticipates that, if the alternative scenario of maintaining tax exemption on fuels in 2023 materialize, it will again emphasize horizons that include the first quarter of However, it assesses that there will be no relevant impacts on the conduct of monetary policy since the primary effects of such measures are already being disregarded.
It was emphasized that the current monetary tightening cycle has been quite intense and timely and that, due to the long and variable monetary policy lags, much of the expected contractionary effect and its impact on current inflation are still to be seen.
These impacts should become clearer in the activity indicators throughout the second half of the year, but the Committee anticipates that measures to sustain aggregate demand hinder a more precise evaluation about the stage of the economic cycle and the impacts of monetary policy.
The options to raise the base interest rates by 0.25 p.p. and to maintain it were widely debated.
On the one hand, the additional interest rate increase would reinforce the vigilance stance and reflect the observation of a stronger than expected activity.
On the other hand, caution and the need to evaluate, over time, the cumulative effects to be observed of the intense and timely monetary policy cycle already undertaken would be in favor of the maintenance.
The Committee reinforced that it is necessary to remain vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a sufficiently long period will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
These members argued that the additional increase would strengthen the Committees message of commitment to its strategy, given the rise in inflation expectations and the projection in the reference scenario for 2024, in an environment of uncertainty about the level of the output gap and the dynamics of activity.
These members consider that the upside risks listed in the balance of risks may have longer- lasting impacts if they materialize, suggesting additional caution in assessing the reference scenario projections for the year The Committee unanimously emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
The Committee emphasizes that it will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects the uncertainty around its scenarios for prospective inflation, an even higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks and is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2023 and, to a lesser extent, Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing of economic fluctuations and fosters full employment.
The Committee will remain vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a sufficiently long period will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
The Committee reinforces that future monetary policy steps can be adjusted and will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
