A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Colombia was held in the city of Bogotá on February 26, 2010.Present:Mr. Oscar Iván Zuluaga, Minister of Finance and Public CreditMr. José Darío Uribe, Governor of the Central Bank of ColombiaFull-time Board Members in Attendance:Mr. Carlos Gustavo CanoMr. Juan José EchavarríaMr. Fernando TenjoMr. Cesar VallejoMr. Juan Pablo ZárateInflation and the economic situation were discussed with respect to growth and prospects for the future, and monetary-policy decisions were reached. The attached document is a summary of the predominant issues addressed during the meeting.
Annual consumer inflation in January was 2.1%, which is 10 bp more
than in December. Monthly inflation was 0.69%, and the annual core inflation
indicators rose for the first time since early 2009.
The annual variation in food prices went from -0.3% in December to -
0.5% in January. Although prices for perishables were higher, the increase
was more than offset by the performance of non-perishables and food outside
the home. The annual increase in regulated prices went from 2.6% in December to
3.9% in January, owing to higher prices on all the goods and services in this
sub-basket, but especially natural gas for residential use and public
transportation.
The annual variation in non-tradables, excluding food and regulated
prices, remained stable at 4.4%. The monthly variation in rentals was a
significant factor; they were up 0.4%, which is more than the increases
registered during the same month in past years.
 The annual increase in tradables, excluding food and regulated goods,
declined from 1.4% in December to 1.2% in January. This reflects
accumulated appreciation in the exchange rate during recent months and
international price stability for industrial products.
 Given the preliminary data for February, inflation expectations derived
from trading in government bonds at 1, 5 and 10 years came to 4.26%, 4.89%
and 5.05%, respectively, with 57 bp, 64 bp and 65 bp variations compared to
the averages for January.
 The inflation expectations revealed in the Central Bank’s monthly
survey at the beginning of February were up slightly, but remained within the
long-term target range defined by the Board of Directors.
Annual inflation in the producer price index (PPI) was 0.5% compared
to -2.2% the month before. Available figures on production in December and January indicate the
momentum in economic recovery is weak, having been affected by the plunge
in sales to Venezuela. Although the consumption indicators denote a slight
recovery, those for industry and commerce show no clear trend.
 
According to DANE, industrial production rose 2.0% in December,
which is better than the Central Bank’s technical team had expected.

As for the December FEDESARROLLO Business Opinion Survey, the
response to the questions on orders and inventory suggest it will take time for
industry to return to the extent of economic activity witnessed prior to the
crisis, since the momentum exhibited by these indicators - when statistically
refined - is low.
January saw an annual decline of 2.6% in the demand for unregulated
industrial energy, halting the recovery observed in the fourth quarter of last
year.
The expectations for industrial activity, as noted in the
FEDESARROLLO Business Opinion Survey for November and December,
are optimistic. Particularly during the final two months of 2009, expectations
for production three months out demonstrate a growing trend, with levels
above those witnessed in 2008 and during the first half of 2009.
The Business Opinion Survey for commerce, with data at December,
indicates entrepreneurs anticipate an economic recovery at the start of 2010.
The FENALCO survey, with information up to January, forecasts low growth
in sales compared to past years.
The total demand for energy rose 2.5% in annual terms, which is less
than the increase posted during the previous two months.
According to estimates by the National Federation of Colombian Coffee
Growers, coffee production was down 40% in January compared to the same
month in 2009.
Available indicators on the demand side, with data at January, denote a
moderate recovery in private consumption.
With January data, the FEDESARROLLO Consumer Confidence Index
(CCI) shows the levels of confidence reached during the third and fourth
quarters of 2009 continue. Given the high correlation between this indicator 

and total household consumption, the figure for January suggests this demand
still continues to grow at a rate below the historic average.
The Colombian Automotive Committee and the firm Econometría
reported an annual increase of 6.8% in vehicle sales during January. As
measured by DANE in the national accounts, there was a high correlation
between motor vehicle sales and durable goods consumption.
 Total exports in dollars came to US32, 849 million in 2009. This
includes an annual reduction of 12.7%, primarily as a result of fewer sales to
the United States (-8.2%) and Venezuela (-33.5%). In terms of value, all the
sectors experienced reductions (industry -20.3%, mining -3.4% and
agriculture -2.5%); as for volume, the industrial sector was the only one to
post a decline (-17.6%).
 Total exports were up 7.6% in December 2009 with respect to the same
month in 2008, largely because of a 51.7% increase in mining exports.
However, agricultural and industrial exports in dollars registered annual
declines: 12.8% and 13.4%, respectively.
 December 2009 witnessed an important rise in exports to the United
States (50.9% in annual terms), thanks largely to the sale of oil and petroleum
by-products. On the other hand, monthly exports to Venezuela dropped 77.6%
in annual terms.
 Imports (CIF) in 2009 came to US$ 32,897 m, having fallen at an
annual rate of 17.1%. The most important reduction was in imports of
intermediate goods (-25.4%), followed by imports of consumer goods (-
11.9%) and capital goods (-9.62%). As for volume, all the country’s imports
were down, accumulating a 6.6% reduction in total. In monthly terms, the total
value of imports at December was similar to what it was in December 2008
(0.1% less). The world economy was still in the midst of recovery at the end of
2009, even though performance was not consistent or uniform across all
countries. At the start of 2010, the figures at hand show this recovery is
ongoing. In fact, industrial production in the United States continued to expand and the figures for annual growth are positive. Business sentiment in
most countries improved moderately during December and January, and
remains at levels indicative of an increase in economic activity.
 However, despite this favorable environment, the past month witnessed
difficulties associated with government debt problems in Greece. The result
has been an increase in risk perception with respect to that country and others
with huge debts, such as Spain, Portugal and Ireland, as reflected in larger
spreads on their sovereign bonds. This situation has brought pressure to bear
on the euro, weakening it against the dollar and undermining investor
confidence and stock market performance in the developed economies.
 As for the emerging economies, the impact of the government debt
problems in Europe has been low. Although the countries in the region saw
their risk premiums go up slightly last month, this situation was reversed
somewhat during the past week. A number of currencies, including the
Colombian peso, remained stable and others, such as the Brazilian real and the
Chilean peso depreciated, 7% between January and the first week of February.
 With respect to growth, several countries in the region, such as Brazil
and Chile, already show clear signs of recovery, as manifest in their industrial
production and export indicators. In general, the developing countries have a
more favorable mid-term outlook than the developed countries. Annual growth in the primary monetary aggregates stabilized during the
past nine weeks at rates between 5.0% and 8.0%. In the case of M3, the
stability in the growth rate was the result of a build-up in savings and a
slowdown in term deposits.
 The nominal annual increase in the total gross loan portfolio came to
5.8% by early February, which is a little more than at the end of 2009 (4.9%).
Although consumer lending was up slightly (2.3% nominal), disbursements
continued to gain momentum, posting an annual increase of 26.6%. With
respect to mortgages, growth in the outstanding balance was much higher
(18.1%) and disbursements were up 48%. The commercial loan portfolio
increased 4.5% as opposed to 3.5% by the end of 2009, while disbursements
weakened in January, especially those for builders to finance home construction. The last three months have seen an upsurge in mortgage and
consumer lending.
 The interbank rates (IBR and BRI) in January and early February were
close to the policy rate. The generalized decline in all other interest rates,
characteristic of the fourth quarter of 2009, continued up until mid-January,
but was interrupted during the last two weeks of that month, with the
exception of interest rates on treasury loans. In real terms, all average interest
rates were down in January.
 Government bond performance in January was mixed, with depreciation
in mid-term bonds (24 bp), valuation in short-term bonds (-35 bp) and stability
in long-term bonds (2 bp). The following points were emphasized by the Board of Directors during its
deliberations:
The January figure for inflation, which was less than the rate forecast
by the Central Bank’s technical team, mainly because of good
performance with respect to food prices
The increase in core inflation indicators
The temporary effect El Niño weather could have on higher prices
The optimism reflected in producer and consumer confidence
indicators
The increase in monetary aggregates at rates between 5% and 8%
The financial system’s peso loan portfolio, which continues to grow in
excess of nominal GDP
How market interest rates performed in response to the decline in the
Central Bank’s benchmark rate
The impact of the exchange rate on inflation and on growth in output
in the tradable sectors
Interest rates on government bonds, which showed mixed
performance for the different tranches.
The main points analyzed by the Board members centered on: the
elements that affect inflation forecasts for 2010, particularly an eventual
temporary surge in food and regulated prices due to El Niño weather; the
lag between monetary policy measures and their impact on production and prices; forecasts for economic growth in 2010; the sharp drop
anticipated in exports to Venezuela; the performance of monetary
aggregates and how it might affect economic recovery; the recent
momentum in the financial system’s commercial and mortgage loan portfolio;
(vii) the increase in expectations of inflation the risk balance between
growth and inflation in the context of an economy that continues to
demonstrate weak growth and a level of inflation that is within the long-term
range set by the Board of Directors; and the need to bolster the monetary
authority’s credibility and to anchor expectations for inflation close to the
long-term target.
 The Board of Directors emphasized the following with respect to the
performance of inflation during the month: annual consumer inflation in
January was 2.1%, having been 2% at the end of December; core inflation
indicators were up slightly, while expectations for inflation one-year out
increased, but remain within the target range set by the Board of Directors,
which coincides with the long-term range (between 2% y 4%); annual
inflation in January was due fundamentally to higher prices for regulated
goods; in spite of El Niño weather, the decline in food prices continued;
although perishables experienced price hikes, they were more than offset
by non-perishables and food outside the home; (vi) the Central Bank’s
inflation forecasts include temporary increases in the price of food as a result
of El Niño weather, but they are expected to be reversed during the second
half of the year.
 The U.S. economy, which is Colombia’s leading export market,
demonstrated more growth during the fourth quarter of 2009 and so far this
year than international analysts had expected. The mid-term and long-range
prospects for the region’s economies and for other emerging markets remain
favorable.
 According to the figures at hand, the slow recovery in quarterly GDP
levels continues. Expectations within the business community have improved,
and there is more growth in private consumption.
 The Board of Directors believes the Central Bank’s expansive monetary
policy has permitted a steady decline in interest rates on deposits and lending.
It also is of the opinion that the benchmark rate, as it now stands, continues to
kindle economic growth in an environment that is characterized by a healthy financial system. Therefore, it decided to hold the Central Bank’s intervention
rate at the current levels. The Board of Directors agreed to make no change in the Central Bank’s
intervention rate, leaving it at 3.5%. 