At the same time, the central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back to its targets, in an environment in which inflation has been resilient.
Recent inflation readings from several countries point to some stabilization of core inflation at levels above their targets and reinforce the persistent nature of the current inflationary process.
Furthermore, it has been recently observed the resumption of the cycle of interest rate hikes in some economies that, in their majority, signal a prolonged period of high interest rates to fight inflationary pressures, which calls for greater caution in the conduct of economic policies also by emerging countries.
Regarding the domestic scenario, the recent set of indicators suggests a scenario of gradual deceleration.
The release of the GDP for the first quarter of 2023 surprised positively, with most of the surprise reflecting the agricultural performance, but with less dynamism in the more cyclical economic sectors.
The labor market, which surprised positively throughout 2022, has shown some resilience, with a net increase in job creation and relative stability in the unemployment rate.
However, a reduction in the participation rate was observed.
Consumer inflation has been reduced in the recent period, with emphasis on the dynamics in industrial goods and food.
Copom members evaluated the different factors that justify an increase and converged on the conclusion that there was a rise in the neutral rate.
Among the mentioned factors that support the increase of the neutral interest rates are the likely increase of neutral interest rates in the major economies, the resilience in the Brazilian economic activity jointly with a slow disinflationary process, as well as an analysis of supporting models that incorporate different methodologies.
However, some factors might reduce external inflationary pressures.
First among these is the commitment of central banks to the control of inflation by maintaining tighter financial conditions for a longer period.
Such determination, albeit with a likely impact upon domestic asset prices in the short term, coupled with a credit slowdown in major economies, contributes to a more credible and lasting global disinflationary process.
Besides, the recent dynamics of the exchange rate and international commodity prices, although with greater volatility, also contribute to slowdown international pressures.
Brazilian activity data, in particular the release of the GDP growth for the first quarter of 2023, continues to indicate a deceleration in the sectors most sensitive to the economic cycle.
At the margin, the pace of growth was moderate, except for the strong growth of the agricultural sector.
In any case, it is anticipated that after this greater growth in the agricultural sector in the first quarter has passed due to the seasonality of the harvest the process of moderating growth in the more cyclical sectors of the economy will deepen over the following quarters.
The Committee debated the recent labor market data.
On the one hand, formal employment data continued to reveal increase in job creation in the most recent period.
On the other hand, the unemployment rate remains relatively stable, but with a lower participation rate than in the pre-pandemic period.
The Committee discussed the possible reasons for the fall in the participation rate, evaluating whether this movement should be read as structural or cyclical, which would have different impacts on the participation rate in effect in the long term.
Some members noted that the recent process towards a partial recomposition of losses in real wages moves forward.
This movement is expected and has been accompanied by a deceleration in nominal gains, which is expected to intensify ahead.
The Committee believes that the disinflation dynamics is still characterized by a process with two distinct stages.
In the first stage, already completed, the speed of disinflation was greater, with a greater effect on administered prices and an indirect effect on market prices through less inertia.
In the second stage, which is currently observed, the speed of disinflation is slower, and core inflation which is more affected by the aggregate demand and the interest rate policy declines at a slower pace, responding to the output gap and future inflation expectations.
The Committee reaffirms that the disinflation process at its current stage demands serenity and patience in the conduct of monetary policy to ensure the convergence of inflation to its targets.
Still in the discussion about inflationary behavior, the recent benign behavior of wholesale prices was emphasized, both for food and industrial goods.
On the food front, logistical issues, together with favorable weather and a good harvest contributed to a revision in the outlook for food prices for 2023 and, to a lesser extent, for For the latter, however, the uncertainty about the impact of the El Nio phenomenon stands out.
Regarding industrial goods, wholesale prices, as well as the normalization of supply chains, have also led to a revision in the dynamics of these sectors.
The Committee assesses that the consolidation of such dynamics contributes to the disinflationary process and should have some indirect impact on the other items.
In terms of the trajectory of consumer inflation over 2023, it should be noted that the continuity of the drop is expected in the twelve-month inflation during this second quarter, due to the base effect of the previous year.
For the second half of 2023, however, a higher twelve-month inflation is expected, as a consequence of the exclusion in this indicator of the effect of the tax measures that reduced the price level in the third quarter of 2022 and of the maintenance of the effects of this year's tax measures.
Copom emphasizes that it will also continue to monitor inflationary dynamics in underlying inflation measures, which best reflect the current inflation trend as well as its prospects.
The Committee continues to assess that deanchored expectations raise the cost of bringing inflation back to the target.
It was emphasized again that the behavior of expectations is a fundamental aspect of the inflationary process since it serves as a guide for present and future prices and wages setting.
Thus, as expectations rise, there is a greater upward pressure on prices in the current period and the inflationary process is fueled by these expectations.
It was also highlighted that the anchoring of expectations is a key factor for price stability.
In this context, the Committee reinforces that decisions that induce the reanchoring of expectations and that raise confidence in inflation targets would contribute to a faster and less costly disinflation process, allowing monetary easing.
The domestic credit granting scenario is compatible with the current stage of the monetary policy cycle.
The Committee anticipates a moderation in credit granting over the next few months, but in line with what has been observed in previous monetary policy tightening cycles.
The Committee stresses that the BCB has the appropriate and necessary liquidity instruments, associated with macroprudential policy, to deal with relevant frictions in the system, should they occur.
The Committee also discussed the impacts of the fiscal scenario on inflation and assesses that the presentation and processing of the fiscal framework have substantially reduced the uncertainty surrounding fiscal risk.
Challenges to meet the targets set for the primary result remain, although in the Committee's discussion, the commitment and the presentation of measures to achieve these results were emphasized.
Copom again emphasized that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence of inflation and the approval of the fiscal framework since the inflation path is conditional on the reaction of inflation expectations and financial conditions.
The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee judges that the current context, marked by unanchored expectations for longer terms and characterized by a stage of the disinflationary process that tends to be slower, requires parsimony and caution in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee unanimously believes that flexibilization of the degree of monetary tightening requires confidence in the trajectory of the disinflation process, since premature flexibilization could lead to a reacceleration of the inflationary process and, consequently, to a reversal of the monetary easing process itself.
In this debate, a divergence was observed in the Committee concerning the degree of signaling regarding the next steps.
Another group was more cautious, emphasizing that the disinflationary dynamics still reflects the retreat of the most volatile components and that the uncertainty about the output gap creates doubt about the impact of the monetary tightening implemented so far.
For this group, it is necessary to observe further reanchoring of long-term expectations and accumulate more evidence of disinflation in the more cyclically sensitive components.
However, the Committee members unanimously agreed that the future steps of monetary policy will depend on the inflationary dynamics, especially the components that are more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on inflation expectations, in particular the longer-term ones, on its inflation projections, on the output gap, and on the balance of risks.
Following the usual analysis, the Committee discussed the different determinants that impact the conduct of the monetary policy.
Resilience of the economic activity in the first quarter was discussed, but the Committee's view remains that growth was driven by the agricultural sector and that the other sectors should show modest growth throughout As for services inflation and core inflation a slow deceleration movement is observed, in line with the non-linear process anticipated by the Committee.
In addition, inflation expectations declined slightly, but remain deanchored, partially due to the questioning about a possible change in future inflation targets.
The Committee believes that decisions that reanchor expectations can lead to faster disinflation.
Copom's inflation projections have been reduced, especially in the relevant scenario, to a large extent due to lower inflation expectations.
Finally, on the balance of risks, the Committee assesses that uncertainty about the final design of the fiscal framework is residual.
Besides this, it noted that part of the downward risk coming from commodity prices has already materialized in the recent period.
The current context, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process tends to be slower and in an environment of deanchored inflation expectations continues to require caution and parsimony.
Copom reaffirms its commitment to set monetary policy to meet the targets and judges that the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a long period has been adequate to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
