The Copom members analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
In case of inconsistency, the Portuguese version prevails.
The episodes involving banks abroad have increased the uncertainty, but with limited contagion on financial conditions so far, requiring constant monitoring.
The impact of these episodes on financial conditions and consequently on global growth is still uncertain but has a negative bias.
Major economies have emphasized the principle of separation of objectives and instruments in the conduct of monetary and macroprudential policies, despite incorporating the impacts on activity in their scenarios.
At the same time, the central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back to its targets, in an environment in which inflation has been resilient.
Recent inflation readings from several countries point to some stabilization of core inflation at levels above their targets and reinforce the persistent nature of the current inflationary process.
Furthermore, most monetary authorities signal a prolonged period of high interest rates necessary to fight inflationary pressures, which calls for greater caution in the conduct of economic policies also by emerging countries.
Turning to the Brazilian economy, the Committee's expected scenario of gradual growth slowdown is still corroborated by the recent set of indicators.
Some moderation is observed in the coincident indicators of activity, as well as a slowdown in the credit market at the margin.
The labor market, which surprised positively throughout 2022, has shown resilience, with a net increase in job creation and relative stability in the unemployment rate.
In assessing the factors that could lead to unfold an alternative scenario characterized by a higher neutral interest rate, emphasis was placed on the possible adoption of expansionary parafiscal policies, which can increase the neutral rate and reduce the power of monetary policy, as previously remarked by the Committee.
Still regarding the debate about the current neutral interest rate in the economy, some members raised an additional aspect, related to the recent economic data set.
May 2-3 in major economies, resilience in Brazilian activity, and a slow disinflationary process could be compatible with a higher measure of neutral rate than that assumed by the Committee.
Under this argument, therefore, the current monetary tightening would lead to a lower contractionary impact than that implicit in the Copom's scenarios.
However, most of the committee members judged that this interpretation still seems premature and needs further corroboration by data.
Regarding the global outlook, the low degree of labor market slack in some economies and a persistently high current inflation and widespread in the services sector suggest that inflationary pressures should last longer.
In this context, reducing inflationary pressures continues to require the commitment and determination of central banks to control inflation by maintaining the tightening of financial conditions for a longer period.
Such determination, with a likely impact upon asset prices in the short term, coupled with a credit slowdown in major economies, contributes to a more credible and lasting global disinflationary process.
Despite the limited contagion from the recent financial instability in the US banking sector, a further tightening of credit conditions is observed in that country.
Thus, despite the reduction in the likelihood of a disruption in the credit market, a scenario with a more restricted credit supply and, consequently, lower economic growth, prevails.
The Committee will continue to monitor this situation, analyzing possible transmission channels, although the direct impact on the domestic financial system is deemed limited.
The Committee reinforces that the best contribution of monetary policy is to fight inflationary pressures and smooth economic fluctuations, and it emphasizes, once again, the separation of instruments between the objectives of inflation control and financial stability.
Brazilian activity data point to a moderate pace of growth at the margin, with emphasis on the support given by consumption, on the demand side, and by the agricultural and livestock sector, on the supply side.
Some members reminded that the methodological changes in monthly activity surveys may increase uncertainty in GDP projections and in the current assessment of activity.
Copom anticipates a more vigorous GDP growth in the release of the first quarter of 2023, especially due to agricultural production, followed by moderation in economic activity in an environment marked by resilience in the labor market.
In addition, formal employment data continued to reveal increase of job creation in the most recent period.
Some members noted that there is a movement towards a partial recomposition of recent losses in real wages.
This movement is expected and has been accompanied by a deceleration in nominal gains, which is expected to intensify ahead.
Finally, it was noted that the economic growth outlook has not changed significantly in the recent period.
The Committee believes that the disinflation dynamics continues to be characterized by a process with two distinct stages.
In the first stage, already completed, the speed of disinflation was greater, with a greater effect on administered prices and an indirect effect on market prices through less inertia.
In the second stage, which has been currently observed, the speed of disinflation is slower, and core inflation which is more affected by the aggregate demand and the interest rate policy declines at a slower pace, responding to the output gap and future inflation expectations.
The most recent inflationary data support the view of a slower disinflation process, in line with the view of an inflation driven by excess of demand, mostly in the services segment.
The Committee reaffirms that the disinflation process at its current stage demands serenity and patience in the conduct of monetary policy to ensure the convergence of inflation to its targets.
Still in the discussion about inflationary behavior, the recent benign behavior of wholesale prices was emphasized, both for food and industrial goods, in line with the Committee's view.
In addition, due to a comfortable water scenario for 2023, the green energy flag is assumed for December.
In terms of the trajectory of consumer inflation over 2023, it should be noted that a relevant drop is expected in the twelve-month inflation during this second quarter, due to the base effect of the previous year.
In the second half of 2023, as the twelve-month inflation no longer includes the effects of the tax measures that reduced the price level in the third quarter of 2022 and the effects of this year's tax measures will still be included, this inflation indicator will rise.
Copom, therefore, emphasizes that such behavior does not reflect the underlying inflationary dynamics, nor does it change the view on future prospects.
Inflation expectations remain deanchored from the targets set by the National Monetary Council, having slightly deteriorated at the margin.
The Committee is following this movement with concern and continues to assess that deanchored expectations raise the cost of bringing inflation back to the target.
It was emphasized again that the behavior of expectations is a fundamental aspect of the inflationary process since it serves as a guide for present and future prices and wages setting.
Thus, as expectations rise, there is a greater rise in prices in the current period and the inflationary process is fueled by these expectations.
It was also highlighted that the anchoring of expectations is a key factor for price stability.
In this context, the Committee reinforces that decisions that induce to the reanchoring of expectations and that raise confidence in the inflation targets would contribute to a faster and less costly disinflation process.
The domestic credit granting scenario seems compatible with the current stage of the monetary policy cycle, despite the persistence of a stronger decrease in the supply of credit in specific modalities.
The Committee anticipates a moderation in credit granting over the next few months, but in line with what has been observed in previous monetary policy tightening cycles.
The Committee believes that the BCB has the appropriate and necessary liquidity instruments, associated with macroprudential policy, to deal with relevant frictions in the system, should they occur.
The Committee also discussed the impacts of the fiscal scenario on inflation and assesses that the presentation of the fiscal framework has reduced the uncertainty associated with extreme scenarios of public debt growth.
The Committee will continue to monitor the processing and implementation of the fiscal framework presented by the government and under discussion in the National Congress.
Copom again emphasized that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence of inflation and the approval of the fiscal framework since the inflation path is conditional on the reaction of inflation expectations and financial conditions.
The materialization of a scenario with a solid and credible fiscal framework may lead to a more benign disinflation process through its effect on the expectations channel, by reducing inflation expectations, uncertainty in the economy, the risk premium associated with domestic assets and, consequently, the Committee's projections.
The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
On the other hand, the current scenario, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process tends to be slower in an environment of deanchored inflation expectations, requires further attention when conducting monetary policy.
Copom emphasizes that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence of inflation and the approval of the fiscal framework, and judges that the deanchoring of long-term inflation expectations raises the cost of the disinflation that is needed to reach the targets established by the National Monetary Council.
In this scenario, Copom reaffirms its commitment to set monetary policy to meet the targets.
Copom started the debate by evaluating whether the previously outlined strategy of stable interest rates would be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation towards to its targets.
To this end, the Committee has continued its process of analyzing the main determinants of the inflation path and how they have behaved in the most recent period.
No significant change occurred in the prospective scenario for the output gap.
As for services inflation and measures of core inflation, increased resilience and lower speed are observed in the recent releases, in line with the non-linear process already anticipated by Copom.
In addition, inflation expectations remain deanchored, partially related to the questioning about a possible change in future inflation targets.
Finally, in the balance of risks, besides the factors already mentioned, the Committee evaluates that the probability of the most extreme scenarios for the public debt trajectory has reduced, but also noted that there was no relevant change in the inflation projections since expectations did not change significantly.
This behavior reinforces the understanding that there is no mechanical relationship between monetary policy and the fiscal framework.
Copom emphasized that the conduct of monetary policy, at this moment, requires serenity and patience to incorporate the inherent delays in the inflation control through interest rates and, therefore, to reach the goals in the relevant monetary policy horizon.
Therefore, the Committee assessed that the scenarios that could require a resumption of the monetary policy tightening cycle have become less likely.
The Committee judges that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes the year of Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment.
Taking into account the uncertainty of the scenarios, the Committee remains vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a long period will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor around its targets.
The Committee judges that the current scenario demands patience and serenity in the conduct of monetary policy.
Copom emphasizes that, although a less likely scenario, it will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
