There is a normalization in supply chains and an accommodation in the prices of major commodities in the recent period, leading to a moderation in goods-related inflationary pressures.
Conversely, the low degree of labor market slack in some economies, associated with a high current inflation and a high degree of inflation diffusion, suggests that inflationary pressures on the services sector should last longer.
The process of normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies continues towards restrictive rates synchronized across countries, tightening financial conditions and impacting economic growth expectations.
It was observed that confidence indicators dropped and industrial production, trade, and services indicators downturned.
The labor market, which surprised positively throughout 2022, still shows signs of deceleration, with a decline in net hirings in New CAGED and some stability in the unemployment rate stemming from setbacks in the employed population and the workforce.
Notwithstanding the slowdown at the margin, consumer inflation remains high.
The Committee judges that the uncertainty in its assumptions and projections is higher than usual.
The Committee analyzed an alternative scenario with stable interest rates throughout the entire relevant horizon.
The Committee evaluated different assumptions, parameters, and scenarios in its discussion of inflation projections.
On this subject, some members evaluated the possibility of incorporating some increase in the neutral interest rate, towards the movement observed in longer-term inflation expectations extracted from the Focus survey.
Some members emphasized that economic activity and labor market data remain relatively resilient in the US.
In China, the adjustments in sanitary restrictions should lead to a cyclical recovery in demand and a reduction in the risks of supply disruptions.
However, the Committee assesses that the Chinese long-term growth is expected to remain lower than observed in the pre-pandemic period, reflecting both the adjustments in the real estate sector and the worsened demographics expected in the coming years.
In Europe, the milder winter has also reduced the likelihood of extreme scenarios in energy supply.
In the US, economic activity data have been pointing to deceleration, but still in an environment of very pressured labor market.
Despite these short-term developments, the Committee continues to assess that the commitment and determination of central banks to reduce inflationary pressures and anchor expectations consolidate a global scenario of tightening of financial conditions for a longer period, with rates at the end of the tightening cycle maintained for a sufficiently long period at contractionary levels, raising the risk of a more pronounced global deceleration.
The Committee continues to assess that the process of global disinflation, especially regarding core inflation indicators, is challenging and will possibly happen more slowly than usually observed, since inflation is widespread in the services segment.
However, some members highlighted the deceleration in the measures of core inflation in several countries.
Data on economic activity in Brazil continues to indicate a more moderate pace of marginal growth and employment data suggest a loss of dynamism.
Some members observed a movement towards partial recomposition of recent real wages losses, but judge that this movement is expected and is coupled with a deceleration in nominal gains that is expected to intensify ahead.
The Committee will continue to monitor the labor market releases, continuously assessing the role of lagged inflation and labor market pressures on wage adjustments.
The set of released data, including the drop in confidence indicators and the deceleration in credit grants, together with the lagged effects of monetary policy, reinforce the Committee's expectation of a slowdown in the pace of economic activity, which should worsen over the coming quarters.
The Committee noted with particular concern the deterioration in longer-term inflation expectations.
In the first case, the BCB reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the established targets and assesses that, once the deanchoring is observed, it is necessary to remain even more vigilant in the conduct of monetary policy to reanchor expectations and thus reduce the future cost of the disinflation.
Jan. 31 - Feb. 1 mitigate any inflationary effects of the fiscal policy.
Finally, regarding the third case, the BCB conducts monetary policy based on the targets set by the CMN.
In summary, more important than analyzing the motivations for the rise in expectations, the Committee emphasizes that it will act to ensure that inflation converges to the targets.
The Committee also discussed the impacts of the fiscal scenario on inflation.
In this discussion, it was again emphasized that the net effect of the conduct of fiscal policy on inflation is very dependent on the prevailing macroeconomic and financial conditions.
Thus, by analyzing the multiple channels, including the movement in financial conditions arising from future interest rates, and updating the assumptions for the fiscal path to incorporate the sanctioned budget for 2023, the Committee assesses that the scenario for activity has not changed significantly.
Copom sustained its usual governance of incorporating the policies already sanctioned by law, but it acknowledges that the implementation of the proposed fiscal package could reduce the upside inflation risk.
The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee judges that this scenario raises the cost of the disinflation that is needed to reach the targets established by the CMN.
In this scenario, Copom reaffirms its commitment to set monetary policy to meet the targets.
The Committee decided again to emphasize the six-quarter-ahead horizon for its projections but anticipates that, for the next quarter, it will resume adopting the usual horizon, according to the calendar years, since the six-quarter ahead horizon will coincide with the calendar year of 2024, and then there will be no direct effect of the tax changes in the usual horizon.
The Committee began its debate by evaluating whether the previously outlined strategy of stable interest rates would be sufficient for the convergence of inflation to its targets.
For this purpose, Copom analyzed the main determinants of the inflation trajectory and how they behaved more recently.
Starting with the output gap, a deceleration in economic activity, credit, and more recently in the labor market was observed, as expected by the Committee given the monetary policy lags.
Jan. 31 - Feb. 1 should continue, and it is necessary for the monetary policy channels to act and for inflation to converge to its targets.
It was also noted that economic growth prospects have not changed significantly in the recent period.
Services inflation has moderated but remains at a level not compatible with the target.
The Committee focuses on services inflation since it responds to inflationary inertia and economic activity more directly, and both factors are expected to put less inflationary pressures over the horizon.
In any case, this dimension continues to call for attention, and the Committee continues to evaluate the speed with which the convergence process will take place.
In the balance of risks, global inflationary pressures have eased, but there is still high uncertainty about the deceleration of the inflation process, which tends to be non- linear.
The risks are likely to persist as long as a tight labor market is observed in several advanced economies.
Concerning domestic risks, two sets of risks intersect on fiscal issues.
Firstly, the fiscal framework revision reduces the visibility on public accounts for the coming years, introduces premia on asset prices, and impacts inflation expectations.
Secondly, concerning fiscal stimuli, Copom will continue to monitor their impact on economic activity and inflation and reinforces that, in an environment of a narrowed output gap, the impact on inflation tends to outweigh the desired impact on activity.
Some members noted that the implementation of the Ministry of Finance fiscal package should mitigate the fiscal risk and consider that it will be important to monitor the challenges for its implementation.
Finally, the risk of a tighter-than-evaluated output gap persists, and the Committee will continue to assess data and models for a more thorough understanding.
Regarding downside inflation risks, international commodity prices in local currency have reduced, but the Committee assesses that the risk of a sharper slowdown in global economic activity remains on the horizon, despite this risk is to some degree reduced by China's reopening process.
In this regard, the Committee will continue to monitor, on the one hand, the process of withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimulus in advanced economies and, on the other hand, the Chinese reopening process.
Regarding inflation expectations, the Committee notes with concern the recent movement at longer horizons.
In addition to the direct impact of the rise in expectations on inflation projections, the rise in long-term expectations raises the cost of the disinflation by requiring greater participation of other monetary policy channels and, consequently, a wider output gap to obtain the same fall in inflation.
The Committee will remain vigilant and will persist until the anchoring of expectations is consolidated.
Copoms projections have risen due to the increase in both administered and market prices.
Among the preponderant factors for increased projections, the rise in Focus survey inflation expectations stands out.
Projections conditioned by the assumptions of the reference scenario do not show convergence to the target over the relevant monetary policy horizon, but the introduction of a more extended monetary tightening, as in its alternative scenario, generates a relevant impact on the projections toward convergence to the targets.
Copom chose to maintain the interest rate, reinforcing the need to evaluate, over time, the cumulative impacts to be observed of the intense and timely monetary policy cycle already undertaken.
The Committee reinforced that it is necessary to remain vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a longer period than in the reference scenario will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee emphasizes that it will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects the uncertainty around its scenarios for prospective inflation, an even higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks and is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2023 and, to a larger degree, Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment.
The Committee remains vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a longer period than in the reference scenario will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation.
The Committee reinforces that future monetary policy steps can be adjusted and will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not proceed as expected.
