The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rdQuarterly Meeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago.
It was agreed that the economy hadmaintained steady and relatively fast growth momentum.  In line with thearrangement of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC hasemployed an array of monetary policy instruments to adjust money and creditaggregates on a timely and appropriate basis and guide the commercial banks tooptimize their credit structure.  The overall performance of the financialsector remained sound, the reform of exchange rate regime progressed smoothly,RMB exchange rate realized two-way flotation, and the expectation on RMBappreciation in the forward market appeared to have moderated.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad. It was agreedthat, with the support of the macroeconomic management policies introducedsince the beginning of this year, the immanent force driving economic growthremained strong, although the overall growth rate dropped slightly. Moreover, acute problems continued to exist in economic operations, includingexcessive fixed-asset investment in some sectors, bottlenecks in the supply ofcoal, electricity, oil and transportation, and a relatively large surplus offoreign trade.  It was concurred that efforts should be made to coordinatemacroeconomic policies, boost consumption demand, speed up economic andinternational trade restructuring, improve economic growth efficiency, promotetransformation of the economic growth pattern, and realize sustained growth aswell as price stability.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policymeasures to be adopted in the coming period, the Committee consented that thesound monetary policy should be continued, and efforts should be made topromote the financial policy become more forward-looking, scientific andeffective.  While ensuring continuity and stability at aggregate level,preemptive and fine-tuning measures should be strengthened and the marketitself should be allowed to play its role in economic restructuring. Market-based interest rate reform policies should be continuously carried out,and interest rate formation system and transmission mechanism should beimproved.  Measures should be taken to further improve the managedfloating exchange rate regime and maintain the exchange rate basically stableat an adaptive and equilibrium level.  Great efforts should also be madeto foster development of the financial market construction and financialinstrument innovation, quicken the steps in foreign market development, improveforeign exchange administration, and guide the enterprises and individuals to enhancetheir foreign exchange risk control capability.  Meanwhile, efforts shouldbe made to advance financial reform, and promote a coordinated development ofthe direct and indirect financing so as to enhance the effectiveness ofmonetary policy transmission.
The meeting was chaired by Mr. ZhouXiaochuan, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee,and attended by other Committee members including Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong, Mr.Su Ning, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Shang Fulin, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. YuYongding.  Committee members Mr. Zhu Zhixin, Ms. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. LiDeshui, Mr. Liu Mingkang and Mr. Wu Dingfu were absent on leave.  Mr. LiuMingkang and Mr. Wu Dingfu provided written comments.    Presidentsof the PBC Jinan Branch, Guangzhou Branch and Xi’an Branch also attended themeeting.