The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food prices, through representation and coordination with the relevant government agencies. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: percent year-on-year in October from 6.9 percent in September. This brought the average inflation for the period January to October 2004 to inflation target of 4.0-5.0 percent for 2004. As in previous months, the increase in the prices of food and energy-related CPI components accounted for the largest contribution to the observed increase in inflation. - The highlights of the discussions of the 18 November 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 16 December 2004. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. reaching 7.7 percent in October 2004 from 7.2 percent in the previous month, with a year-to-date average inflation of 5.4 percent. energy products) also edged higher in October. The 1994-based core inflation increased to 6.9 percent in October from 6.6 percent in September, while the 2000-based core inflation also rose to 6.7 percent in October from 6.6 percent in September. indicate that inflation is likely to exceed the 4.0-5.0 percent inflation target set by the Government for 2004 and 2005 before easing back to 4.0-5.0 percent by 2006. and loan growth rates continue to point to soft spots in the domestic economy. to 80 percent in recent months. Data for August 2004 showed average capacity utilization at 79.2 percent (revised), a slight deceleration from the 79.7 percent in July. This level was higher than the 78.7 percent registered for the same month a year ago. index (VOPI) for manufacturing declined by 3.6 percent year-on-year This brought the January-September 2004 annual exports growth to August 2004 from 5.6 percent growth in July 2004. For the January to August 2004 period, the cumulative annual growth of imports was Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. previous month. This also represented a deceleration from the 81.9 percent increase in October 2003. Meanwhile, the combined truck and bus sales posted an 8.7 percent year-on-year growth in October, a reversal from the 7.8 percent dip in September. growth in August, and the 0.4 percent rise in September of last year. an improvement from the 12.6 percent registered for the comparable period in the previous year. This is still considerably higher than 7.4 percent, the lowest unemployment rate recorded during the peak growth years 1993-1996. September 2004, a slight deceleration from the 6.1 percent rise posted in the previous month. At 5.3 percent, however, the growth in M3 remained significantly below the double-digit levels posted in the growth years during the pre-Asian crisis period of 1993-1996. trillion as of end-September 2004. This was a marked slowdown from the 5.5 percent increase recorded in the previous month, and lower than the double-digit growth rates registered during the preAsian crisis period of 1993-1996. yields for the 91-day and 182-day T-bills rose during the 8 November October 2004. By contrast, the yield for the 364-day T-bill declined during the said auction. The rise in yields reflected market concerns that rising oil prices would push inflation higher as well as worries relating to sustainability of the fiscal position and the country’s credit rating. These risk factors include primarily the rise in world oil prices, which will affect the cost of producing other goods and services. Nonetheless, the prospect of favorable agricultural output for the rest of the year is expected to provide a cushion for food prices. semester of 2004. This supports expectations of favorable agricultural production for the rest of the year. However, the possibility of a weak El Niño episode in early 2005 could pose upside pressures to food prices in the first quarter of 2005. November 2004 after peaking in the previous month. The international oil market was slightly calmed after seeing that stocks remained adequate and the growth in demand for oil could moderate due to high oil prices. In the domestic oil market, retail pump prices of petroleum products increased five times in October from their endSeptember levels, reflecting the recent uptrend in world oil prices. early November due to continuing market jitters over rising global oil prices, and the consequent inflation uptrend, weaker regional currency markets, the increase in dollar purchases by oil and other manufacturing companies, and renewed worries over the government’s fiscal position. quarter of 2004 reached P61.8 billion, lower than the deficit level for the same period last year of P63.1 billion. This deficit for the first three quarters of P141.9 billion was likewise lower than the P142.7 billion fiscal gap recorded in the same period a year ago. underpinned by robust industrial production and rising corporate profits. This was accompanied by the strengthening of consumer demand and labor market conditions in most regions. On the price front, stronger global inflationary pressures are likely to persist over the near term owing to the volatility in oil prices. improvements in consumer spending, business investment, and employment conditions. upturn in private consumption, rise in business investment, and robust export performance. by the decline in housing prices, which suggest that interest rates have peaked and that further increases in borrowing rates could be deferred until 2005. evidence of lower export demand for electronics and slower retail sales. by 25 basis points at its 10 November 2004 meeting. Other central banks which have tightened their policy rates were Canada, Thailand, and New Zealand. The main reasons cited by these central banks for raising policy rates were rising inflationary pressures due to robust domestic demand and tight labor market conditions. European Central Bank (ECB) remained cautious and kept their monetary policy settings unchanged during their respective policy meetings. Similarly, monetary authorities in Australia and South Korea opted to keep their policy settings unchanged. These decisions were generally based on the possible impact of tighter monetary conditions on output concerns given the sluggish growth in private consumption and investments and soft labor market conditions. to exceed the 4-5 percent target in 2004-2005 but should revert toward the same range target by 2006. remained largely unchanged since the previous assessment of the monetary stance, and that prevailing price pressures continue to be linked primarily to supply-side rather than demand-side factors, notably the increases in commodity prices, particularly food and oil. inflationary pressures remain for the most part limited and supply-side factors continue to have a central influence on the inflation outlook. Such conditions provide a strong argument for leaving policy interest rates at their present setting. This argument was further amplified by lingering concerns about the underlying strength of demand, particularly in view of the relatively high unemployment rate and the moderate pace of credit activity. data and the observed rise in official and internally generated core inflation measures suggest the possibility of demand-side effects from ongoing supply shocks. Such conditions, although tentative, require closer attention over the next few months, and should be complemented by information on whether public inflation expectations continue to be well-anchored in the face of sustained commodity price increases. accumulated evidence supports keeping present policy settings unchanged, and suggests a greater need for the continued readiness of monetary authorities to respond to inflation pressures. They noted that the readiness to act will be particularly important given that the uptrend in commodity prices is likely to persist over the policy horizon, and negative market sentiment surrounding the fiscal situation could fuel a prolonged episode of exchange market pressure, thereby feeding into inflation and inflation expectations. monetary tightening, should they become necessary, would be oriented primarily towards guiding inflation expectations. Significant monetary tightening does not appear justified by present conditions, and is only bound to do more harm than good to the ongoing recovery. non-monetary intervention in the importation, distribution and delivery of goods and services should continue to be explored, evaluated and pursued accordingly. agreed unanimously to maintain current monetary policy settings. However, the Monetary Board emphasized that monetary authorities stand ready to respond to the potential second-order inflationary effects of ongoing supply shocks and other conditions that could generate persistent price pressures. that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; SDAs; and measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 16 December 2004. H:\MACRO\_aaMB Policy and Minutes\Highlights\MB minutes 18-11-2004 meeting.doc