The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: November was recorded at 5.3 percent (1994=100) and 5.7 percent energy products) also edged higher in November, reaching 7.3 percent using the 1994-base CPI and 7.6 percent using the 2000-base CPI. - The highlights of the discussions of the 16 December 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 20 January 2005. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. indicate that inflation will exceed the 4.0-5.0 percent inflation target in suggest expansion in demand, other indicators pointed to soft spots in the economy. while real GNP expanded by 6.1 percent from a year-ago level. Growth was boosted by the continued growth in personal consumption along with the strong rebound in both investments and exports. percent in September 2004 from 79.2 percent in August and 78.7 percent in the same month a year ago. significantly by 13.9 percent in September following a revised annual growth of 3.2 percent in the previous month. Likewise, the volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing accelerated by 7.2 percent year-on-year in September, a reversal of the 3.6 percent (revised) contraction in August. percent in the previous month. This brought the January-October percent in September from 8.9 percent in August. For the January to September 2004 period, the cumulative annual growth of imports stood at 8.0 percent. Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines, Inc. previous month. This also represented a deceleration from the 81.9 percent increase in October 2003. Meanwhile, the combined truck and bus sales posted an 8.7 percent year-on-year growth in October, a reversal from the 7.8 percent dip in September. growth in September, and the 0.3 rise in October of last year. an improvement from the 12.6 percent registered for the comparable period in the previous year. This is still considerably higher than 7.4 percent, the lowest unemployment rate recorded during the peak growth years 1993-1996. while nominal RP interest rates eased during the 6 December 2004 auction of the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) relative to the previous auction, leading to narrower spreads over foreign interest rates. October, up from the 5.3 percent rise recorded in the previous month but significantly below the double-digit levels posted in the growth years during the pre-Asian crisis period of 1993-1996. end-September 2004, a marked slowdown from the 5.5 percent increase in the previous month, and lower than the double-digit growth rates registered during the pre-Asian crisis period of 19931996. auction of the Bureau of the Treasury relative to the previous auction rate. Healthy liquidity in the market helped soften the yields for the chief among them is the continued rise in world oil prices, which will affect the cost of producing other goods and services. On the other hand, the prospect of favorable agricultural output for the rest of the year is expected to provide a cushion for food prices. remainder of the year. However, the onset of a weak El Niño episode poses upside risks to food prices, and highlights the importance of timely intervention measures to limit adverse impact of the said weather disturbance. helped moderate world oil prices in December 2004. In the domestic market, pump prices of petroleum products increased by a range of P0.30–P1.00 during the first two weeks of November, reflecting the general uptrend in world oil prices. remittances from overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) for holiday-related spending. P147.7 billion, was 10 percent lower than the figure recorded in the same period a year ago. production and private consumption appeared to have slowed down in most economies alongside tapering export growth. On the price front, stronger inflationary pressures are expected to persist over the short term due to world oil prices, but the medium-term outlook remains in line with price stability. sustained improvements in consumer spending, business investment, and employment conditions. However, the large current account deficit could dampen prospects for sustained economic growth. growth and subdued consumption spending alongside the observed slowdown of the industries and services sector. private consumption tapered off and the property market cooled down, suggesting that growth for the short term had peaked and further hikes in borrowing rates might be put off until next year. moderating industrial output and lower export demand for electronics. latest respective monetary policy meeting. However, some, like the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and the Bank of Thailand for inflation remains essentially unchanged despite the recent higher outturns. The overall pattern of price data remains consistent with the assessment that (1) ongoing pressures on inflation remain tied to supplyside influences, and (2) the likely path of future inflation will be humpshaped, with the average inflation expected to exceed the 4-5 percent target in 2004-2005 but should ease back towards the same range target by 2006. the price front, notably the direct policy actions undertaken by Department of Agriculture (DA) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) on food prices and the easing conditions in world energy markets which have led to a downward shift in the expected inflation path. continue to indicate slack in the domestic economy with a slight risk of a slower pace of economic activity, particularly in view of indications of reduced business optimism and possible output effects of higher oil prices and recent weather disturbance. the risk of demand-side effects from ongoing supply shocks could increase in the very near term, and therefore merits close attention. The observed rise in various measures of core inflation could signal persistent movements in prices, and consequent adverse changes in inflation expectations. This underscores the need to avoid any spillover from short-term price developments to inflation expectations over the policy horizon. prevailing price and output conditions supports keeping present policy settings unchanged but suggests a greater need for the continued readiness among monetary authorities to undertake necessary policy action ahead of time against inflation pressures to guide and prevent unfavorable shifts in the public’s inflation expectations. supply-side risks should remain a key policy priority, and all possible avenues for non-monetary intervention in key commodities should continue to be explored and pursued. agreed unanimously to maintain current monetary policy settings. that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; SDAs; and to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening the BSP’s representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 13 January 2005.