The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: (1) maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight repurchase (RP) rate; (2) maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and (3) maintain the current reserve requirement ratios. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: from 4.1 percent in the previous month. The increase in May inflation was due mainly to higher prices of food items, particularly, meat, dairy products and cooking oil, which exerted the most pressure on headline inflation. The average inflation for the first five months of the year was 3.8 percent which remains lower than the Government-announced target of the average inflation for the first five months to 4.1 percent. food and energy products) edged up to 4.7 percent in May from 4.3 percent in the previous month (1994=100). Similarly, the 2000-based core inflation rose to 5.2 percent in May from 4.7 percent in the previous month. - The highlights of the discussions of the 1 July 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 5 August 2004. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. The 1 July 2004 meeting of the Monetary Board—the 7th monetary policy meeting for 2004—followed the Advisory Committee meeting held on 28 June 2004. that average headline inflation is likely to track the upper end of the 4.05.0 percent target inflation in 2004 and could possibly rise above the target in 2005 with the full impact of the various supply-side risk factors. The uptrend in inflation in recent months was driven mainly by supplyside factors, including the rise in the prices of food products, increase in the domestic pump prices of gasoline and other oil products as well as the adjustments in transport fares and utilities charges. continued to be some soft spots in the economy. This underpinned the view of moderate demand-side pressures in the near term. percent in April 2004 as in March, but was higher than the 77.0 percent a year ago. percent in April 2004, reversing the 5.0 percent contraction in the previous month. However, the volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing dipped by 5.2 percent year-on-year in April 2004 following a 10.3 percent contraction in March. percent in the previous month. This brought the January-April 2004 annual growth of exports to 6.9 percent. month by 8.3 percent year-on-year in April 2004 from 4.4 percent in March. This brought the January-April 2004 annual growth of imports to 6.9 percent. growth rates for eight straight months at a hefty 145.8 percent based on May 2004 report of the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines (CAMPI). increase for the fourth consecutive month at 3.8 percent year-on-year in May. This was slower than the 5.2 percent annual increase in energy sales in April but was higher than the 2.7 percent growth in May 2003. unemployment rate rose to 13.7 percent, representing an increase in the number of unemployed persons to 4.99 million in April 2004 from to the inflation outlook over the policy horizon. However, the favorable outlook for agricultural production, particularly, for the crops subsector, should help ensure stable food prices and provide some cushion against cost-side inflationary pressures. The potential cost-side risks to inflation could come from the adjustments in transport fares and utilities charges. weather conditions suggested favorable prospects for agriculture in commodities, particularly, corn, meat and fish products. Overall food supply conditions remain supportive of price stability. announcement of an increase in Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries’ (OPEC) production ceiling by 2.0 million barrels per day August 2004. In the domestic market, pump prices of gasoline and other fuel products increased following the rise in world crude oil prices in the previous month. Such increases translated into an increase in transportation costs. approved Meralco’s 13.27-centavo per kwh increase in generation charge by way of the periodic generation rate adjustment mechanism decision on the National Power Corporation’s (NPC) petition for an adjustment in the generation charge allowing the NPC to raise its rates by an average of 25.05 centavos per kwh. lending increased slightly. Meanwhile, nominal RP interest rates rose in June relative to the previous month. This led to the widening of spreads between RP and foreign interest rates. percent year-on-year from 4.8 percent in the previous month. following the 0.8 percent annual growth registered as of endMarch. auction of the Bureau of the Treasury relative to that registered in May reflecting market’s concerns over the perceived weakening of fiscal position of the National Government (NG), the anticipated increase in the US federal funds target rate as well as the risk premium associated with the then protracted canvassing of presidential and vice-presidential election results in Congress. US interest rate, the increase in the country’s unemployment rate and news reports regarding the NG’s plan to absorb the debt of the NPC. billion from P7.8 billion in April as the growth in revenues was outpaced by that of expenditures on account of election-related spending. This brought the NG deficit to P77.4 billion for the first five months of the year, only P2.2 billion away from the target for the semester. industrial production alongside sustained improvements in consumer demand and strong rebound in global trade in most regions. Overall, the conditions for sustaining the global economic recovery over the medium term remained in place. However, the sustained economic expansion in the US and the UK along with declining spare capacity could exert further pressures on inflation. improved further while the manufacturing sector sustained its robust performance in May. However, consumer prices continued to accelerate due to the steep rise in energy and food prices. strengthened in recent months supported by gradual improvements in private consumption and robust export performance. Inflation has remained in line with price stability although recent oil developments exerted upward pressures on consumer prices. backdrop of increased consumer spending and rising consumer prices, coupled with the gradual tightening of the labor market, inflationary pressures continued to mount in the UK. strong export performance as well as sustained improvements in business fixed investment and corporate profits. However, deflation continued to persist. activity, monetary authorities in Japan and the euro area remained cautious and kept their monetary policy settings unchanged during their latest policy meetings. However, the US Fed and the Bank of England consumer prices as their economies continued to strengthen. The US FOMC voted to raise federal funds target rate by 25 basis points to 1.25 percent during the 29-30 June 2004 meeting while the BOE raised its key repo rate by 25 basis points to 4.5 percent during its 10 June 2004. Advisory Committee, the members of the Monetary Board noted that the inflation outlook is likely to trend upward over the policy horizon. Inflation is likely to track the upper end of the 4-5 percent target for 2004 and could possibly rise above the target in 2005. ahead does not warrant a shift towards a monetary tightening bias. The recent uptrend in inflation could be traced to relative price changes involving selected CPI components and, therefore, is not broad-based. Potential for demand-side pressures on consumer prices are likely to be tempered by the presence of resource slack as evidenced by double-digit unemployment, continued spare capacity in manufacturing as well as subdued activity in lending and investments. possibility of an above-target headline inflation rate in 2005 are largely tied to supply-side developments particularly, higher energy prices, which are also driving wage and transport cost adjustments, in addition to utility charge increases. The members of the Monetary Board were of the view that the impact of these supply-side factors on inflation is likely to be transitory and thus, is not likely to be curbed by monetary action. exercise gradual caution in the path of monetary policy action in responding to unforeseen developments in the economy. This is in line with enhancing credibility in setting the stance of monetary policy. exchange market volatility remained present. They noted that the prospect of tighter monetary policy in the major economies—with its implications for interest differentials and exchange market stability that could, in turn, fuel inflationary expectations—could raise the possibility that limited monetary tightening may become necessary in the near future. current policy settings remained appropriate for the macroeconomic environment given the outlook for inflation. However, the Monetary Board underscored the need to monitor closely the emerging risks to the inflation outlook over the policy horizon. that have been made available since the last meeting on monetary policy on 3 June 2004 as presented by the Advisory Committee, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following policy measures: a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight RRP rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP rate; b. Maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs; and c. Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 29 July 2004.