The Advisory Committee[1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: (1) maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight repurchase (RP) rate; (2) maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and (3) maintain the current reserve requirement ratios. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: percent in the previous month using the 1994-based series for consumer price index (CPI). The increase in April inflation was due mainly to higher prices of selected food items, gasoline and other oil products, selected construction materials and the adjustment in transport fares. The average inflation for the first four months of the year was 3.7 percent, lower than the Government-announced target of four months to 4.1 percent. selected food and energy products) increased to 4.3 percent in April from 4.0 percent in the previous month (1994=100). Similarly, the - The highlights of the discussions of the 3 June 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 23 June 2004. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. The 3 June 2004 meeting of the Monetary Board—the percent in March. that the baseline average headline inflation is likely to trend higher but will continue to track the 4-5 percent target for 2004-2005. However, the recent transport fare adjustments and possible increase in utilities charges could threaten the inflation target over the policy horizon. The uptrend in inflation can also be attributed to expectations of improving aggregate demand conditions and emerging supply-side risks. while real GNP grew by 6.2 percent from the year-ago level. The economic expansion was broad-based with all the major production sectors (supply-side) posting higher growth rates. On the demandside, private consumption continued to be the major driver of growth along with the strong rebound in both investments and exports. soft spots in the economy as evidenced by the double-digit unemployment rate and fairly sizable level of spare capacity in manufacturing. steady at 78.6 percent in March 2004 from 78.4 percent in February, but was lower than the 80.1 percent a year ago. growth in March 2004 from 7.6 percent in the previous month. This brought the January-March 2004 exports annual growth to 6.3 percent. consecutive month but at a decelerated pace of 4.4 percent in March 2004 from 6.3 percent in February 2004 and from 11.6 percent a year ago. growth rates for seven straight months at 119.1 percent based on April 2004 report of the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines. by 7.8 percent year-on year in March 2004 from 6.2 percent in February. stable food prices and provide some cushion against cost-side inflationary pressures. The potential cost-side risks to inflation could come from the observed uptrend in world oil prices, increase in transport fares and the possible adjustments in user charges in the utility sector. quarter of 2004, the sector’s highest expansion in 15 years and more than twice the 3.6 percent growth registered in the same quarter a year ago. Both _palay_ and corn production performed better-than-forecasted, and benefited from favorable weather conditions as well as better irrigation facilities and the use of highyielding seeds. Forecasts of robust rice and corn production are expected to be sustained over the next quarters of 2004 which should help keep prices stable over the near-term. mainly to the strong demand for oil from US and China as well as the prospects of lower US crude inventory and continued hostilities in the Middle East which could threaten the stability of global supply. In the domestic market, pump prices of gasoline and other fuel products increased following the rise in world crude oil prices in the previous month. These developments prompted regulators to allow an increase in the minimum transport fare. pending petitions by the Meralco and the National Power Corporation (NPC) with the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) for a 27-centavo increase in generation rate and 12-centavo increase in distribution, metering and supply charge. bank lending increased slightly. Meanwhile, nominal RP interest rates eased in May relative to the previous month. This, combined with the increase in foreign interest rates, has led to the narrowing of spreads between RP and foreign interest rates. percent year-on-year from 4.8 percent in the previous month. modest 0.8 percent year-on-year growth to reach P1.47 trillion as of end-March 2004. This was, however, an improvement from the of the Bureau of the Treasury relative to that registered in April as auction rate was higher relative to the yield posted during the expectation of an imminent rise in the US federal funds target rate. consecutive month to average P55.84/US$1 for the period 1-31 May inflows from remittances of overseas Filipino workers in time for the school opening in June. for April 2004 stood at P7.8 billion, the lowest monthly deficit since June 2003. However, this level of deficit was 18.8 percent higher than the P6.6 billion deficit recorded in April 2003. This brought the cumulative level of deficit for the January to April 2004 period to P64.7 billion, 1.2 percent lower than the cumulative deficit for the comparable period in 2003 and was 81.3 percent of the 2004 first semester target of P79.6 billion. proceeding robustly. Growth in most regions has been driven mainly by industrial production and business investment, accompanied by growing consumer demand. However, economic expansion in the US and UK alongside rising consumer prices, declining spare capacity and surging world oil prices suggested rising inflationary pressures, which could pose risks to the sustainability of world economic recovery. momentum in the first quarter of 2004. The labor market continued to strengthen while the manufacturing sector returned to fairly solid growth in April. Consumer prices, on the other hand, continued to accelerate due to higher food and fuel prices. albeit at a modest pace. The robust global economic recovery has provided a favorable external environment while modest growth in retail sales signaled improving consumer demand. While these factors pointed to an overall positive outlook for the economy, uncertainties related to the tepid investment climate and sluggish labor market conditions indicate continued weak spots in the euro economy. robust consumption and solid investment performance. Latest economic indicators also supported the prospect of sustained economic growth going forward. by strong export performance and growing business fixed investments. Industrial production trended up while private consumption showed some positive movements as labor market conditions improved. activity, monetary authorities in the US, Japan and the euro area remained cautious as they kept their monetary policy settings unchanged during their latest policy meetings. However, the Bank of England (BOE) raised its policy rate by 25 basis points on 19 May Advisory Committee, the members of the Monetary Board noted that the inflation outlook is likely to trend upward over the policy horizon. for the year with a possibility of a further increase above the 4-5 percent target in 2005. outlook, which could threaten the inflation target over the policy horizon. These risks include the rising oil prices, increase in transport fares and the planned adjustments in utilities charges. The expected inflationary pressures are transitory in nature and do not appear to represent a permanent shift in the long-run price path. These supplyside risk factors are outside the sphere of monetary policy and, thus, a monetary policy response may not be warranted. However, careful monitoring should be sustained of the possible second round effects of these supply pressures on the demand side. demand-side pressures on future inflation. However, the overall likelihood of significant demand-driven pressure on consumer prices developing in the near term remained low given continued evidence of double-digit unemployment, spare manufacturing capacity and modest bank loan growth. various cost-side risks to the average annual inflation in 2004 and gradualism in considering any possible adjustments in policy rates in the future. This is in line with the need to sustain price stability with the flexibility of accommodating economic growth. could still emanate from volatile movements in the nominal exchange rate. They noted that the risk of exchange market volatility is linked mainly to negative market sentiment concerning the medium-term prospects for fiscal consolidation as well as the expected narrowing of foreign interest differentials as a result of cyclical monetary tightening in the major economies, particularly the US. current policy settings remain appropriate for the macroeconomic environment given the outlook for inflation. However, the Monetary Board underscored the need to monitor closely the emerging risks to the inflation outlook over the policy horizon. evidence that have been made available since the last meeting on Committee, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following policy measures: a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight RRP rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP rate; b. Maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs; and c. Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 1 July 2004.