The Advisory Committee1 submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: for the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight repurchase (RP) rate; Special Deposit Accounts (SDAs); and following measures: the inflation target in 2005 through press releases and other means, with specific emphasis on the driving role of supply-side factors in the inflation forecast and the notion that such factors cannot be appropriately addressed by monetary action. President clearly outlining the role of supply-related factors in the deviation from the inflation target and making reference to the BSP’s government measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. - The highlights of the discussions of the 26 August 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 30 September 2004. namely: the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant Governor, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. The 26 August 2004 meeting of the Monetary Board—the 9th monetary policy meeting for 2004—followed the Advisory Committee meeting held on 23 August 2004. The above recommendations were based on the following considerations: from 5.1 percent in the previous month. The acceleration in July inflation was driven mainly by price pressures on food and energy-related CPI components, as well as items classified under services, including transportation and communications. The average inflation for the period January to July 2004 was 4.3 percent, still within the Government’s announced target of 4-5 percent for 2004. to 6.6 percent from 5.4 percent in June to bring the average inflation for the first seven months of the year to 4.6 percent. headline inflation excluding selected food and energy products) tracked a similar uptrend in July. The 1994-based headline inflation inched up to of 5.3 percent in June. that inflation could possibly exceed the upper end of the 4-5 percent inflation target for 2004 and 2005 as the full impact of the supply-side risks is felt. However, in the absence of any further adverse supply-side shocks, average inflation is expected to revert to the 4-5 percent target in activities with a mild reduction in excess capacity in manufacturing. May 2004 from 78.8 percent in April, also higher than the 78.5 percent registered for the same month a year ago. percent in May 2004 following a 4.9 percent annual growth in the previous month. However, the volume of production index (VOPI) for manufacturing continued to dip by 1.6 percent year-on-year in May percent in May. This brought the first semester annual export growth to 8.5 percent. June 2004, a reversal from the 1.7 percent contraction in the previous month for a cumulative imports annual growth for the period January to June period of 7.2 percent. July, slower than the double-digit growth of 44.3 percent in the previous month, based on the report of the Chamber of Automotive Manufacturers of the Philippines (CAMPI). Meanwhile, the combined truck and bus sales continued to decline by 55.7 percent year-onyear in July following a 25.7 percent dip in the previous month. increase for the fifth consecutive month at 6.8 percent year-on-year in July 2004. This was higher than the 3.8 percent annual increase in energy sales in May and the 0.5 percent rise in June 2003. the unemployment rate rose to 13.7 percent from 12.2 percent a year earlier. In a related development, wage adjustments in the form of increase in cost of living allowance (COLA) have been granted to nine regions including Metro Manila as of 16 August 2004. inflation outlook, particularly the risks associated with volatile movements in world oil prices and the corresponding adjustments in domestic pump prices of oil, transport fares, and utility charges. In addition, some domestic supply constraints led to the uptick in selected food prices. Nonetheless, the favorable outlook for agricultural production, along with the timely implementation of Government policies should help stabilize food prices and provide some cushion against inflationary pressures. However, the recurrence of the avian flu outbreak in other Asian countries could raise demand for country’s poultry products and exert pressures on prices of local poultry products. Nevertheless, continued Government programs as well as forecasts of normal weather conditions remain supportive of the favorable prospects for agriculture in 2004. This should help ensure the broad stability of agricultural products, moving forward. both legitimate demand and supply concerns as well as short-term uncertainties relating to production capacity given the developments in major oil producing countries. that, in real terms, both the current world and local prices were still below their peak levels in 1991. Moreover, past data also showed that previous experiences with oil price hikes did not necessarily lead to a contraction in output. The available data also revealed that domestic oil price inflation influence overall inflation with a lag but more recent evidence also showed that this correlation has somewhat weakened. modest. Meanwhile, nominal RP interest rates declined during the 16 August 2004 auction relative to the previous month, but rose relative to the previous auction. June, slightly lower than the 6.1 percent posted in the previous month. following the 1.7 percent annual growth registered as of end-May. auction of the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) relative to those registered during the 16 July auction. Compared to the previous auction on 2 August 2004, however, T-bill yields were higher, reflecting market’s expectation that the uptrend in global oil prices could push inflation higher. appreciation of other regional currencies against the US dollar, as well as the sustained inflows of OFW remittances. budget deficit as of July 2004 reached P99.4 billion, about P844 million higher than the P98.6 billion target for the first seven months of 2004. broadening of the recovery process in the world’s major economies. On the price front, while stronger inflationary pressures persist over the short term, the outlook remains in line with price stability over the medium term. consumer spending. However, analysts expect the US economy to resume a stronger pace of expansion going forward. performance and gradual improvements in business investments. gains in the production industries and the continued rise in retail spending. private consumption and business investment in the second quarter. their respective policy rates by 25 basis points following their 10 August Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the European Central Bank (ECB) remained cautious and kept their monetary policy settings unchanged during their latest policy meetings held on 9-10 August 2004 and 5 August 2004, respectively. monetary policy, the members of the Monetary Board noted that inflation is likely to marginally exceed the upper end of the 4-5 percent target and could continue to rise above the target in 2005. However, the overall path remains hump-shaped as average inflation is also expected to taper off to around 4-5 percent in 2006, in the absence of continued adverse supplyside shocks. The Monetary Board’s assessment of the inflation outlook was based on the latest information and inflation forecasts provided by the Advisory Committee. conditions for inflation as well as output growth continued to argue for maintaining present monetary settings. The outlook for inflation continued to be driven largely by supply-side pressures, mainly the rise in oil prices. They believed that said price pressures are transitory in nature with no permanent long-run impact on the overall inflation path. The transient nature of the supply shocks as well as the overall conditions for aggregate demand and credit activity argue against monetary tightening at this time. BSP to continue to discuss and explain to the public the reasons behind the possible breach of the inflation target in order to promote transparency and enhance the credibility of monetary policy. They noted that communications with the public concerning the monetary stance should highlight the role of supply-side factors. BSP to issue an Open Letter to the public addressed to the President, in case the inflation target is breached. This forms part of the operational procedures under the BSP’s inflation targeting framework and is consistent with the transparency practices of inflation targeting countries. The members of the Monetary Board agreed that the Open Letter would include reference to “explanatory notes” in order to make clear to the public that the deviations in the inflation target are due to supply-side factors, which are beyond the sphere of influence of monetary policy. The letter should also explain in clear terms why the target was exceeded, and the policy actions, if any, taken by the monetary authorities. to the public the specific factors that caused the deviation of actual inflation from the target. The members of the Monetary Board agreed to refer to this predefined set of circumstances under which actual inflation may deviate from target inflation as the BSP’s explanatory note. These factors include price pressures arising from: (a) volatility in the prices of agricultural products; (b) natural calamities or event that affect a major part of the economy; (c) volatility in the prices of oil products; and (d) changes in government administrative or policy measures that directly affect prices. measures in addressing the inflation buildup due to supply shocks. Among other things, they identified the timely importation of specific agricultural commodities such as corn and feedstuffs as well as continued monitoring of prices of basic commodities as measures that could help ensure adequate supply and ease supply related price pressures. need to continue monitoring the evolving economic and financial developments and to assess their impact on the long-run price path. The Monetary Board also pointed out the need to monitor and measure possible second-round effects of supply shocks on inflation which could lead to inflation persistence, which may require measured action on the part of monetary authorities, in order to arrest a further build up in inflationary pressures and prevent inflation persistence. that current monetary policy settings remain appropriate. They believed that monetary tightening may be unwarranted at present given that the supply-side pressures driving the current uptrend in inflation remain dominant but are expected to be transitory. The members of the Monetary Board agreed to draft a letter addressed to the President to inform Her Excellency of the dynamics behind the upward trend in headline inflation and to reassure the President and the general public of the BSP’s firm commitment to delivering stable prices. that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved unanimously the following measures: percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; SDAs; and following measures: inflation process and the expected breach of the inflation target through press releases, press briefings and other means, with specific emphasis on the driving role of other supply-side factors in the inflation forecast and the notion that such factors cannot be appropriately addressed through monetary action. Philippines informing her of inflation developments, the reasons behind the inflation uptrend and measures undertaken by the BSP and other Government agencies to mitigate the impact on consumer prices. measures to address supply-side risks, particularly those relating to food supply, by strengthening representation and coordination with various government agencies. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting is scheduled on 23 September 2004.