The Advisory Committee[1] submitted for the consideration of the Monetary Board the following recommendations: (1) maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight repurchase (RP) rate; (2) maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and Special Deposit Account (SDAs); and (3) maintain the current reserve requirement ratios given the adequate level of liquidity in the system. The above recommendations took the following into consideration: down in December 2003 to 3.1 percent from 3.3 percent in the previous month. This brought the full-year average to 3.1 percent, below the Government’s target of 4.5-5.5 percent and equal to the 2002 average inflation. The low-inflation environment in 2003 may be traced largely to the absence of significant demand-driven pressures on consumer prices and the abatement of cost-push inflationary risks. December. The BSP’s main measure of core inflation (CPI less food and energy) was recorded at 3.4 percent year-on-year in December average core inflation rate of 3.0 percent for 2003 was also lower than the 3.8 percent average for the previous year. - The highlights of the discussions of the 15 January 2004 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 12 February 2004. namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of Research and the Director of the Treasury Department. The 15 January 2004 meeting of the Monetary Board—the 1st meeting for 2004 to discuss monetary policy issues—followed the Advisory Committee meeting held on represents a moderate rise in inflation, reflecting the impact of a projected rise in output growth and improvements in aggregate demand, possible wage adjustments as well as cost-push influences of planned adjustments in import tariff rates and utility charges. At the same time, the BSP’s assessment of the outlook for inflation also considered the risks stemming from financial concerns over domestic political conditions, which may influence the movements of foreign exchange and other financial variables with potential inflationary effects. the pace and strength of domestic demand showed a modestly improving trend but with continued soft spots. accelerated by 3.6 percent year-on-year in November 2003 following two consecutive months of very modest increases. The rise was due mainly to the growth in consumption by the industrial sector. Statistics Office (NSO) showed an improvement in domestic labor market conditions. The unemployment rate decreased to 10.1 percent in October 2003 compared to 10.2 percent in October 2002 and 12.6 percent in July 2003. the past two consecutive months of declines. November 2003 to US$2.95 billion, after two consecutive months of expansion. Year-to-date exports growth, however, remained positive at 0.5 percent. percent (revised) in October 2003 from the previous month’s 78.7 percent (revised). manufacturing in October 2003 slowed to 2.9 percent (revised) from production index (VOPI) for manufacturing declined for the second consecutive month by 5.5 percent (revised) year-on-year in October September 2003. percent year-on-year to 2,783 units of passenger cars sold in November 2003 from 81.9 percent in October prices and utility charges could be mitigated by the favorable outlook for food supply. US$28.10 per barrel in December 2003 from an average of US$27.66 per barrel in November. The relatively tight inventory situation and the projected increase in world oil demand imply that the current high level of oil prices are likely to be sustained over the near term.[2] In turn, increases in world oil prices are likely to be passed on to domestic pump prices of oil products. the Manila Electric Company (Meralco) a provisional rate increase amounting to an average of 12 centavos per kwh effective January of the rate increase on 15 January 2004 in response to a petition filed by cause-oriented groups. The approved adjustment would have been reflected as increases in the distribution, supply and metering charge components of Meralco’s unbundled bill. of 2003, drawing mainly from the robust rebound in the crops sector strong performance and the government’s sustained efforts to ensure adequate supply, food prices are expected to remain fairly stable in the near term. sentiment over the Government’s fiscal performance, nominal interest rates eased in early January. percent (revised) year-on-year from 2.5 percent in October. percent year-on-year to reach P1.49 trillion as of end-November increase in bank lending also represents an improvement from the banks, still awash with excess liquidity from the holiday season, competed to bid lower rates for government debt papers. During the November 2003 auction. the seasonal inflows of remittances from Overseas Filipino Workers elections as well as the higher corporate demand for dollars to cover for anticipated short dollar positions in the first few months of 2004. The peso-dollar exchange rate averaged at P55.43/US$1 in December P55.39/US$1 while spending continued to be prudent. The NG fiscal deficit for November reached only P8.3 billion, P9.5 billion lower than the target deficit for November. This brought the NG budget deficit to P172.2 billion for the period January-November 2003, P17.5 billion below the program for the same period. firmer. The world economy, led by the US, continued to show evidence of a moderate to strong recovery ahead. The economic performance of the euro area and Japan have been equally encouraging although slightly less brisk. of 2003 after posting a significant third quarter real GDP growth of noted that recent economic news have confirmed that “output is expanding briskly and that labor markets are improving modestly.”[3 ] increasingly to a gradual economic recovery in the euro area over the next quarters.[4] However, the recent appreciation of the euro against the US dollar poses downside risks to the Eurozone’s export performance, which in turn can dampen the growth prospects for the region. stronger activity in the services sector. However, business investment spending declined during the quarter due to a fall in spending on plant and machinery. the steady growth in exports and business investments (private capital outlays).[5] However, consumption spending has remained virtually flat due to still-weak labor market conditions. Moreover, given persistent structural factors such as excessive debt, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) expected that the increase in business fixed investment would remain moderate. remained generally cautious and kept their monetary policy settings unchanged as they await for firmer evidence of a sustained economic upturn. The US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the Governing Council of the ECB, the Monetary Policy Committee of the BOE and the BOJ have all opted to keep current monetary policy guidelines unchanged. boarddocs/ press/ monetary/ 2003/20031209/default.htm President of the European Central Bank, Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 4 December 2003; available at http://www.ecb.int Developments December 2003 (The Bank's View ),” 16 December 2003; available at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/ seisaku/03/seisak f.htm in key macroeconomic and financial indicators, the members of the Monetary Board discussed the appropriate monetary policy stance. The Monetary Board members shared the view that the absence of material changes in the balance of risks for consumer prices over the policy horizon strongly underlines the argument for maintaining the present monetary policy settings to ensure continued stimulus to the real sector. money and credit demand as well as the generally uneven character of the trends in other economic indicators suggested downside risks for the overall strength of economic activity. They pointed out the need for monetary policy to recognize the liquidity needs of economic growth against a backdrop of manageable inflation and ensure that the macroeconomic environment remained conducive to credit demand and investment activity. This would also affect over time the supply factors that could impinge on price stability. Advisory Committee to the Monetary Board: a. An active approach through further monetary easing to increase the stimulus to economic activity and respond to the lingering weakness in overall demand; and b. Cautious optimism in the form of maintaining the current monetary policy settings to preserve the ongoing stimulus to the real sector. The members of the Monetary Board agreed that the principal argument for further easing is the evidence of uneven conditions in aggregate demand, which pointed to downside risks to economic activity. However, they stressed that expected uptrend in inflation over the policy horizon suggests that a reduction in policy interest rates may not be warranted as this could fuel further pressures on consumer prices. The members of the Monetary Board also argued that a reduction in the policy rates may contribute to even higher demand for public sector credit, which could eventually constrain the sustainability of the NG’s fiscal position. In addition, the Monetary Board members raised the possibility of exchange market pressure when monetary policy settings are eased. The possibility of disorderly adjustments in the foreign exchange market, particularly due to political developments and shifts in market sentiment, underpin the need for continued caution in formulating the monetary policy stance. The members of the Monetary Board, however, pointed out that the pass through effect of exchange rate movements should be small given indications of negative output gap such as the sizable level of spare capacity in the manufacturing sector and the double digit unemployment level. However, they also noted that while the degree of exchange rate pass through to inflation is presently small, this should be carefully watched as a sharp and sustained depreciation of the peso could upset the inflation target. As in the previous Monetary Board meetings, the following arguments were again raised by the members of the Monetary Board in favor of maintaining current monetary policy settings: a. the outlook for 2004 inflation suggested that average inflation will be in line with the target, implying that monetary tightening may not be necessary; b. there continued to be evidence of sufficient liquidity to fuel the economy’s growth requirements, hence, further easing may not be necessary; and c. the monetary policy stance should be sufficiently cautious to guard against any possible renewed price pressures that may emerge over the near term. In conclusion, the members of the Monetary Board agreed that the decision to maintain the monetary policy stance would continue to ensure adequate liquidity to support growth in domestic demand while helping guard against potential price risks. available data on domestic and external conditions presented by the Advisory Committee, the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, approved the following policy measures: a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 6.75 percent for the overnight RRP rate and 9.0 percent for the overnight RP rate; b. Maintain the current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs; and c. Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios given the adequate level of liquidity in the system. The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy setting was scheduled on 12 February 2004.