It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
United with all relevant parties to make joint efforts unremittingly, it will firmly uphold the utmost priority of high-quality development, steadfastly follow the Chinese path to modernization, and apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, to speed up the establishment of a new development paradigm.
It will safeguard the overall stability of the economy and make its development more resilient.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the national economy is performing steadily with stable and sound momentum for growth, but the overall situations at home and abroad remain complicated and challenging.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy to improve the efficiency of capital utilization.
Moreover, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is targeted and effective and maintaining its continuity, stability, and sustainability, the PBOC has scientifically managed market expectations, made practical efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented and controlled financial risks.
In order to cope with the impacts brought about by the crisis and promote the stable and relatively rapid economic development in China, the government adjusted the direction of macroeconomic policy in a timely manner and took a series of policy measures to stimulate domestic demand.
The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial situtaion has become more complex.
On April 12, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) holds the first quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 84th meeting) in Beijing.
On September 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third regular quarterly meeting in 2018 (its 82nd meeting) in Beijing.
While consistency and continuity ofmacroeconomic policies should be preserved, appropriate measures should betaken in due course to fine-tune the forcefulness and focus of the policy inline with the changing environment.
In the meantime, the two-way opening-up at a high level in the financial sector will be further expanded to enhance the capacity for economic and financial management, risk prevention and control in an open economy, and participation in the international financial governance.
It will guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector and focus on stabilizing industry and supply chains, trying to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, act skillfully in turning external pressure into strong drive for deepening reforms and opening up, and focus on performing our own duties.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 2ndQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform yielding continuous dividends, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and loan rates have steadily dropped.
In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, consolidate the capability to manage economic and financial situation and prevent risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in international financial governance.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
The sound monetary policy has maintained its continuity, consistency, and sustainability to guide market expectations in a scientific way，to make great efforts to serve the real economy and to prevent and manage financial risks effectively.
Generally speaking, the financial industry remained in stable operation and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
Weak external demand poses enormous pressures, domestic demand expansion faces multiple constraints, some industries and enterprises experience operation difficulties, and economic restructuring remains an arduous task.
The participants discussed the current economic and financial situations at home and abroad and were of the view that performance of the financial sector and real economy in China was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable, despite many difficulties and challenges; the global economy was expected to continue a slow recovery trend but also faced some unstable and uncertain factors.
Efforts should be made to optimize credit structure, to bolster the financial support for weak links such as agriculture, farmers and the rural areas and small- and medium-sized enterprises, to address financing difficulties of certain enterprises, and to tighten up lending extended to the enterprises in highly energy-consuming, heavily polluting and overcapacity industries.
The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of the monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and fast growth momentum.Following the guidance of the Communist Party of China’s Central Committee andthe State Council, the PBC closely monitored economic and financialdevelopments while at the same time applying various monetary instruments tostrengthen liquidity management, steadily push forward interest rate reform andincrease flexibility of the RMB exchange rate.
Prices will pick up at low levels and remain at a reasonable level.
The international economic situation and monetary policy of the major economies have diverged as there are more positive signals in the U.S., the euro area has further relaxed its monetary policy, and the real sector in some developing economies faces many difficulties.
Ma Jiantang was on business leave.
On December 27, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the fourth quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 103rd meeting) in Beijing.
The foreign exchange administration system should be improved to vigorously advance trade and investment facilitation.
The PBC will implement the prudent and neutral monetary policy, control total money supply, and use multiple monetary policy instruments to maintain reasonable growth of money, lending and social financing to keep adequate and stable liquidity, improve the efficiency of financial operations and its capacity to serve the real economy, and constrain the overall leverage ratio at an acceptable level.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to encourage large banks to promote financial inclusiveness and small and medium-sized banks to focus on their mandatory responsibilities and businesses, so as to advance a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, facilitate the transition of pricing benchmark of outstanding loans with floating rates, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committee held that the international financial crisis further spread and deepened, and the international financial market was still in turbulence.
At present, the work of pandemic prevention and control in China continues to improve, and the restoration of the order of production and life is picking up pace.
On December 27, 2019, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 87th meeting) in Beijing.
It was pointed out that close attention should be paid to developments of the world economic and financial situations in the second half of this year.
The meeting heldthat, as a series of well-targeted macro control measures formulated by theState Council began taking effect, China’s economy kept developing in thedirection intended by the macro control, the financial system remained safe andsound, and the overall situation was good.
In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in both directions.
At end-September of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17.7 trillion yuan, up 16.5%.
The world economy is still in a period of profound readjustment after the global financial crisis.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and the world and changes in global capital flow, follow the overall requirements of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and bring about reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
Renminbi exchange rate formation system should be further improved,with the exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level to promote the balance of international payments.
The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place a top priority on stability.
Atthe same time, the pace, priorities and intensity of financial macro controlshould be brought in alignment with changes in the economic and financialsituations at home and abroad.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held thefirst quarterly meeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
The PBOC will make good use of policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments, with the priorities on supporting infrastructure construction and promoting government investment to drive private investment.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 4th quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
The participants analysed the current domestic and international economic and financial situations.
It was stressed at the meeting that the creditstructure should be further adjusted to prevent credit flow to low-efficientand duplicated construction projects, and that coordinated development of themoney market, capital market and insurance market should be push forward.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstacles in monetary policy transmission.
The performance of the financial sector and the overall price level are both stable.
It has used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR), central bank lending, and purchasing and selling of government bonds to provide solid support for the real economy and effectively prevent financial risks, creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
The special lending facilitating real estate delivery will be put into use at a faster pace, even with appropriately higher intensity if needed.
With the sound monetary policy maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks.
Broad money (M2) reachedRMB22.7 trillion yuan at the end of February, a year-on-year increase of 19.4%.Outstanding balance of loans extended by all financial institutions increasedby RMB509.2 billion yuan, accelerating by 55.3 billion yuan from a yearearlier.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 3rd regular quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 4th quarterly regular meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The domestic economy and financial sectors both have realized positive development in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial environments have become more complex.
At the same time, more channels should be explored to increase the proportion of direct financing, improve financing structure of the enterprises and strengthen funding capacity of the small and medium-sized enterprises.
It was agreed that, the economy was continuing to grow in asteady and relatively fast way with enhanced stability and coordination.However, problems still exist in economic operations including pressures on are bound in fixed-asset investment growth and imbalances in international balance of payments.
The spread of COVID-19 outside China and the world economy sees prospects for turnaround, but the overall situations remain complicated and challenging.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC)held its second quarterly meeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
Adhering to the Two Unwavering Commitments, the PBOC will make coordinated efforts to implement macro policies, expand demand, conduct reform and innovation, as well as prevent and defuse risks.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and to meet the reasonable financing needs of real estate companies regardless of their ownership types, thus promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
The PBOC will also deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, guide large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and give more support to banks in capital replenishment.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks and strike a balance between stabilizing growth, preventing risks and curbing inflation.
Necessary support has been rendered for economic recovery.
Their view is that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing the old ones.
Moreover, acute problems continued to exist in economic operations, includingexcessive fixed-asset investment in some sectors, bottlenecks in the supply ofcoal, electricity, oil and transportation, and a relatively large surplus offoreign trade.
However, the Chinese economy still faced a complex situation, with both favorable and unfavorable factors in sight.
The meeting emphasized the needs to further improve monetary policy transmission and promote the state-owned commercial banks to enhance both the incentives and restraints on loan marketing to actively meet the rational liquidity demands from those profitable and creditworthy enterprises with marketable products.
More work will be done to promote the well-regulated and healthy development of the financial businesses of platform enterprises and strengthen the normalized regulation on their financial activities.
The pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic recovery remains unstable and imbalanced, said the meeting.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, implemented a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates and the required reserve ratio (RRR), thereby providing effective support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
Under favorable conditions of stable and rising food production and smooth functioning of the energy market, we will keep prices basically stable.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government.
In the next quarter, the PBC will follow the State Council´s decisions on macroeconomic management, continue the relatively easy monetary policy, and maintain policy continuity and stability.
Work will be done to implement financial policy measures to promote the healthy development of the platform economy.
On December 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) holds the fourth regular quarterly meeting in 2018 (its 83rd meetings) in Beijing.
Following the guidance of the CommunistParty of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC closelymonitored economic and financial developments while at the same time strengtheningthe preemptiveness of monetary policy by applying a mix of policy measures toimprove financial macro control and preserve balances at the aggregate level.Despite the fact that volatilities in the USsubprime mortgages market have caused turbulences in the internationalfinancial market recently, the impact was so far quite limited on China.
The macro leverage ratio remains basically stable, financial risks have been effectively controlled, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
Outstanding balance of loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB13.3 trillion yuan, increased by RMB1403.5 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB496.8 billion yuan over the same period of last year, a record high growth of the last four years.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policymeasures to be adopted in the coming period, the Committee consented that thesound monetary policy should be continued, and efforts should be made topromote the financial policy become more forward-looking, scientific andeffective.
The PBC will render more financial support for helping enterprises stabilize jobs and expand recruitment, as well as for the entrepreneurship and employment of targeted groups.
Various policy instruments should be adoptedto manage the liquidity of the financial system in a timely and appropriatemanner.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor the marginal changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, strengthen the sense of crisis, amplify counter-cyclical adjustments, and make monetary policies more forward looking, flexible and targeted.
In this connection, the PBC would further streamline the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, maintain adequate liquidity of the banking system and ensure that the aggregate money supply be sufficient to support economic development.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to monitor the lastest domestic and international economics and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a sound monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, conduct timely and well-designed fine-tunings according to the situations, and strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast growth, economic restructuring and managing the inflationary expectation.
We will closely monitor the latest development  in the international and domestic economy and financial markets, and changes in international capital flows, adhere to the general principle of seeking progress while maintaining stability, adapt to the new norm of economic development, implement the prudent and neutral monetary policy, and use a variety of monetary-policy instruments, in order to maintain of the volume of liquidity generally stable, and to guide reasonable growth of monetary credit and social financing scale.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, while strengthening coordination of international macroeconomic policies.
Measures should also be taken to improve the managed floating exchange rateregime in a self-initiated, controllable, and gradual way and enable the market supply and demand to play a fundamental role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Supply and demand in foreign exchange market have been basically balanced, China’s current account surplus has remained at a stable level, and foreign exchange reserves have been in a sufficient state.
The market-based interest rate reform and the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime will be advanced to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will press ahead with financial reform and innovation, strengthen risk management, and make financial institutions more resilient.
The Committee discussed monetary policy and measuresto be adopted in the period ahead and concurred that the sound monetary policyshould be preserved and various monetary policy instruments be flexibly employedto ensure steady growth of aggregate money supply and credit and the continuityof the recent policy guidance.
Senior officials from the PBC’s Tianjin and Nanjing Branches attended the meeting as observers.
Meanwhile, effortsshould be made to promote restructuring of the industries and foreign trade andto facilitate the transformation of economic growth pattern and the improvementof growth quality.
It will resolutely enhance economic vigor, forestall and defuse risks, and improve social expectations, thus reinforcing the momentum of economic recovery and effectively upgrading and appropriately expanding the economic output.
The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and pronounced contradictions still persist.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2022, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and stabilized economic and social development to the greatest extent possible.
Consistency and stability of policy conducts will be kept whereas their intensity, pace and focus will be flexibly handled to enhance the targeting of such policies to enable the financial sector to support economic development in a more sustainable manner and maintain the healthy and stable operation of the financial system.
It is emphasized by the attendees that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, properly and soundly manage the intensity of countercyclical adjustments of macro policies, strengthen its efforts to invigorate micro entities, and fully maintain stability in employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign and domestic investments, and expectations.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market, hence contributing to the development of a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive.
Direct financing will be expanded to promote the development of the financial market.
Days ago, the 3rd quarterly meeting of Monetary Policy Committee was held in Beijing.
The market-based reform of interest rates and the RMB exchange rate regime reform will be advanced steadily to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Specifically, the PBOC will integrate implementation of the strategy to expand domestic demand with efforts to deepen the supply-side structural reform, and it will motivate business entities while ensuring policy effects, aiming to strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balancing internal and external equilibria.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, give play to the guiding role of the central bank policy rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates, and help stabilize and bring down the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for individuals.
The international economic and financial situation has become more complex, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
Structural monetary policy tools will play a supportive role to further back key areas, weak links, as well as the sectors battered by COVID-19.
Furthermore, measures will be adopted to perfect the macropurdential framework and use various monetary policy instruments to strengthen and improve liquidity management and guide the stable and appropriate growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, innovate and improve approaches to macro control, make timely and appropriate countercyclical adjustments, and enhance macro policy coordination.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse major financial risks, hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur, and strike a long-term balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy, build the new development paradigm, and focus on promoting high-quality development.
Coordination and cooperation between monetary policy and other policies including fiscal, industrial, trade and financial regulatory policies shall be improved, and the forward-looking nature of the monetary policies be enhanced to maintain stable and relatively rapid economic development.
Besides, forceful actions should be takento push ahead institution building in the financial market, expand directfinancing, and promote a balanced development of the financial markets.
Staying committed to the central task of economic development, the Two Unwavering Commitments and the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm.
While ensuring continuity and stability at aggregate level, preemptive andfine-tuning measures should be strengthened.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform to drive down lending rates, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, especially for MSBs and private enterprises, and increase the proportion of MSB loans, credit loans and loans to the manufacturing sector.
On the international side, although the European debt crisis abated and the global economy recovered moderately, uncertainties remained.
The prudent monetary policy will remain neutral, money supply will be properly managed to keep liquidity at reasonably ample levels, and steps will be taken to guide the reasonable growth of money supply, credit and aggregate financing to the real economy.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It will resolutely correct pro-cyclical behaviors and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting so as to prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at a reasonable and balanced level.
The structural monetary policy tools will be fully leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct accessibility” of policies.
The PBC will refrain from “flooding the market with liquidity,” and maintain generally stable prices.
It was noted that supported by steady expansion of public demands, the Chinese economy had maintained its rapid growth momentum during the first three quarters of this year.
Foreign exchange management system reform should be deepenedto promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
While the sound monetary policy stance is maintained, a mix of policy instruments should be flexibly used to appropriately adjust money supply on a timely basis.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, pursued a prudent monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
The PBOC will continue its efforts and ride on the momentum to intensify macro adjustments, implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthen both counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
The PBC carried out sound monetary policy and adoptedeconomic measures to address the excessive growth of money and credit.
The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of expectations has been scientific and effective.
By implementing the sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, and strengthening counter-cyclical adjustments, the PBOC has used a mix of policy instruments to earnestly serve the real economy and effectively prevent and control financial risks.
At present, these policy measures have taken preliminary effects, and the Chinese economy is showing positive signs, including adequate liquidity in the banking system, rapid growth of money and credit supply and stable operation of the financial system.
The Committee called for strengthening ofmacroeconomic and financial management to ensure the rapid and steadydevelopment of the Chinese economy.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be leveraged to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all-system financing aggregates at reasonable volumes.
The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, lending rates will be further guided downwards, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments.
Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to optimize their credit structure, prevent financial risks and improve their financial services to better serve the real economy and ensure a stable and relatively fast economy growth.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote the virtuous circle of the economy.
However, some emerging market economies still face challenges, and the international financial market has potential risks.
It was also agreed that the deposit and loan interestrates and the exchange rate of RMB should be kept stable, and market-basedinterest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
It was noted that the Chinese economy has maintainedgood growth momentum since the beginning of the year.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
Market should play a fundamental role in determining the exchange rate so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The financial system reform will be deepened, the two-pillar framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies and the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be improved.
The PBC will keep the aggregate at an appropriate level to drive a virtuous cycle between finance and the real economy and provide full support for “ensuring stability on the six fronts” (employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and “maintaining security in the six areas” (employment, people’s basic livelihood, market entities, food and energy, stability of industrial and supply chains, and smooth functioning of grassroots administration).
Atend-November, balance of broad money (M2) reached RMB21.6 trillion yuan,representing a year-on-year increase of 20.4 percent, and new loans of allfinancial institutions registered RMB2.87 trillion yuan, an acceleration ofRMB1.23 trillion yuan on year-on-year basis.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its second quarterly meeting of 2009 in Beijing days ago.
Appropriatemeasures should be taken to improve coordination of the monetary policy with fiscalpolicy, industrial policy, trade policy and financial regulatory policy,actively expand domestic consumption demand, manage the growth of fixed assetinvestment at appropriate level and optimize the investment structure.Meanwhile, efforts should be made to accelerate economic restructuring as wellas the transformation of economic growth pattern, improve growth quality andefficiency, and promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
It will continue to improve the credit structure, step up financial support to agriculture, rural areas, farmers, SMEs and other weak links, develop consumer credit, support the adjustment and revitalization of key industries and the development of emerging strategic industries, and promote independent innovation, mergers and reorganization, industrial relocation and balanced development across regions.
It will remain focused on the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform, implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and continue to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas.
In linewith the policy instructions of the CPC Central Committee and the StateCouncil, the PBC has implemented the sound monetary policy, closely monitoredthe economic and financial development, and kept monetary aggregates underproper control.
The PBOC will improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Vigorous actions should be taken to push aheadfinancial reform and innovations to improve the competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resources allocation.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rdQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 94th meeting) on September 24 in Beijing.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 3rd regular quarterly meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The PBC would further advance financial reform and innovation, and reinforce risk management, in order to enhance the financial enterprises´ capability in fending off risks.
In general, policymeasures have been proved effective in that the monetary and credit performancewas broadly kept in line with the policy stance of steady growth of money andcredit.
The PBOC has achieved remarkable results in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, and given full play to the role of the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the decisions and resolutions adopted at the 18th CPC National Congress, 3rd Plenum of 18th CPC National Congress and Central Economic Work Conference will be earnestly implemented.
The second quarterly meeting in 2002 of the monetary policy committee of the PBC was held in Beijing recently.
While providing guidance to ensure a rational growth of money andcredit on the aggregate level, measures should be applied to strengthen policycoordination between the local and foreign currencies, enhance liquiditymanagement of the banking system and apply a mix of monetary policy instrumentsto maintain basic stability of the price level.
Liquidity in the banking system remains adequate, money and credit supply grows rapidly, and the financial system functions in a stable manner.
It will remain committed to the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, precise, adaptive and appropriate.
In general, the financial industry performed well in the first fivemonths of this year.
The global economy is gradually recovering, with continued recovery in major developed countries and certain challenges in some emerging economies.
The financial system reform will be deepened by refining the two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies, advancing the reform in interest rate and other key areas, and smoothing the monetary policy transmission channels.
Financial services with respect to consumer commodities and social services will be improved.
The international economic and financial situation is complicated, and it has been more apparent that global uncertainty is evolving at a faster speed.
In addition, the PBOC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial management as well as risk prevention and control in an open economy.
The market-based interest rate reform will be furthered so that the market mechanism will play a fundamental role in resource allocation.
After analyzing domestic and global economic and financial developments, the Committee held that policy measures adopted to address the international financial crisis have produced remarkable results, with investment growth accelerating, consumption expanding rapidly, and domestic demand playing a greater role in driving economic growth.
It will put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector based on market demands, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
Meanwhile, efforts shouldbe made to advance financial reform, and promote a coordinated development ofthe direct and indirect financing so as to enhance the effectiveness ofmonetary policy transmission.
Efforts should be made to increase the contribution of domestic demand, household consumption in particular, to economic growth, to shift development pattern, and to speed up strategic adjustment of economic structure.
It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development have bolstered the sustained economic recovery.
Efforts will be made to improve the RMB exchange rate mechanism and keep the RMB rate basically stable at an equilibrium and adaptive level.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2006 in Beijing days ago.
Shang Fulin and Mr.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy featuring a steady and moderate tighteningshould be continued while efforts need to be made to further improve theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach in the making of monetarypolicy.
It was agreed in the meeting that, despite variousdifficulties, the Chinese economy had maintained the rapid growth momentumduring the first three quarters of this year.
The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform and improve the regulatory framework underpinned by the two pillars of monetary policy and macro prudential policy.
It will put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
In accordance with the overall arrangement ofthe State Council, the PBC properly managed the priorities, pace and intensityof financial macro control.
The Chinese economy still faces many uncertainties.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment.
The international economic situation and monetary policy of the major economies have diverged as there are more positive signals in the developed economies and growth in some emerging economies has continued to moderate.
It was agreed that remarkable results have been achieved in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development since the beginning of this year, and the Chinese economy has gradually returned to normal.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large banks to focus more attention on financial inclusiveness and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main businesses and responsibilities, thus advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC will enhance market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system, optimize regulation over deposit rates, constantly unleash the potential of the LPR reform and further bring down actual loan rates.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the decisions and resolutions adopted at the 18th CPC National Congress, 3rd Plenum of the 18th CPC Central Committee and Central Economic Work Conference will be earnestly implemented.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, guide financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, and strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
Instead, Jiang Jianqing, Shang Fulin and Li Yang will join the Committee as new members.
Measures should be taken to actively advance industrial andinternational trade restructuring, promote the equilibrium of the BOP, fosterthe transformation of economic growth pattern, and improve the efficiency ofeconomic growth.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable overall and become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It will also focus on expanding domestic demand, boosting confidence, and expediting a virtuous circle of the economy so as to provide stronger support for the real economy.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial development.It was agreed that the PBC shall meet the requirements of strengthened macroeconomic control, flexibly adopt a mix of monetary policy instruments, furtherpromote the fundamental role of market mechanism in resource allocation,continue to appropriately manage the money and credit aggregate, improvefinancial services and optimize credit structure.
The transition of the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans has been completed, and the loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been delivering benefits, with monetary policy transmission becoming more efficient and loan rates significantly lowered.
It will make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, and move ahead with the effective implementation of new facilities such as the swap facility for securities, fund and insurance companies, and central bank lending for share buybacks and holdings increase, which shall stabilize the capital market.
It was noted thatat present China’s economy maintained a steady and rapiddevelopment momentum, but problems such as a potential rebound of fixed assetinvestment, excess money and credit supply and excessive liquidity were notadequately addressed, accompanied by a palpable pressure of price hike.
Monetary policy instruments should be adoptedto timely and moderately manage the financial system liquidity while avoiding majorfluctuation.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used and innovated to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
We will guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector and support accelerating the development of a modern industrial system, in a bid to provide private enterprises with financial support that is commensurate with their contribution to economic and social development.
The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
The meeting waschaired by Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy CommitteeZhou Xiaochuan, and attended by committee members Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong,Ms.
Effective performance assessment system and risk management system should be in place so that commercial banks would attend to both near-term and long-term development goals, manage balanced credit extension throughout the year.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Considering the situation, the PBC will place an utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
While fixed-asset investment should be brought undercontrol, domestic consumption shall be boosted to rationalize the relationshipbetween investment and consumption.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its first quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
The Committee also agreed to keep the RMB interestrates basically stable while pushing ahead the market-based interest ratereform.
A mix of new monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
Towards this end, measures would be taken to further improve the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, optimize credit structure, bolster the financial support for weak links such as agriculture, farmers and the rural areas and small- and medium-sized enterprises, develop consumer credit, support independent innovation, merger and acquisition, industrial relocation and coordinated regional development.
The meeting stressed the necessity to conscientiously implement the decisions of the eighteenth National Congress of the CPC and the third, fourth, fifth and sixth plenary sessions of the eighteenth CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, the National Financial Work Conference, and government work report.
The international economic and financial situation has become more complicated, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
The performance of the world economy diverged, with increasing signs of growth momentum in the U.S. and the euro zone, and further moderation of growth in some emerging economies.
Renminbiexchange rate shall be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibriumlevel to promote the balance of international payments.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will fully implement the requirements of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
It was pointed out at the meeting that as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties, and the domestic economic development faces triple pressures, namely demand contraction, supply shocks, and weakening expectations.
On June 24, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2022 (its 97th meeting) in Beijing.
While ensuring continuity and stability at aggregate level,preemptive and fine-tuning measures should be strengthened and the marketitself should be allowed to play its role in economic restructuring.
Participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
The sound monetary policy is practiced responding to the requirements of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, the prevention and control of financial risks is steadily and resolutely carried forward, and continued improvements have been made to the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
At the same time, the urgency of economic restructuringshould be fully recognized, the coordination of the monetary policy with fiscalpolicy, industrial policy, trade policy and financial regulatory policy shouldbe enhanced and economic restructuring accelerated to promote a basicequilibrium of the balance of payments.
The PBC carried out soundmonetary policy, strengthened open market operations and employed variousmonetary policy instruments including raising reserve requirement ratio by 1percentage point to keep money supply and credit grow in a steady way.
The PBC will facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
The PBC will impose strict controls over lending to highly energy-consuming and heavily polluting industries and enterprises with excess capacity.
The PBOC will accelerate building a diversified and seamless financial service system that covers the entire life cycle of sci-tech-based enterprises, which will facilitate building China into a great power in science and technology, and achieving sci-tech self-reliance and self-strengthening at higher levels.
It will pursue the strategy of expanding domestic demand while deepening supply-side structural reform, and leverage policy effectiveness while stimulating the vitality of business entities.
With these efforts, the financial market is expected to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed.
The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
The meeting urged that special attention should be paid to expand access to credits by the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and county-level economic agents.
The economic and financial performance has broadlyremained in sound situation.
We will improve consumer financial services with respect to commodities and social services, and proceed with greater financial support for enterprises to stabilize and expand employment, as well as for targeted groups to start businesses and seek employment.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the spread of COVID-19 outside China and the world’s economic landscape are still complicated and challenging for the time being.
It will improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 2nd quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
The Committee held that, the package to cope with the international financial crisis would be implemented in a comprehensive manner, enriched and improved according to changes of the situation.
The monetary and credit aggregates are basically commensurate with the needs to sustain economic growth.
It will work on developing tools to support carbon emissions reduction, and improve the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality.
Work will be done to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between ensuring stable growth and preventing risks, focus on diffusing risks amid reform and development, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
China should monitor the impact of the fresh bailout and stimulus measures taken by Europe and the United States recently.
Various policy instruments should be adoptedflexibly to manage the liquidity of the financial system in a timely andappropriate manner, guide the financial enterprises to improve their creditstructure, appropriately control the proportion of medium and long-term loans inthe overall lending business, and gradually rationalize the ratio ofconsumption to investment.
It will take steps to put in place the support instrument for carbon emission reduction, and promote the green finance system for peaking carbon dioxide emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Financial institutions will be encouraged to increase credit support for enterprises providing supplies for epidemic containment, resumption of work and production, poverty alleviation, spring farming and tillage preparation, poultry and livestock breeding and foreign trade.
Market supply and demand of foreign exchange should be allowed toplay a greater role in the process of increasing RMB exchange rate flexibility,with a view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level.
In line with the arrangement of the StateCouncil, the PBC has closely monitored the economic and financial performance,and curbed the overly rapid growth of money and credit with a mix of variousmonetary policy tools.
In accordance with the principle of keeping a prudent stance, making proper adjustment and optimizing structure, a mix of monetary tools will be adopted to control liquidity and bring the monetary and credit conditions back to a normal state.
The PBOC will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and maintain a reasonable growth and a stable pace of credit supply, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
At end-June of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17 trillion yuan, up 14.7%.
After studying the direction and measures of monetary policy in the next stage, the Committee held that, in view of implementing the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on macroeconomic management, relatively loose monetary policy should be conducted and policy consistency be maintained.
The PBOC will work to ensure delivery of presold housing projects and safeguard stability as well as people’s livelihood, promote the healthy and stable development of the real estate market, and accelerate to improve the financial policy system for housing rental, so as to facilitate the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector.
It has achieved remarkable results in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, and given full play to the role of the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates.
However, the downward pressure on the economy is mounting, and the spread of COVID-19 outside China has not only exerted adverse impact on the world economy, but also posed new challenges to China’s pandemic control and economic growth.
The PBC will keep its monetary policy consistent, stable and sustainable by properly managing the timeliness, intensity and effectiveness of the policy, so as to maintain necessary support for economic recovery.
The trend of faster than desiredincrease of money and credit had been preliminarily reined in, and theperformance of financial industry remained stable.
Coordinated efforts have been made to help turn around overall economic performance, enhance the endogenous growth dynamics of the economy, improve social expectations, and defuse potential risks in a sustained way, thereby setting the stage for building a modern socialist country in all respects.
The countercyclical adjustments of macro policies should be intensified so as to invigorate micro entities and make all-round progress in stabilizing employment, the financial sector, domestic and foreign investment, foreign trade and expectations.
It was emphasized that commercial banks should makeefforts to prevent new credit risks, further improve loan structure, strengthenliquidity management, and steadily promote various reforms, includingstrengthening internal control mechanism and corporate governance.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit rates has brought into play, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have dropped significantly.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, trade and investment, elevated inflation, and persistently tightened central bank policies in developed countries, and increased volatility in global financial markets.
However, its endogenous growth dynamics is still not strong enough, and the demand drivers are still inadequate.
The mechanism for the coordination between  and the transmission and implementation of fiscal, monetary and employment policies will be improved to ensure that the economic performance is within a reasonable range.
We will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and develop funding chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby creating a virtuous circle and interaction among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector and industries.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stable expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The overall domestic economy is gradually rebounding with a steady recovery in market demand and a growing supply of production.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses.
It will make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, and move ahead with the implementation of newly initiated facilities such as the central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological transformation, and the central bank lending for affordable housing.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts should made to implement the prudent monetary policy, make the financial measures more targeted, flexible and effective, and give more priority to stabilizing the general price level in 2011.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used in a flexible way to keep liquidity reasonably adequate.
It was unanimously agreed that the Renminbi interest and exchange rates should be basically maintained stable in the near term taking into consideration of current economic and financial developments.
It will also stabilize banks’ liability costs, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and give full play to its guiding role, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
It will continue to make good use of the funds already injected under the policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments, and enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives, thereby effectively stimulating the private investment.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held its fourth quarterly meeting in 2006 in Beijing recently.
The PBC will take more proactive measures to boost support for the real economy.
Itwas agreed that the economy had maintained steady and relatively fast growthmomentum.
The U.S. economy has shown more positive signs, the euro zone faces deflationary risk, and the real sector in some emerging economies has to address many difficulties.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to stability and promoted the overall improvement of economic operation.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, implemented a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthened the counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing effective support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
In addition, the PBOC will fully understand the new changes in the relationship between supply and demand in the real estate market, meet people’s new aspiration for high-quality housing, and strive to ensure that the financial policy measures that have been introduced will deliver results, thus promoting the stable and sound development of the real estate market.
The Chinese economy faces tougher challenges.
The growthof money and credit shall be properly controlled and credit structure furtheroptimized.
The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to keep the RMB exchange rate generally stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, forestall and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
The structural monetary policy tools will be effectively leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct reach” of policies.
Moreover, measures will be taken to promote the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, in a bid to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
In line with the scientific approach to development, efforts would be made to enable domestic demand to play a greater role in driving economic growth, shift the development model and accelerate strategic restructuring.
Efforts will be made to facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
It will implement a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
The performance of the financial sector and the overall price level were both stable.
It will focus on promoting high-quality development and pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task by staying committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
The PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, appropriate and well-targeted manner, and use a mix of monetary policy tools and innovate new ones to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced initial results, and real lending rates have seen a marked decline.
Work will be done to implement financial policy measures to promote healthy development of the platform economy so as to promote standardized, healthy and sustainable development of platform enterprises.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and fast growth momentumin the third quarter of this year.
The PBC continued to conduct sound monetarypolicy and ensured timely provision of financial services for SARS preventionactivities.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations, resolutely correct one-sided and pro-cyclical behaviors, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting, hence keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Efforts should be made to curb excessive growthof money and credit by adopting various monetary policy instruments, restrainthe excessive growth of money and credit and further improve credit structureto encourage growth in some sectors and discourage in others to ensure creditsupport to agricultural economy, job creation, students, small &medium-sized enterprises and other vulnerable groups.
To protect the legitimate rights and interests of home buyers and boost the sound development of the real estate market, the PBC will guide commercial banks to provide supplementary financial support.
By promoting the balance between internal and external equilibria, and coordinating financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, the PBC will ensure the national economy performs within a reasonable range, promote high-quality economic development, and thereby stand ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
Itwas concurred that efforts should be made to fully carry out the guidelineslaid out by the Central Economic Work Conference, firmly adopt a scientificdevelopment approach and continue to strengthen and improve macro financialadjustment to ensure price stability and healthy economic development.
Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used and macro-prudential policy measures will be employed to make counter-cyclical adjustment, to keep the money and credit aggregates and all system financing aggregates at reasonable volumes.
Domestically, the economy is on a recovery trajectory, but the pressures of shrinking demands, supply shocks and waning expectations still exist.
The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of market expectations has been scientific and effective.
It will make good use of the support instruments providing inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs), increase central bank lending for rural development and MSBs, and implement the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, to enhance flexibility of fluctuation in both directions and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Further studies will be conducted on establishing a macro-prudential regulatory system to prevent and mitigate potential systemic risks.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterlymeeting of 2004 in Beijing days ago.
As the expectations remain stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and served as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Economic and financial structure has experienced positive changes.
Liquidity of thefinancial system shall be managed in a timely and appropriate manner.
In the meantime, efforts will be made to integrate reform measures into macroeconomic regulation, and enhance the efficiency of financial sector operation and its ability to serve the real economy.
The meeting called for promoting structural adjustment,institutional reform and growth pattern while strengthening aggregates control soas to fully adopt the scientific approach to economic development; and speedingup construction of financial markets to improve the efficiency of monetarypolicy transmission.
Global economy still showed a sign of weakness.
The Committee held that recovery of the global economy was likely to continue in 2011, although with a lot of unstable factors and uncertainties.
Liquidity was adequate in the banking system, growth of money and credit supply rapid and the financial system operated in a stable manner.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committeeheld that the Chinese economy maintained a sound and rapid developmentmomentum, but the inflationary pressure was noticeable and the BOP imbalancesstill remained despite the generally upbeat situation.
On the other hand, due to a number of factors such as the European debt crisis, with global economic growth remaining tepid, instability and uncertainty rising, the Chinese economy still faced complex domestic and external situation.
The Committeediscussed monetary policy stance and measures in the coming period.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to play their leading role in providing financial services for the real economy, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and support banks in capital replenishment.
The RMB exchange rate regime will be further improved to keep.
With the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates playing an important role and the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously unleashing its potential and offering guidance, the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for personal consumption are expected to remain stable with a slight decline.
Adhering to the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, and placing a top priority on stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively.
Adhering to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and the strategic orientation of structural adjustments, the PBC will keep firmly in mind the strategic basis of expanding domestic demand, take solid steps to ensure stability on the six fronts (employment, financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and fully implement the task of maintaining security in the six areas (the employment of residents, the basic livelihood of the people, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normal functioning of primary-level governments).
The attendees has analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
The PBC will further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for countercyclical adjustment.
It will ensure that the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play an important role.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the 2020 Central Economic Work Conference, act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and prioritize stability and refrain from making abrupt changes.
Operation of the financialindustry broadly remained stable.
Members of the Committee and heads of relevant government ministries including Wang Chunzheng, Zhang Zhigang, Jin Liqun, Xiao Gang, Guo Shuqing, Ma Yongwei, Zhu Zhixin, and Zhang Enzhao attended the meeting.
In this way, private enterprises will get financial support proportionate to their contribution to the economic and social development.
With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved.
It will take solid steps to ensure the delivery of presold housing projects, people’s livelihood and stability, and adopt city-specific measures to meet residents’ rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions.
The economicand financial performance has broadly remained in sound situation.
The monetary policy committee of the PBC convened its first quarterly meeting in 2010 in Beijing days ago.
Atend-August, balance of broad money (M2) increased by 21.6 percent year-on-yearto RMB21 trillion yuan, and RMB loans of all financial institutions grew byRMB2.1680 trillion yuan from end-2002 to RMB15.3 trillion yuan, RMB1.1025trillion yuan more than the expansion recorded for the first eight months of2002.
The PBOC will guide the sound and well-regulated development of the financial business of platform enterprises and improve the regular supervision on their financial activities.
Staying committed to the central task of economic development, the Two Unwavering Commitments, and the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
The PBOC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, guide reasonable growth and balanced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level, so as to keep prices at a reasonable level.
The PBC will ensure stability on six key fronts and maintain security in six key areas.
Market-based interest rate reformpolicies should be continuously carried out, and commercial banks and rural credit cooperatives should be encouraged to enhance their capabilities in risk pricing and liability management.
The meeting further pointed out that facing with the favorable recovery of global economy and domestic demands, the sound monetary policy should be continued through flexible use of a broad mix of monetary policy instruments to increase money supply and strengthen financial support to economic development.
The PBOC will also make significant efforts in the areas of sci-tech finance, green finance, inclusive finance, pension finance and digital finance, make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, ensure effective use of the central bank lending and discount quotas, continuously increase support for inclusive finance, green transition, sci-tech innovation, digital economy and infrastructure construction, and adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
Weighing the monetary policy stance and measures for the comingperiods, the Committee held the view that efforts should be made to keep thecontinuity and stability of the monetary policy, take more preemptive, targetedand flexible financial macro control measures, properly manage the focus, paceand intensity of these measures and various monetary policy instruments in linewith the macroeconomic adjustment policies of the State Council, so as tocreate a benign monetary environment for sound and rapid economic development.It is necessary to improve the credit structure in the principle of encouraginggrowth in some sectors while discouraging it in others, to increase financialsupport for agriculture, rural areas and farmers, post-quake reconstruction,students, consumption, those industries that have created lots of jobs but arein difficulties, to support balanced economic development across regions, to guidefinancial institutions to provide proper financial products and services and render more lending support to small- and medium-sizedenterprises.
Adhering to the Two Unwavering Commitments, the PBOC will make coordinated efforts to implement macro policies, expand demand, conduct reform and innovation, as well as prevent and defuse risks, and integrate the implementation of the strategy of expanding domestic demand with deepening supply side structural reform.
In their view, China's economic and financial sectors performed in a relatively moderating and stable manner.
It was emphasized at the meeting that it was necessary to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, maintain policy stability and consistency, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, properly handle the intensity, pace and focus of policy implementation, conduct fine-tunings and take preemptive measures in a timely manner in view of changing situations, strike a balance among stable and relatively fast economic growth, economic structural adjustment and inflation expectation management, and strengthen systemic risk prevention.
It will build the systems and mechanisms for providing effective financial support for the real economy, implement the action plan to increase financial support for technology-based enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, thereby expediting the building of a modern industrial system.
It will resolutely prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of the economic situations, strengthen coordination of international macroeconomic policies, concentrate on running its own affairs well, and make fine cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The participants analyzed the current economic and financial situation in China and beyond, and were of the view that performance of the Chinese economy was within a reasonable range.
It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, strengthen countercyclical adjustment, and enhance macro policy coordination to forge synergy.
There will be continued efforts to optimize the financing structure and credit structure, and to increase the proportion of direct financing according to the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform.
Meanwhile, excessive growth of investment and credit in real estate development in some areas should be closely monitored.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadilyadvanced.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, follow the mechanism that allows dynamic adjustments to first-home mortgage rate policies, lower the ratio of down payment and the floor on second-home mortgage rates, urge the reduction of the interest rates on existing first-home mortgage loans, and increase financial support for public infrastructure development for both normal and emergency uses, urban village renovation and government-subsidized housing construction, thus facilitating the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector and promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
Financial macro adjustmentshould be further improved to promote a steady and rapid economic growth aswell as price stability.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the steady development of the financial market.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
The market-based interest rate reform and the RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee agreed that China’seconomy continued to expand in a stable and relatively rapid pace.
Considering the situation, the PBOC will overcome difficulties, and build on this momentum to intensify macro adjustments, and implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, the Committee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, andsteps should be taken to promote coordination between domestic and foreign currency policies and strengthen the liquidity management of banking system.
It will pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task, stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and consolidate and expand achievements made in pandemic containment and economic and social development.
Following the guidance ofthe Communist Party of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBCstrengthened financial macro control to preserve balances at aggregate level.The economic and financial performance has broadly remained in sound situation.
The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, improve the loan prime rate (LPR) formation mechanism to promote its application, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and boost the sustained and sound development of the economy.
Improvement of the foreign exchange managementregime reform should be effected by strengthening the oversight overcross-border capital flow.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to monitor the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, conduct timely and well-designed fine-tunings according to the situations, and strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast growth, economic restructuring and managing the inflationary expectation.
The PBC has continued to implement the sound monetary policy while the commercial banks gradually established and improved their incentive and restraint mechanisms to promote loan marketing, resulting in acceleration of the growth of monetary credit and strengthening of financial support to economic development.
It was agreed thatthe Chinese economy has run smoothly and continued to develop towards theexpected targets of macro control.
Market supply and demand of foreign exchange should be allowedto play a greater role in the process of increasing RMB exchange rateflexibility, with a view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable atan adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, the trend of relatively rapid economic development to aneconomic overheating has yet not been contained, represented by excessivecredit extension and increased inflationary pressure.
It was emphasized at the meeting that to implement the decisions of the 18th CPC National Congress, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Executive Meetings of the State Council, the latest developments in the financial market and real sector at home and abroad and the changes in international capital flow will be closely monitored; in accordance with the general requirements of keeping the continuity and stability of macro-economic policies, the sound monetary policy will be continued, and policy measures will be more targeted and balanced; fine-tuning and preemptive adjustment will be conducted when necessary; efforts will be made to strike a balance among pursuing stable growth, adjusting economic structure, promoting reform and preventing risks; optimize the allocation of financial resources; make good use of the new loans and mobilize the stock of credit assets in order to create a good financial environment and monetary conditions for the adjustment of economic structure, upgrading and transformation of the economy.
Financial reform and innovation should be pressed ahead to improve the competitiveness of financial institutions and the efficiency of the financial markets in resources allocation, and to streamline the transmission mechanism for the conduct of moderately loose monetary policy.
The PBOC will effectively advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement with enhanced driving forces and solid progress in high-quality development, but it still faces challenges such as insufficient effective demand and weak social expectations.
In their view, both the real economy and the financial sector in China was moving in the direction intended by the macro-economic management policy, though the external environment remained complex with the world economy slowly recovering amongst a multiple of risk factors; the Chinese economy had continued its stable and fairly rapid growth with inflation pressure moderated but remaining high.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2010 in Beijing days ago.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation bothat home and abroad.
The Committee held that, to implement the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on macroeconomic management, the PBC would implement a relatively loose monetary policy, maintain policy consistency and stability, and guide money and credit supply to grow in an appropriate manner.
It was pointed out at the meeting that as the overseas pandemic situations and the world economy remain severe and complex, efforts should be made to enhance the research and analysis of the international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, concentrate on doing our own affairs well, improve cross-cyclical policy designs and adjustments, and support high-quality economic development.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation at home and abroad and agreed that China’s economy was broadly in good shape although it stillfaced some problems such as inappropriate economic structure, extensive growthmodel and imbalanced BOP.
It was agreed thatthe Chinese economy has maintained the rapid and sound growth momentum.
Weighing themonetary policy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee heldthe view that a tight monetary policy should be implemented by taking variousmeasures in line with the guidance of the Central Economic Work Conference.Efforts should be made to strengthen liquidity management by taking effectivemeasures, improve guidance on financial institutions, restrain the excessivegrowth of money and credit and further improve credit structure to ensurecredit support to agricultural economy, job creation, students, small&medium-sized enterprises and other vulnerable groups.
Improvement of themanaged floating exchange rate regime should be effected, continuouslyfollowing the principle of “ making it a self-initiated, controllable and gradualprocess”.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregate and the all-system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
In their view, both the real economy and financial sector in China were moving in the direction intended by the macro-economic management policy, the economic growth and the overall price level stabilized, and the balance of payments became more balanced.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy, and give full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools.
Specifically, it will continue to implement the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, to reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance through central bank lending and central bank discounts, and to guide financial institutions to step up support for areas such as sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development.
The principle of makingthe RMB exchange rate reform a self-initiated, controllable and gradual processshould be followed to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at anadaptive and equilibrium level.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 2ndQuarterly Meeting of 2004 in Beijing on June 18th.
Comprehensive measures should be taken to accelerate economic restructuring and transformation of growth pattern, intensify the system reform and promote equilibrium of international payments so as to achieve a balanced and sustainable development of the national economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, PBC will earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC),  the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and explore an effective way to that end; to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, increase the two-way flexibility of RMB exchange rate fluctuations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBOC will make great efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, old-age finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, thus accelerating the development of new quality productive forces, and better satisfying reasonable demand for consumption and financing in a targeted manner.
More credit will be channeled to the real economy, especially to support agriculture, the countryside, farmers and medium-sized and small enterprises, so as to help promote the strategic and economic restructuring.
The PBC will work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission to lower the cost of social financing, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, and encourage financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
The world economy continues to undergo profound adjustment in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Measures should be applied to strengthen policy coordination (such asinterest rate and exchange rate policies) between the local and foreigncurrencies, enhance liquidity management of the banking system, improve policyinstrument innovation and appropriately strengthen policy adjustment to keepmoney and credit grow at reasonable speed.
The PBC will work vigorously to improve monetary policy transmission, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, guide financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
The global economy is recovering gradually and the recovery of major developed countries has continued.
The participants discussed the economic and financial situation at home and abroad and were of the view that performance of the financial sector and real economy in China was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable, despite the many difficulties and challenges; the global economy took a turn for the better but the situation remained complex.
The PBC will take proactive measures to boost market confidence, enhance support for the real economy, and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
The PBC will keep the real estate market stable and protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers.
The PBC shall closely monitor the latest development of the economy and financial sector both home and abroad as well as the changes in international capital flows, remain committed to the underlying principle of making progress while ensuring stability and adjust to the new normal of economic development.
The PBC continued toimplement sound monetary policy and closely monitored economic and financialdevelopments while at the same time applying various instruments to strengthenpolicy fine-tuning and open market operations to control liquidity of thefinancial system and the growth of the base money.
The PBC will work to improve the market-based mechanism of interest rate formation and transmission and the central bank policy rate system.
The sound monetary policy responds well to the requirement of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, financial risks are generally under control, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
The PBOC will make institutional arrangements for providing effective financial support for the real economy and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place an utmost priority on stability.
It was forecast that increased loans of all financial institutions would reach RMB1.6-1.7 trillion yuan with broad money (M2) growing by 16%-17% in 2002.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
It will further encourage the use of central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological transformation, and step up financial support for large-scale equipment renovation and trade-in of consumer goods.
It was concurred that the economic situation continued to be broadly favorable.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, the PBC has scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented financial risks.
The PBC will further deepen market-based reform of interest rates, advance the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans to loan prime rate (LPR) in an orderly manner, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBOC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and optimize the central bank policy rate system.
The RMB exchange rate regime reform will be continued to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
Meanwhile, efforts shall be made to advance financial reform andinnovation, foster a multi-layered financial market system, and enhance the competitivenessof financial institutions and resource allocation efficiency of financialmarket.
Domestically, the COVID-19 is recurring more frequently, and the economic development faces triple pressures, namely shrinking demand, supply shocks, and waning expectations.
The managed floating exchange rate regime shall be improved in aself-initiated, controllable and gradual way to enable market supply and demandto play a fundamental role in RMB exchange rate formation and keep the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and loan rates have remained stable and witnessed a slight decline.
The sound monetary policy will be maintained appropriate in intensity, money supply will be properly managed, and massive liquidity injection will be avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy is in line with the nominal GDP growth.
The Committee had in-depth review of thecurrent economic and financial development both at home and abroad.
Generally speaking, the financial industry has beenoperating sound, and the new RMB exchange rate regime has been workingsmoothly, with the RMB exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level.
They agreed that since the beginning of this year, great achievements have been made in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development, and the economy has been recovering steadily.
The financial supply-side structural reform will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their major businesses and responsibilities, advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
It will contribute to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period with high-quality development, and celebrate with outstanding accomplishments the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC.
Theformation mechanism of RMB exchange rate should be further improved to keep RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive equilibrium level and promote theequilibrium of the balance of payments.
It will maintain the stability of policy instruments like central bank lending and discounts, continue to implement inclusive micro and small business (MSB) loan facilities as well as the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects, and step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy such as inclusive finance, green development, sci-tech innovation, and infrastructure construction, thus facilitating the coordinated regional development by adopting a mix of policies.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
Given the difficulties and setbacks in global recovery and capricious development of the European debt crisis, large uncertainty remained in the global outlook.
Preemptive adjustments and fine-tuning will be made at proper time so as to prevent risks with the priority of stabilizing growth.
Meanwhile, based on the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform in the financial sector, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems.
The Committeediscussed monetary policy stance and relevant measures in the period ahead andagreed to continue the sound monetary policy and strengthen policy coordinationbetween domestic and foreign currencies and banking liquidity management inorder to enhance the forward-looking and scientific approach and effectivenessof monetary policy and maintain price stability.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
Efforts will be made to keepmoney and credit growth at an appropriate level and promote optimal creditstructure.
The meeting stressed that a mix of monetary policy tools would be adopted to maintain adequate liquidity in the banking system and to guide reasonable increase of money and credit supply.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all-system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
It will work toward an economy with a higher-level equilibrium in the course of economic recovery, and celebrate the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC with outstanding accomplishments.
The PBC will further bring into play the propelling force of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, to increase financial support for sci-tech innovation, micro and small businesses (MSBs) and green development, and to continue to implement the policy of deferred repayments on MSB loans and the support scheme for unsecured loans.
On March 29, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2024 (its 104th meeting) in Beijing.
Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at a high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
The participants discussed the current economic and financial situations at home and abroad and were of the view that the performance of the Chinese economy remained in a reasonable range, performance of the financial sector was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable.
The PBC would further advance the financial reform and innovation, and reinforce risk management, in order to enhance the financial enterprises´ capability in fending off risks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast economic growth, keeping the general price level stable, and preventing financial risks according to the requirements of keeping the financing volumes at a reasonable level and making counter-cyclical adjustment in a prudential and flexible manner.
The central bank will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee had in-depth review of the currenteconomic and financial development both at home and abroad and the policymeasures to be taken in the coming months.
In line with the overallrequirement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitored the economic and financialperformance, made use of various monetary policy instruments to strengthenliquidity management, control credit growth, improve credit structure andsteadily enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility.
We will focus on supporting the expansion of domestic demand and providing stronger support for the real economy.
The PBOC will effectively combine the strategy of expanding domestic demand and deepening supply-side structural reform, strengthen coordination and cooperation among macro policies, and spare no efforts to put into practice the incremental policies, so as to substantially improve social expectations, rejuvenate the economy, and consolidate and fortify the upward trend of economic recovery.
Efforts should be madeto fully implement the scientific development approach by improving andcarrying out each macroeconomic policy and continuously strengtheningmacroeconomic management to prevent a shift from a relatively fast growth to aneconomic overheating and ensure a sound and rapid development of the Chineseeconomy.
The PBC will adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development and guide financial institutions to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
It was noted at the meeting that the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector should be deepened to build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy.
Efforts should be made to thoroughly implement the scientific outlook on development and, with a view to expanding domestic demand, to accelerate the shift of development strategy and economic restructuring.The coordination of monetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, foreign trade policy and financial regulatory policy should be strengthened to maintain stable and relatively rapid economic growth.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, trade and investment, elevated inflation and persistently high interest rates in developed countries.
The prudent and neutral monetary policy has brought about positive outcomes, as the macro leverage ratio has stabilized, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided stronger support for the real economy.
The PBC will innovate and improve macro regulation, practice the sound monetary policy that is more flexible and appropriate, and put more emphasis on supporting the recovery and sustainable development of the real economy.
Measures should also be taken to improve the managed floatingexchange rate regime in a self-initiated, controllable, and gradual way andenable the market supply and demand to play a fundamental role in the formationof the RMB exchange rate so as to keepthe RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
Financial institutions will be guided to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and better coordinate routine pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development.
We will improve consumer financial services with respect to commodities and social services, and proceed with greater financial support for enterprises to stabilize and expand employment, as well as for targeted groups to start businesses and seek employment.
In line with the policy instructions of the CPC CentralCommittee and the State Council, the PBC continued to implement the soundmonetary policy, strengthened and improved financial management, kept monetaryaggregates under proper control and optimized credit structure.
And in line with the principle of differentiated treatment to different sectors, the PBC will vigorously guide and promote credit structure optimization, step up financial support to key areas and weak links in the economy, guide financial institutions to improve their financial services so as to better serve the real sector.
Vigorous support has been rendered to pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, and the development of the real economy.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures with an emphasis on adjusting and optimizing the structure of financial system, and to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development.
Recently, the Monetary Policy Committee of PBC held its first quarterly meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector.
It was noted that the Chinese economy had maintained rapid growth momentum during the first half of this year with steady improvement of both domestic and external demands.
A mix of policies will be adopted to support coordinated regional development.
It was alsoagreed that capital markets should be developed to diversify market productsand to improve monetary policy transmission.
The PBC will give more support to banks in replenishing capital so that banks will be more capable of serving the real economy and forestalling and defusing financial risks.
Moreover, based on the requirements of deepening the financial supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems.
At present, the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth, trade and investment is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level and interest rates are persistently high in developed countries.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and in the world and the changes in global capital flow, follow the overall requirements of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and bring about reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
With innovation and high-quality supply leading and creating new demands, the PBC will make its contribution to accelerating the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other.
The financing and credit structure will be improved and financial sector reform will be deepened to improve efficiency and build stronger capacity to serve the real economy.
They were of the view that China’s real economy and financial sector in general maintained a steady growth momentum, prices were stable but the future trend was uncertain, and the global economy showed signs of improvement but still faced complex situations.
On April 7, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 100th meeting) in Beijing.
In the coming periods, close attention should bepaid to the impact of the US subprime mortgages market turbulence onthe international financial market and its potential impact on the Chineseeconomy.
It was agreed in the meeting that the Chinese economyhad maintained rapid growth momentum, and macro-economic management measureshad further produced results since the beginning of this year.
We need to implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, make intertemporal adjustments, give better play to the role of monetary policy tools in adjusting both quantity and structure, and make every effort to stabilize growth, employment, and prices.
Great efforts should also be madeto foster development of the financial market construction and financialinstrument innovation, quicken the steps in foreign market development, improveforeign exchange administration, and guide the enterprises and individuals to enhancetheir foreign exchange risk control capability.
Continued efforts would be made to improve the internal governance structure of commercial banks.
The reform of the financial system will be deepened further to improve the efficiency of financial sector and abilities of serving the real economy, and to improve risk management.
It will make continued efforts to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas.