The market-based interest rate regime reform and RMB exchange rate regime will be furthered to keep RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The market-based interest rate reform should be pursued, and theleverage role of interest rate should be played out.
Following the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, we will pursue the general principle of making progress while ensuring stability, firmly grasp the primary task of high-quality development and steadily advance the Chinese path to modernization.
At present, the PBC should thoroughly, accurately andpositively understand and carry out the central government's decision andarrangement on macro-economic management, stick to market-orientation in policymaking, follow the economic principles, support capital market development, givefull play to the movitation and creativity of economic agents, strengthen thecoordination with industrial policy and fiscal policy, and improve theselection and intensity of proper policy instruments so as to ensure the steadyand relatively fast economic growth.
The PBOC has adopted a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
It was concurred that efforts should be made to promote theeconomic and social development in a scientific approach, further deepen thefinancial reform, and improve macro financial management.
The PBC continued to implement sound monetary policy, and strengthened its support to economic development while at the same time taking concrete measures to prevent and mitigate financial risks.
At end-May, balance of broad money (M2)reached RMB23.5 trillion yuan, a year-on-year increase of 17.5 percent, and newloans of all financial institutions registered RMB1258 billion yuan, adeceleration of RMB92.8 billion yuan on year-on-year basis.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been continuously paying dividends, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly.
It was stressed thatsteps should be taken to coordinate macroeconomic policies, boost domesticconsumption demand, optimize the investment structure, and curb the highinvestment growth.
Themeeting also encouraged commercial banks to strengthen credit support to agriculture,small and medium-sized enterprises, consumption and employment.
It will put into effect the financial policies that aim to promote the healthy development of the platform economy.
The prudent monetary policy shall be more properly managed to keep liquidity at reasonably ample levels, and keep the reasonable growth of money supply, credit and aggregate financing to the real economy.
The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, measures should be taken to strengthen macro-management,maintain continuity and stability of various macro economic policies, boostdomestic demand, control investment growth at a reasonable level and improveinvestment structure.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with greater flexibility and played a role as stabilizer for the macroeconomy.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
A mix of policies will be in place to support coordinated regional development.
The PBOC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, guide reasonable growth and well-paced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level.
Generally speaking, the financial industry was in stable operation during the first half of this year, and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
It was noted at the meeting that uncertainties incurred by changes in external environment are on the rise as the momentum for world economic growth is lackluster, and inflation eases somewhat.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor new developments in the economic and financial situation and environment both at home and abroad, attach great importance to counter-cyclical adjustments, make forward looking judgments on the situation and take pre-emptive adjustment and fine tuning measures when necessary.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Third Plenary Session of the 20th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, and the Central Financial Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The PBC will also adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development and guide financial institutions to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
Efforts should be made to fully implement thescientific approach to development, to take maintaining relatively rapideconomic growth and curbing excessive price increase as top priority, and toattach great importance to containing inflation.
On June 24, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 89th meeting) in Beijing.
The RMB exchange rate is expected to be basically stable, and it has been moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a macroeconomic stabilizer.
The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, vigorous efforts should be made to improve macroeconomicpolicy, enhance macroeconomic management, and further improve coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal, industrial, foreign trade and financial regulatorypolicies.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, noting that while the Chinese economy broadly remainedin sound situation, problems of excessive growth of investment, overly largesurpluses recorded in foreign trade and more than desired expansion of creditstill existed.
It was agreed that the Chineseeconomy in general was in good shape, and macroeconomic management had achievedsignificant results.
The financial system reform will be deepened, the two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies and the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be improved.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses, so as to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial market that features great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
Measures will be taken to foster financial reform and innovation,improve financial market system and enhance competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resource allocation.
Appropriate measures should betaken to improve coordination among the macroeconomic policies, focusing on fosteringconcrete progress in the building of the socialist new countryside, expandingdomestic consumption demand, managing the growth of fixed asset investment atappropriate level and optimizing the investment structure.
Global inflationarypressure continued to mount, the world economy slowed down, and more uncertainand disabling factors emerged.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote the virtuous circle of the economy.
However, the foundation for economic recovery was not solid, especially given the grave external environment due to the uncertain prospect of international economy and declining external demand.
Senior officials from the PBC’s Operation Office, Tianjin and Nanjing branches attended the meeting as observers.
The meeting pointed out that the economy performed stable in the first quarter by keeping the sustained and rapid development momentum.
They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Chinese economy is basically controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged.
Forceful actions should be taken to push ahead financialreform and innovation to improve competitiveness of financial institutions andefficiency of the financial market in resource allocation.
It will also step up financial support for large-scale equipment renewal and trade-in of consumer goods.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibria, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will also step up financial support for large-scale equipment renewal and trade-in of consumer goods.
By guiding financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, it will strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
The sound monetary policy has been forward-looking, targeted and timely, enabling vigorous support for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
In general, the Chinese economy and financialsector performed well.
The Committeeanalyzed current domestic and world economic and financial situation and agreedthat despite benign economic situation, China still faced such problems asunreasonable economic structures, extensive growth model and imbalances underbalance of payments.
The quality and effectiveness of financial sector’s support to the real economy will be enhanced by comprehensively implementing policies, while the financial services provided for small and micro enterprises, as well as agriculture, rural areas and rural people are to be improved, and a virtuous triangular cycle will be fostered among keeping monetary policies prudent, enhancing the vitality of micro entities and giving play to the functions of the capital market, so as to nurture the overall virtuous cycle of the national economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that to implement the decisions of the 18th CPC National Congress, the 3rd Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, the latest developments in the financial market and real sector at home and abroad and the changes in international capital market will be closely monitored; in accordance with the general requirements of seeking progress while maintaining stability and carrying on reform and innovation, efforts will be made to continue the sound monetary policy, maintain appropriate liquidity, guide money, credit and the all-system financing aggregates to grow at a proper pace, and optimize the financing and credit structure.
The Committee conducted in-depth analysis of thecurrent economic and price development, agreeing that some of the macroeconomicmanagement measures taken since last year have already produced preliminarypositive results, but certain problems emerged in the process of economicoperation are yet to be resolved.
The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement the two monetary policy tools which enable direct support for the real economy, ensure deferred repayments of inclusive loans are applicable to all eligible micro and small businesses (MSBs) and substantively raise the portion of unsecured inclusive MSB loans.
Efforts will be made to optimize financial resources allocation, resolve structural imbalance in credit supply and demand, prevent financial risks and improve financial services to better serve the real economy and ensure a stable and relatively fast economy growth.
It was emphasized that the commercial banks should strengthen their efforts in transforming operational mechanism and increasing incentives for loan marketing to timely meet reasonable demand for liquidity and credit for technical innovation purposes of those enterprises with sound credit standing and marketable products.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, keep the growth of money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
It was noted that though China’s economic development was confronted with difficulties and challenges from home and abroad, the fundamentals and the long-term trend of the economy remained unchanged.
With financial risks effectively managed, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy have been gradually improved.
It was agreed in the meeting that, thanks to strongleadership of the State Council, the Chinese economy had maintained favorablegrowth momentum as great efforts were made both to control the SARS epidemicand promote economic development.
The Committee concluded that,the macro-economic control has achieved preliminary results and variousadjustment measures would continue to take effect.
The relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention and control will be handled properly, and the bottom line that no systemic financial risk should occur will be firmly defended.
Efforts should also be made tospeed up the reform of financial institutions, encourage financial innovations,improve financial services, develop financial market, promote a coordinated growthof direct and indirect finance, and increase the effectiveness of monetarypolicy transmission.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and abroad and changes in global capital flow, follow the principle of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, pay more attention to maintaining an appropriate monetary condition, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and realize reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 4thQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
It will implement a prudent monetary policy in a precise and effective manner, strengthen counter-cyclical adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus sustained overall economic recovery.
The overallperformance of the financial sector remained sound.
The RMB exchange rate and market expectations have remained stable, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks.
The solution of the problem needs cooperation among the enterprises, the commercial banks as well as authorities in different sectors.
The PBOC will make significant efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, old-age finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, so as to speed up the development of new quality productive forces.
It was stressedthat the sound monetary policy should be continued and the forward-looking,scientific and effective approach to macro financial management be furtherstrengthened in the coming period.
The PBOC should be highly concerned about marginal changes in price trends to keep prices basically stable.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, follow the Chinese’s path to modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
It was emphasized that more efforts should be made to improve financial services, strengthen credit control and enhance credit structure with a view to preventing duplicated construction.
The Committee heldthat, performance of the national economy featured relative fast growth,enhanced efficiency and low inflation in 2006.
Weighing themonetary policy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee heldthe view that a tight monetary policy should be implemented by taking variousmeasures in line with the guidance of the Central Economic Work Conference.
It was agreedthat, with the support of the macroeconomic management policies introducedsince the beginning of this year, the immanent force driving economic growthremained strong, although the overall growth rate dropped slightly.
Fixed asset investment continued to expandrapidly, consumer demand remained buoyant and CPI maintained its risingmomentum since the second half of 2003.
Improvement of the managed floating exchange rate regime shouldbe effected, continuously following the principle of “ making it aself-initiated, controllable and gradual process”.
The Committee held that efforts should be stepped up to monitor the international financial crisis and to improve the policy response mechanism to ensure safe and stable performance of the financial system.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and become more resilient against external shocks.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the guiding principles of the Two Sessions.
According tothe overall arrangement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitoredeconomic and financial performance and employed a combination of monetarypolicy instruments to enhance liquidity management, steadily advance market-basedinterest rate reform, and strengthen RMB exchange rate flexibility.
In particular, RMB loans grew by 462.5 billion yuan, 24.6 billion yuanmore than the growth recorded a year earlier.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2022 (its 96th meeting) in Beijing recently.
With these efforts, the PBC will enhance the resilience of economic development and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
The financing and credit structure will be improved and the financial sector reform will be deepened to improve efficiency and build stronger capacity to serve the real economy.
It will implement the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals, sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care services, and the transport and logistics sectors respectively.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held the 2nd Quarterly Meeting of 2005in Beijing days ago.
We will further strengthen policy coordination among departments, unleash the benefits of monetary and credit policies, balance internal and external equilibria, and coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, all of which will build a modern socialist country in all respects off to a good start.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at a reasonable and balanced level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Efforts will be made to adjust the economic structure andtransform economic growth pattern, promote a basic balance under the BOP andachieve sound and fast economic development.
The prudent and neutral monetary policy has brought about positive outcomes, as the macro leverage ratio has stablized, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided solid support for the real economy.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of the interest rates, and further improve the RMB exchange rate regime to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will work to maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, and stabilize investment and expectations.
The PBC will also give effective play to the role of structural monetary policy tools in accurate liquidity provision, make good use of the RMB300 billion special central bank lending, the RMB500 billion quotas of central bank lending and central bank discount and the RMB350 billion special credit quotas of policy banks.
Reform of the financial system will be deepened to enhance the efficiency of financial sector and its ability to serve the real economy.
The PBC, in line with the overall arrangement of the State Council, implemented a relatively loose monetary policy and strengthened financial support for economic growth.
In line with the arrangement of the CPC Central Committee and theState Council, the PBC has employed an array of monetary policy instruments toadjust money and credit aggregates on a timely and appropriate basis and guidethe commercial banks to optimize their credit structure.
It will concentrate on running its own affairs well and delivering good cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
Firmly implementing the “two unswervinglys”, the PBOC will provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy, while conquering the problems that restrain the small and medium-sized enterprises from getting financed.
Meanwhile, efforts should be made to quicken the steps inthe development of direct financing and promote a coordinated development offinancial market.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
In addition, the RMB exchangerate should be basically kept stable and the formation mechanism of RMBexchange rate improved to promote the equilibrium of the balance of payments.
Meanwhile, the financial open-up will be further expanded to boost the vitality and resilience of the financial sector.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
The Committee made an in-depth review ofcurrent economic and financial developments.
With financial risks under effective control, the financial sector has gradually improved its quality and efficiency in serving the real economy.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, and reinforce regulation over deposit rates.
The PBOC will intensify implementation of the existing monetary policies, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep credit growing reasonably at a stable pace, and ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
Renminbiexchange rate formation system should be further improved, and the exchangerate be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level topromote the balance of international payments.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts will be made to follow up the world’s economic and financial developments, enhance the research and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, and concentrate on doing our own affairs well.
The monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the financing costs for the real economy have continued to decline.
The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, promote the balance between internal and external equilibria, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Upholding the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm.
Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Su Ning, Mr. Xie Fuzhan, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Liu Mingkang,Mr.
However, economic stabilization and recovery is not firmly established.
Great support has been provided for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
The Committee deliberated on the stance and measures of monetary policy in the next stage.
The PBC will deepen reforms to make the interest rate and exchange rate more market-based, improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, stabilize market expectations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It was noted that adverse factors in the global economy and severenatural disasters in China added new uncertainties to China’s economic performance, but thefundamentals remained unchanged.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, strengthen the guiding role of the central bank policy rates, unleash the benefits of the self-regulatory mechanism for the pricing of market rates and the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates, and steadily bring down the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for residents.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the factors pushing up prices and the impact ofthe sleet and snow disaster on economic growth, pointed out that prevention ofexcessive increase of general price should become the focus of financial macrocontrol, and a mix of measures ranging from increasing supply and stabilizingexpectations should be taken.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Central Financial Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB12.8 trillion yuan, increased by RMB870.1 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB186.2 billion yuan over the same period of last year.
Appropriate measures should be taken to improve coordination of the monetarypolicy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy and financialregulatory policy, accelerate economic restructuring as well as thetransformation of economic growth pattern, improve growth quality andefficiency and promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
Market supply and demand offoreign exchange should be allowed to play a greater role in the process ofincreasing RMB exchange rate flexibility, with a view to keeping the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy, build the new development paradigm, focus on promoting high-quality development, pursue supply-side structural reform as its main task, stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and consolidate and expand achievements made in pandemic containment and economic and social development.
With financial risks under effective control, the financial sector has gradually improved its quality and efficiency of serving the real economy.
We will accelerate the improvement of the financial policy system for rental housing, and promote the smooth transition of the real estate sector to a new development mode.
The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to properly manage the strength and pace of structural deleveraging and strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, prevent and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Efforts should be made to strengthen coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy andfinancial regulatory policy, accelerate economic restructuring and the shift ofgrowth pattern, mobilize the flexibility of market participants so that theycan play a greater role in improving the self-adjusting ability of the economy,and vigorously expand domestic demand to promote a basic equilibrium of thebalance of payments.
The PBC will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and strengthen the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies.
It will take the initiative to activate financial resources that are inefficiently occupied and improve the efficiency of capital utilization.
At the same time, the PBOC should pay attention to changes in long-term yields while focusing on the economic recovery.
It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development as well as the effective implementation of macro policies have bolstered the sustained recovery of the national economy in general.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterly meeting of 2009 in Beijing days ago.
The coordination between monetary policy and fiscal, industrial, trade and financial regulatory policies should be strengthened so as to maintain sound and rapid economic development.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Efforts will be made so that private enterprises receive financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development.
The Committee called for strengthening of macroeconomicmanagement to ensure a continuously steady development of the Chinese economyas well as a basic stability of the price level.
Therefore, private enterprises will get financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development.
The institutional reform in the financial sector will be deepened; the adjustment framework based on the two pillars of monetary and macro-prudential policies will be improved; the market-based interest rate reform and exchange rate regime reform will be deepened; and risk management will be strengthened to hold the bottom line of no systemic financial risks.
In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
The macro leverage ratio has remained basically stable.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy and build the new development paradigm.
The overallperformance of the financial sector has remained sound.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to play their leading role in providing financial services for the real economy, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and support banks in capital replenishment.
It is agreed at the meeting that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing old ones.
Market-based interest rate reform policies should be continuously carried out,and interest rate formation system and transmission mechanism should beimproved.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period,the Committee consented that sound monetary policy should be continued.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, follow the Chinese path to modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
In discussingmonetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, theCommittee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, and effortsshould be made to promote coordination between domestic and foreign currencypolicies and strengthen the preemptive nature of financial macro-management.While strengthening the liquidity management of banking system, an excessivelyrapid growth of money and credit should be further prevented and commercialbanks should be guided to properly control the scale and pace of mid andlong-term lending.
A combination of monetary policy instruments will be used to keep liquidity at reasonably adequate level.
It will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
It is their concensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained a stable growth momentum with strong resilience, the overall supply and demand remains broadly balanced, and the swtich to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable, market expectations have improved, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit rates has been brought into play, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have dropped significantly.
The PBOC will effectively advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, the Central Financial Work Conference and the “two sessions”, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current situation and challenges facing theimplementation of the appropriately tight monetary policy, assessed relevantrisks in the process of global economic rebalancing and analyzed structural andunderlining factors affecting inflation trend.
Great efforts shouldalso be made to foster development of the financial market, quicken the stepsin financial reform, and promote a coordinated development of the direct andindirect financing so as to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policytransmission.
Although some new developments emerged in current economicoperation needed to be further examined, growth of money supply and credit wasfaster than desired, which could possibly lead to low-quality economic growthand worsen structural problems, thereby damping the sustainable and healthydevelopment of economy.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, and implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to expedite a virtuous circle of the economy.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and played its role as a stabilizer of the macro economy.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement with enhanced driving force, while it still faces challenges such as insufficient demand.
With these efforts, the financial market will become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed.
Furthermore, inflationary pressures are also building up andasset prices are rising persistently.
The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform, improve the two-pillar regulatory framework underpinned by monetary policy and macro prudential policy, and further improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
Considering the situation, the PBC will place the utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
The PBC will continue to give even greater priority to serving the real economy to keep the economy generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its second quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at the high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk control capability in an open economy.
It was also emphasized that greater financial support will be extended to shifting growth pattern and restructuring the economy.
We will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and maintain a reasonable growth and a stable pace of credit supply, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
At the same time, market-based interest rate reform should be steadily proceeded and the floating band of lending interest rate to SMEs needs to be widened.
However, the global pandemic and the world economy remains in a severe and complex situation, and preventing a resurgence of COVID-19 at home remains an arduous task, posing risks and challenges to China’s economic development.
It will keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable.
It will optimize consumer financial services in the areas of bulk consumer goods and social services, and continue to enhance financial support for enterprises to retain and recruit employees and for key groups of population to seek jobs or start businesses.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties as COVID-19 persists overseas and geopolitical conflicts escalate.
The domestic economy has seen stronger endogenous growth drivers but still faces instabilities and uncertainties such as the pandemic.
It was emphasized at the meeting that it was necessary to follow the latest developments in global economy and financial market and their impact, to continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, to give top priority to inflation control, to make macro-economic management more targeted, effective and forward-looking, and to manage the pace and strength of policies.
Besides, forceful actions should betaken to push ahead financial reform and innovation to improve competitivenessof financial institutions and efficiency of the financial market in resourceallocation.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote continuous economic recovery.
The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and develop funding chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby creating a virtuous circle and interaction among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector and industries.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, keep the sound monetary policy appropriate and flexible, use a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity reasonably adequate, and to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth.
It will enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives to effectively stimulate private investment.
It will strengthen policy coordination across authorities to implement the package of economy-stabilizing policies and their follow-up policies, thus further consolidating the recovery and development of economy.
It will optimize consumer financial services in the areas of bulk consumer goods and social services, and continue to enhance financial support for enterprises to retain and recruit employees and for key groups to seek jobs or start businesses.
It will also support the coordinated regional development, and promote the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality.
While strengthening the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held the 2nd Quarterly Meeting of 2006in Beijing days ago.
It will continue to unleash the potential of the reform to lower lending rates, optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and facilitate further decline in real lending rates.
Measures will also be taken to advance the higher-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk control capability in an open economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that PBC will, following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era on economic work, earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Government Work Report and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
It will enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives to enhance the multiplier effect and stimulate more private investment.
It wasagreed that the good momentum of economic and financial development should bemaintained.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, stabilize banks’ liability costs, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans will be promoted in an orderly manner, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
While ensuring consistency andstability on the aggregate level, measures should be applied to strengthenpolicy coordination between the local and foreign currencies, and improve theeffectiveness of the monetary policy.
Participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situations.
Meanwhile, loanstructure should be further improved to prevent new credit risks and promotereform of the state-owned commercial banks.
It was held at the meeting that the implementation of the existing monetary policies should be strengthened.
The Committeestressed the necessity of taking increasingly forward-looking, scientific andeffective actions in the course of macro financial control.
It was put forward on the meeting that, according to the overall arrangements of the State Council, continued efforts would be made to implement a relatively easy monetary policy and strike a balance between maintaining stable and fairly rapid economic development, restructuring and managing inflation expectations.
The PBOC will appropriately increase the quota for central bank lending to support rural development and micro and small businesses (MSBs) as well as central bank discounts, make good use of the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF), and launch central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological upgrading.
The mechanism for the coordination and transmission of fiscal, monetary and employment policies should be improved to counter the impact of the outbreak on economic growth.
In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC has adopted a series of measures including cutting interest rates both on deposits and loans, strengthening open market operations and intensifying guidance on credit policy to promote appropriate growth of the monetary and credit aggregates.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rdQuarterly Meeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago.
The overallperformance of financial sector has remained sound.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to guide improvements in financing and credit structures, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development, to enhance the financial sector’s capacity to serve the real economy, and to nurture a virtuous circle of economic and financial development.
With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation bothat home and abroad.
The PBC will ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments, so as to get off to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period with high-quality development.
Following the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, we will pursue the general principle of making progress while ensuring stability, firmly grasp the primary task of high-quality development and steadily advance the Chinese path to modernization.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, and focus on performing its own duties.
Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
The PBCimplemented the CPC Central Committee and State Council's decision andarrangement on enhancing macro-economic management, and adopted variousmonetary and credit measures with the support of relevant government agenciesto reinforce aggregates control.
By coordinating both financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, the PBC will ensure the national economy performs within a reasonable range, promote high-quality economic development, and thereby stand ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
It will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions.
The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Moneyand credit growth should be properly controlled, with credit structure to befurther improved and direct financing steadily advanced.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level but is still sticky, and the economic growth and monetary policies of major economies are diverging.
In general, the performance of the financial industry was soundand stable.
The PBC will guide financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system with an aim to having carbon dioxide emissions peak before 2030 and achieving carbon neutrality before 2060.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
On September 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the third quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 102nd meeting) in Beijing.
It was concurred that the principles mapped out at theCentral Economic Work Conference should be implemented fully and a scientificapproach should be applied to economic development.
Improvement of the managed floating exchange rate regime should be effected,continuously following the principles of “self-initiated, controllable andgradualistic”.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and promoting stability based on progress, the PBOC will intensify macro adjustments to maintain a good momentum of stable and sound economic growth.
Efforts will be made to improve a multi-layer capital market system, increase the share of direct financing, and maintain a reasonable scale of total financing.
Great support has been provided for pandemic prevention and control, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
Fluctuations in commodity prices and other factors have a larger impact on the world economy and the international financial markets.
It was concurred that efforts should be made to coordinatemacroeconomic policies, boost consumption demand, speed up economic andinternational trade restructuring, improve economic growth efficiency, promotetransformation of the economic growth pattern, and realize sustained growth aswell as price stability.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and give more support to banks in capital replenishment.
It was also agreed that, according to thecurrent economic development both at home and abroad, basic stability of theRMB deposit and loan interest rates should be maintained, and market-basedinterest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
The PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and promote the high-quality development of the economy.
RMB exchangerate regime should be further improved and the foreign exchange market shouldbe expanded to increase the floating flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, witha view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level.
It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Following the guidance of the CommunistParty of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC strengthenedfinancial macro control to preserve balances at aggregate level.
At the same time, the PBOC will include the purchasing and selling of government bonds into the monetary policy toolkit and pay attention to changes in long-term yields.
The PBC will innovate and improve marco adjustments and use a combination of monetary policy instruments to keep the RMB exchange rate generally stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, prevent and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
It was the first meeting of theadvisory body after the State Council appointed new members into the Committee.
The PBC will intensify the effects of structural monetary policy tools to provide targeted support for the economy.
The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers, better meet the reasonable demands of homebuyers, and foster a virtuous cycle of the real estate market for its sound development.
On September 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 86th meeting) in Beijing.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts should be made to thoroughly implement the scientific outlook on development, to continue to promote sound and rapid economic growth as the priority of economic work, to implement and improve the policy package and relevant policy measures, and to further enhance the momentum of economic stabilization and recovery.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote sound development of the financial markets.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform for lowering lending rates, adopt a mix of policies to significantly drive down overall financing costs, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, shore up weak links and foster strengths, and ensure that new financing primarily flows to the manufacturing sector and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).
It was held at the meeting that the regulation of monetary policies should be more intense and more targeted.
At the next stage, a mix of multiple monetary instruments will be used and macro-prudential policy framework will be improved to effectively manage liquidity and to keep all-system financing aggregate and money aggregates at reasonable levels.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, agreeing that the scientific development approach mushbe upheld as the overriding principles in guiding the overall economic andsocial progress.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to implement the decisions adopted at the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China and the overall arrangements of the Central Economic Work Conference, closely monitor the domestic and global economic and financial developments and changes in cross-border capital flow, continue to implement a sound monetary policy, and strike a balance among maintaining stable growth, adjusting economic structure, containing inflation and preventing risks.
However, the overall situation remains complex, with both positive and negative factors.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, pursued a prudent monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committee held that it was a critical time for the stability and recovery of the Chinese economy.
It is their consensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained sound growth momentum with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
The sound monetary policy will be kept appropriate in intensity, money supply properly managed, and massive liquidity injection avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth and prices are  generally stable.
Furthermore, city-specific measures should be adopted to meet people’s demand for buying their first home or improving their housing situation.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and abroad.
Work will also be done to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, and consolidate the capabilities of economic and financial regulation and risk prevention in an open market.
The PBC will work to maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of trade, foreign direct investment, and domestic investment, and keep market expectations stable in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, the PBC has scientifically managed market expectations, made practical efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented financial risks.
With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with their contribution to socio-economic development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual circulations with the domestic circulation as the mainstay and international and domestic circulations facilitating each other.
Supply and demand in the foreign exchange market have been basically in equilibrium, current account surplus has remained stable, and foreign exchange reserves have been adequate.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy and make it more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, and give full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools.
Prices will see a moderate recovery and remain at a reasonable level.
Measures should be taken to promote institutional building of the financial market, encourage innovation ofnew financial products and instruments and develop financial derivatives.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor the marginal changes in the economic and financial situations both at home and abroad, strengthen the sense of crisis, maintain strategic orientation, maintain counter-cyclical adjustments, and strengthen coordination among monetary, fiscal and other policies.
The market-based interest rate reform and RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will consolidate and expand achievements in pandemic containment and economic and social development, while ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and market expectations, and maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
On June 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 85th meeting) in Beijing.
The meeting discussed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
It was emphasized that underlying financial risks inreal estate development and low-efficient duplicated constructions brought byrapid credit growth should be closely monitored and prevented with credit riskearly-warning and surveillance arrangement to be strengthened.
Great efforts will be made to optimize credit structure, to facilitate further industrial restructuring, to guide financial institutions to improve financial services and enhance support to transformation of economic growth pattern.
Presidents from the Guangzhou Branch, Wuhan Branch and Chengdu Branch of the PBC were also present at the meeting.
It is their consensus that the Chinese economy has witnessed healthy development with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
In line with the Rules on Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China and with the approval of the State Council, presidents of two wholly state-owned commercial banks, Liu Mingkang, Zhang Enzhao and Wu Jinglian will withdraw from the Monetary Policy Committee as their term has expired.
The interest rates liberalization and RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee called for full implementation of thescientific development approach by stabilizing, improving and carrying out eachmacroeconomic policy, continuously strengthening macroeconomic management toprevent a shift from a relatively fast growth to an economic overheating andensure a sound and rapid development of the Chinese economy.
The participants analyzed the current economic and financial situation in China and beyond, and were of the view that performance of the Chinese economy is still within a reasonable range.
It was agreed that the economy hadmaintained steady and relatively fast growth momentum.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks, resolve risks in the course of reform and development, and hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 3rd quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex amid sluggish economic growth worldwide, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts.
The overall price level was basically stable.
The PBOC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, and improve their expectation management, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will reinforce inter-temporal adjustment, which is to be combined with countercyclical adjustment, and coordinate the monetary policies for this year and the next year, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
In theinternational market, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis worsened, anduncertainties and risks increased.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadily advanced and RMBexchange rate formation mechanism be further improved to keep RMB exchange ratebasically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and promote theequilibrium of the balance of payments.
The participants analyzed the economic and financial developments at home and abroad.
It was concurred that policy measures to strengthen and improvefinancial management have achieved evident effects, however, there stillexisted a possibility of fixed-asset investment rebound, inflationary pressureshad yet to be eased fundamentally, and the transmission mechanism of monetarypolicy needed to be further improved.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its fourth quarterly meeting of 2012 in Beijing days ago.
With regard to properly controlling the money and credit growth, commercial banks will be guided to expand the fee-based business and improve profit structure.Meanwhile, efforts should be made to quicken the steps in the development of direct financing and promote a coordinated development of financial market.
Under favorable conditions of stable and rising food production and smooth functioning of the energy market, prices will remain basically stable.
It will resolutely correct pro-cyclical behaviors, prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable.
After analyzingcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad and discussingthe possible impact of the international financial turmoil on China’s economicand financial development, the Committee held that, as the US sub-primemortgage crisis had caused drastic fluctuations in the global financial marketand spilled over into financial institutions and even the real economy, theoutlook of the global economy was unfavorable, and proper measures should betaken accordingly.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced tangible results, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy featuring a steady and moderate tighteningshould be continued while efforts need to be made to improve theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach in the making of monetarypolicy.
It was pointed out at the meeting that a sound monetary policy should be implemented in a flexible, appropriate, targeted and effective way.
The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform, speed up the building of a new development paradigm, and stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
At the same time, lessons should be drawn from the currentfinancial crisis to improve China’s banking system and the regulatory regime soas to maintain the stability of the country’s financial system and financialmarket.
Direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding, and to promote sound development of the financial markets.
In May, balance of broad money (M2) increased by 20.2 percentyear-on-year to RMB20 trillion yuan, and RMB loans of all financialinstitutions grew by RMB1.2561 trillion yuan from end-2002 to RMB14.4 trillionyuan, RMB719 billion yuan more than the expansion recorded for the same periodof 2002.
It was pointed out at the meeting that it is essential to follow up the world’s economic   and financial developments, enhance the judgment and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and concentrate on running our own affairs well.
Forcefulactions should be taken to push ahead financial reform and innovation toimprove competitiveness of financial institutions and efficiency of thefinancial market in resource allocation.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding, and to promote sound development of the financial markets.
It is their consensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained a stable growth momentum with strong resilience, the overall supply and demand remains broadly balanced, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
It will optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and adjust the method of determining the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit rates.
It will remain focused on the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will give better play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the quantity and the structure, and make every effort to stabilize growth, employment, and prices to provide practical support in expanding domestic demand and improve the consumption environment, thus facilitating a virtuous economic circle and providing stronger support for the real economy.
Various monetary policy instruments should beflexibly used to strengthen open market operations and ensure steady growth ofmoney supply so as to maintain the good momentum of economic and financialdevelopment.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The overall performance offinancial sector remained sound, the new exchange rate regime has been running smoothly, and the flexibility of RMB exchange rate has gradually improved.
The PBOC will intensify the financial support for the housing supply system which features “market mechanism plus government subsidy”, and promote the establishment of a new development model of the real estate sector.
Financial services to the small and medium-sized enterprises should be further improved.
They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Chinese economy is overall controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) recently held its third quarterly meeting in 2017.
Efforts will be made to improve the coordination, transmission and implementation mechanisms for fiscal, monetary and employment policies, so as to effectively offset the impact of the pandemic on economic growth.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, so as to achieve risk prevention while facilitating high-quality development, properly manage the intensity and pace of risk resolution, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy, and give full play to the role of monetary policy tools in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
By taking proactive measures and rising up to the challenges, the PBC will enhance support for the real economy, focus on stabilizing employment and prices, and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
Besides, forceful actionsshould be taken to push ahead financial reform and innovation, promote developmentof a multi-layer financial market, and improve competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of the financial market in resource allocation.Development of the money market benchmark interest rate system should beaccelerated to further increase the role of price in macro financialmanagement.
It will increase support for micro and small businesses (MSBs) through inclusive MSB loans and help stabilize employment in micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).
It will continuously ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
At the sametime, the urgency of economic restructuring should be fully recognized, thecoordination of the monetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy,trade policy and financial regulatory policy should be enhanced and economicrestructuring accelerated to promote a basic equilibrium of the balance ofpayments.
We will adhere to the principle of “being focused, reasonable, moderate, and flexible” in implementing structural monetary policy tools, and the three monetary policy tools, including the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF), will continue to be implemented to increase support for key areas and weak links of the national economy, such as inclusive finance, green development, technological innovation, and infrastructure construction.
The PBOC will make significant efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, pension finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, so as to speed up the development of new quality productive forces.
The overall performance of the financial sector has remained sound.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and to meet the reasonable financing needs of real estate companies regardless of their ownership types, thus promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
Moreover, the PBOC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk-neutral, implement a mix of policy measures to stabilize market expectations, and resolutely prevent major exchange rate fluctuations, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts.
Under the guidance of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC continued to pursue sound monetary policy and adopted various monetary policy instruments to appropriately adjust money and credit growth.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 4th quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
Remaining flexible and appropriate, the sound monetary policy will be more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, with monetary policy tools playing their roles in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
It was agreed at the meeting that the economy maintained a steady and relatively fast growth with generally good performance, indicating that macroeconomic management achieved initial effects.
Besides, attentionshould be given to guide public expectation through the leverage role ofinterest rate.
In discussing monetary policy stance and measures tobe adopted in the coming period, the Committee suggested that the PBC shallcontinue to implement a sound monetary policy and strengthen coordination ofpolicies on local and foreign currencies as well as liquidity management in thebanking system so as to further enhance the forward-looking and scientificnature and effectiveness of monetary policy and maintain price stability.
The PBOC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
Balance of international payments will be enhanced and the RMB exchangerate will be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, the complexities of the situation should not be underestimated.
The participants were of the view that that performance of China's real economy and financial sector as steady with a good momentum for growth, but faced a complicated situation.
The transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans has been completed successfully.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote the sound development of the financial markets.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
The PBOC will effectively prevent and defuse the risk of high-quality leading property developers, and help improve their balance sheets.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, promoting stability based on progress, and establishing the new before abolishing the old, the PBOC will maintain a good momentum of stable and sound economic growth.
It will work unswervingly to consolidate and develop the public sector and to encourage, support and guide the development of the non-public sector, and provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy.
The prudent monetary policy has reflected the demand for counter-cyclical adjustments, as the macro leverage ratio has tended to stabilize, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided stronger and more efficient support for the real economy.
The RMB exchange rate is generally stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, coordinate pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development, and adhere to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability with the pandemic containment becoming a normal.
However, complexities of the situation should not be underestimated.
The growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable.
It was agreed that the continuity and stability of the macro-economicpolicies should be maintained to strengthen the scientific, forward-looking andefficient approach to macro-economic management.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2022, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterlymeeting of 2004 in Beijing days ago.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level but is still sticky, and interest rates remain elevated in developed countries.
Mr. Wu Dingfu and Mr. Guo Shuqing submittedtheir written opinions and Mr. Zhu Zhixin was absent due to another officialarrangement.
While the sound monetary policy stance should be maintained, various measures should be adopted to appropriately adjust money supply and improve credit structure, so as to ensure the Chinese economy further develop in a sustained, rapid and healthy manner.
Greater progress shall be made to boost domestic consumption demand,properly contain fixed asset investment, and optimize investment structure.Importance should be attached to adjust economic structure and growth model,enhance quality and efficiency of economic growth, and promote a basic balanceunder the BOP, with a view to accelerating sound and rapid economic growth.
The PBOC will promote sustained improvement in economic performance, enhance the endogenous growth dynamics of the economy, improve social expectations, and defuse potential financial risks, so as to set the stage for building a modern socialist country in all respects.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
It was stressed by the attendees that, the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and coordinate the efforts to support pandemic control and economic and social development.
The PBOC has adopted a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
It will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, so as to ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government.
With positive changes in global economy on a rise, the momentum of stabilization and recovery in China will further take hold.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 93rd meeting) on June 25 in Beijing.
Domestically, COVID-19 containment is generally improving but remains an arduous task, and the economic development faces triple pressures, namely shrinking demands, supply shocks, and waning expectations.
The PBC will not only stimulate the vitality of micro entities but also innovate and improve macro adjustments, so as to further maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, and stabilize investment and expectations.
The credit information system and capital raising system for SMEs should be established.
In line with the arrangement of the CPC Central Committeeand the State Council, the PBC has continued to pursue a sound monetary policy,closely monitored the economic and financial performance, strengthened the adjustmentof money and credit, and strove to improve credit structure.
Meanwhile, the PBC will also work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission, continue unleashing the potential of reforms in bringing down real lending rates, and guide financial institutions to increase support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
Moreover, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its second quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
The real economy and financial sector have both made good progress in structural adjustments, yet the downward pressure on China’s economy is mounting.
The committee stressed the necessity of designing anoptimum pre-emptive and fine-tuning strategy featuring a combination of monetarypolicy instruments to further improve the scientific, forward-looking and effectiveapproach to macro-economic management.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, solidly promote Chinese modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, speed up building a new development paradigm, and effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output.
The PBC will deepen interest rate liberalization reform, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and promote the stable and sound development of economy.
Based on in-depth knowledge of the changes in the relationship between supply and demand in the real estate market and responding to people’s aspiration for high-quality housing, it will work to ensure that the financial policies introduced will deliver results, support revitalizing the inventory of unused land, and lower the interest rate on existing home loans, thus facilitating the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
The domestic economy is showing a recovery trend, but the foundation for recovery is not yet solid.
Tools such as central bank lending and discount, and monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy will play a guiding role.
The allocation of financial resources will be optimized to effectively alleviate the structural imbalances in the supply and demand of credit, prevent financial risks, and improve the financial service to the real economy, and the role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diversified demand of investment and financing in a better way, and promote the sound development of financial markets.
Specifically, it will extend the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, employ a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development, reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance, and guide financial institutions to step up support for sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its first regular quarterly meeting in 2014 in Beijing.
The PBOC will keep reasonable and sufficient liquidity level, guide reasonable growth and well-paced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level.
Upholding the Two Unswerving Commitments, the PBOC will employ an optimal combination of macro policies, demand expansion, reform and innovation, as well as risk forestalling and defusing.
Efforts should be made to maintain adequate liquidity in the banking system and to promote the stable money and credit growth.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rd Quarterly Meeting of 2006 in Beijing days ago.
Efforts would be made to tighten up lending extended to the enterprises in highly energy-consuming, heavily polluting and overcapacity industries.
After discussion, representatives held that China is facing complex economic and financial situations both at home and abroad.
Market-based interest rate reform should besteadily advanced, and RMB exchange rate formation system be improved tomaintain the exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibriumlevel so as to promote a balanced international payments.
The overall financing costs for businesses and the costs for individual consumption loans are expected to drop, with the LPR reform continuing to unleash its potential and playing a guiding role.
It will resolutely enhance economic vitality, forestall and defuse risks, and improve social expectations, thus reinforcing the momentum of economic recovery and effectively upgrading and appropriately expanding the economic output.
It wasstressed that the sound monetary policy should be continued and theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach to macro financialmanagement further strengthened.
The PBC will make good use of policy-based and developmental financial instruments, with priority on supporting infrastructure construction.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual cycles with the domestic cycle as the mainstay and international and domestic cycles facilitating each other.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People´s Bank of China (PBC) held its third quarterly meeting in 2009 in Beijing days ago.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and the lending rates have stabilized and dropped.
Days ago, the 4th quarterly meeting of Monetary Policy Committee in 2011 was held in Beijing.
In the coming period, continued effortsshould be made to maintain the continuity and stability of macroeconomicpolicies, consolidate the macro management effects, strengthen policycoordination, actively boost domestic consumer demand, optimize investment structure,and promote the appropriate growth of investment.
Considering the situation, the PBC will follow the requirements of “containing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and maintaining sound development,” coordinated the efforts to stabilize employment and prices, place the utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
It will pursue the strategy of expanding domestic demand while deepening supply-side structural reform, strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balance internal and external equilibria.
In line with the principles of differentiated policies to different sectors, greater credit support should be given to projects aimed to improve social welfare, SMEs, agriculture,rural areas and farmers, major construction projects, post-disaster reconstruction, energy conservation and emission reduction, scientific and technological innovation, technical upgrading, mergers & acquisitions as well as balanced regional development.
However, difficulties and structural problems still remain in China´s economic and social development, making it more pressing for China to shift growth pattern and restructure the economy.
A mix of policy tools will be used to keep liquidity reasonable and  adequate and maintain the overall stability of prices.
The structural monetary policy tools are expected to play more roles and become better targeted.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and guard against external shocks.
The Committee discussed monetary policy and measuresto be adopted in the period ahead and concurred that the sound monetary policyshould be preserved, interest rates of deposits and loans be maintained stableto ensure steady advancement of market-based interest rate reform.
The two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy should be developed into market-oriented policy tools rendering inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs) and self-employed businesses.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy should be continued while efforts need to bemade to improve the preemptive and fine-tuning actions and the forward-lookingapproach in the making of monetary policy.
In their view, China’s economic and financial sectors were developing in a generally stable manner.
Overall speaking,the strong growth momentum of money supply and loans had been reined in, andthe macro financial control measures had produced expected result.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate.
The meeting advocated maintaining the stability of RMB interest rates in the near term given the current domestic economic and price situation.
The task of controlling money and credit aggregates, optimizing credit structure and preventing financial risks is still arduous.
Broadly speaking, thefinancial sector performance was stable.
On June 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2024 (its 105th meeting) in Beijing.
It was agreed in the meeting that, despite variousdifficulties, the Chinese economy had maintained sustained rapid growthmomentum this year.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 95th meeting) on December 24 in Beijing.
The PBC will work to improve the mechanism for the formation and transmission of market-based interest rates and the central bank policy rate system.
Financial institution will be encouraged to issue loans to manufacturing and other key areas for equipment upgrading.
The participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
Against this backdrop, the PBC will follow the requirements of “containing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and maintaining sound development”, and seek progress while giving top priority to stability.
In discussing monetarypolicy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, theCommittee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, andefforts should be made to promote the policy become more forward-looking,scientific and effective.
It will implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthen both counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
On March 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 88th meeting) in Beijing.
Potential risks remain in the international financial market.
The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement new instruments to enable direct support for the real economy, and support eligible locally incorporated banks to defer repayment of loan principal and interest for inclusive MSB loans and to issue MSB credit loans.
It will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to the communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, noting that while the economy broadly remained sound,problems of structural imbalances, heavy reliance on resources input and imbalancesof payments still existed.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) recently held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2017 in Beijing.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the guiding principles of the Two Sessions.
In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market.
With the help of the policy measure package to stimulate domestic demand and promote economic growth, China´s economy saw positive changes.
The managedfloating exchange rate regime will be further improved in a self-initiated,controllable and gradual manner to give market supply and demand a fundamentalrole in the formation of RMB exchange rate and keep RMB exchange rate broadlystable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, certain problems remained, such as the structural imbalances, increasing pressures on environment and energy, andinternational payment imbalances.
The meeting analyzed the current economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
In doing so, banking institutions will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market, hence contributing to the development of a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the economic recovery is still uneven despite the growth of driving forces for domestic economic development and the remarkable increase of positive factors.
The economic growth was within the range of the policy target while the growth of the overal price level slowed down.
The share of direct financing needs to be increased gradually and efforts should be made to further improve financing structure of the enterprises and convert more savings into investment.
It will also scale up financial support for government-subsidized housing construction, public infrastructure development for both normal and emergency uses, and urban village renovation, thus facilitating the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 91st meeting) on December 25 in Beijing.
Major economies are witnessing diverging economic performances, and are turning to cycle of rate cuts when it comes to monetary policy.
It was pointed out that continual attention should be paid to developments of both the domestic and international economic and financial situations in the 4th quarter of this year.
Meanwhile, it will strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balance internal and external equilibria.
While financialsupport to economic growth must be guaranteed, no negligence should be toleratedin preventing inflation and financial risks.
Measures should be taken to further improve the managedfloating exchange rate regime and maintain the exchange rate basically stableat an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will conduct regular supervision over platform economy to promote its regulated, sound and sustained development.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement and solid progress in high-quality development, but it still faces challenges such as insufficient effective demand and weak social expectations.
Participants analyzed the economic and financial landscapes at home and abroad and concluded that Chinese economy is stable and improving, though complex as usual.
It will work unswervingly to consolidate and develop the public sector and to encourage, support and guide development of the non-public sector, and provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy.
It will strengthen policy coordination across authorities to implement the package of policies to stabilize the economy and give full play to their roles in stabilizing the economy and providing reliefs for businesses.
It was pointed out at the meeting that amid sluggish economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts worldwide, the tightening effect of central bank policies in developed countries is evident, and the volatility of international financial markets is intensifying.
In general,policy measures have achieved preliminary effects, as evidenced in the moderategrowth of money and credit and sound performance of the financial industry The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of domestic and international economic andfinancial development.
While strengthening the coordination of policies across authorities, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
It was unanimously agreed that RMB interest rates should be maintained stable in the near term considering current domestic and international economic developments.
Moreover, measures will also be taken to further expand the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, consolidate the capability of managing economic and financial situation and preventing risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in the international financial governance.
The Committee called for advancedanalysis of the reasons and rationales behind the rapid increase of consumerand asset prices level by specifically identifying the roles of aggregatefactors, structural factors, international transmission and revaluation in sucha process so that relevant responses could be prepared.
The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, guide large banks to shift the focus of their services to the lower levels, and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and tasks.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has enhanced macro regulation, pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, steadfastly adhered to an accommodative stance, strengthened counter-cyclical adjustments, and improved monetary policy framework.
The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
In the meeting,participants analyzed current economic and financial situation and focused on the potential impact of the international financial crisis on China’s economic and financial development.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to improve financing and credit structures, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development, to enhance the financial sector’s capacity to serve the real economy by comprehensively implementing policies, and to foster a virtuous triangular cycle among keeping monetary policies prudent, enhancing the vitality of micro entities and giving play to the functions of the capital market, so as to nurture the overall virtuous cycle of national economy.
The domestic economy and financial sectors both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial situation has become more complex.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and relatively fastgrowth momentum since 2005.
The monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and social financing costs have continued to decline.
On June 28, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 101st meeting) in Beijing.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and aboard.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 90th meeting) on September 25, 2020 in Beijing.
We will give full play to the important role of the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and bring into play its guiding role , so as to steadily bring down the overall financing costs for businesses and the costs for consumer loans.
It was agreed thatsince the beginning of 2004, the Chinese economy has maintained the rapid andsound growth momentum.
Specifically, the PBC will fully utilize the RMB300 billion new quota of central bank lending for micro and small businesses (MSBs), support the growth of loans granted to MSBs and self-employed businesses, continue the policy of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and of the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans, and introduce comprehensive policies to support coordinated regional development.
Efforts should be made tofully implement the scientific development approach by improving and carryingout each macroeconomic policy to prevent shifts from a relatively fast growthto an economic overheating and from structural price rise to full-scaleinflation, so as to realize good and rapid economic development.
The PBC will ensure good use of the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF), the facilities supporting inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs), as well as the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for the transport and logistics sectors, respectively.
Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to improve their financial services to better serve the real economy.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its third quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The participants emphasized the need to implement the decisions adopted at the 18th National Congress of the CPC and the Central Economic Work Conference, closely follow the latest developments in the real economy and financial markets at home and beyond as well as changes in international capital flow, continue the sound monetary policy to maintain policy continuity and stability, make policy measures more forward-looking, better-targeted and more flexible, properly handle the relationship among stable growth, structural adjustment, inflation control and risk prevention, and maintain a stable monetary environment.
With improved conditions and positive factors on the increase, the economic performance stabilized and took a turn for the better.
The PBOC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, speed up building a new development paradigm, effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output, and promote the continuous overall improvement of economic operation.