The market-based interest rate regime reform and RMB exchange rate regime will be furthered to keep RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The market-based interest rate reform should be pursued, and theleverage role of interest rate should be played out.
Following the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, we will pursue the general principle of making progress while ensuring stability, firmly grasp the primary task of high-quality development and steadily advance the Chinese path to modernization.
At present, the PBC should thoroughly, accurately andpositively understand and carry out the central government's decision andarrangement on macro-economic management, stick to market-orientation in policymaking, follow the economic principles, support capital market development, givefull play to the movitation and creativity of economic agents, strengthen thecoordination with industrial policy and fiscal policy, and improve theselection and intensity of proper policy instruments so as to ensure the steadyand relatively fast economic growth.
The PBOC has adopted a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
It was concurred that efforts should be made to promote theeconomic and social development in a scientific approach, further deepen thefinancial reform, and improve macro financial management.
The PBC continued to implement sound monetary policy, and strengthened its support to economic development while at the same time taking concrete measures to prevent and mitigate financial risks.
At end-May, balance of broad money (M2)reached RMB23.5 trillion yuan, a year-on-year increase of 17.5 percent, and newloans of all financial institutions registered RMB1258 billion yuan, adeceleration of RMB92.8 billion yuan on year-on-year basis.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been continuously paying dividends, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly.
It was stressed thatsteps should be taken to coordinate macroeconomic policies, boost domesticconsumption demand, optimize the investment structure, and curb the highinvestment growth.
Themeeting also encouraged commercial banks to strengthen credit support to agriculture,small and medium-sized enterprises, consumption and employment.
It will put into effect the financial policies that aim to promote the healthy development of the platform economy.
The prudent monetary policy shall be more properly managed to keep liquidity at reasonably ample levels, and keep the reasonable growth of money supply, credit and aggregate financing to the real economy.
The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, measures should be taken to strengthen macro-management,maintain continuity and stability of various macro economic policies, boostdomestic demand, control investment growth at a reasonable level and improveinvestment structure.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with greater flexibility and played a role as stabilizer for the macroeconomy.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
A mix of policies will be in place to support coordinated regional development.
The PBOC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, guide reasonable growth and well-paced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level.
Generally speaking, the financial industry was in stable operation during the first half of this year, and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
It was noted at the meeting that uncertainties incurred by changes in external environment are on the rise as the momentum for world economic growth is lackluster, and inflation eases somewhat.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor new developments in the economic and financial situation and environment both at home and abroad, attach great importance to counter-cyclical adjustments, make forward looking judgments on the situation and take pre-emptive adjustment and fine tuning measures when necessary.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Third Plenary Session of the 20th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, and the Central Financial Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The PBC will also adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development and guide financial institutions to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
Efforts should be made to fully implement thescientific approach to development, to take maintaining relatively rapideconomic growth and curbing excessive price increase as top priority, and toattach great importance to containing inflation.
On June 24, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 89th meeting) in Beijing.
The RMB exchange rate is expected to be basically stable, and it has been moving in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a macroeconomic stabilizer.
The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, vigorous efforts should be made to improve macroeconomicpolicy, enhance macroeconomic management, and further improve coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal, industrial, foreign trade and financial regulatorypolicies.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, noting that while the Chinese economy broadly remainedin sound situation, problems of excessive growth of investment, overly largesurpluses recorded in foreign trade and more than desired expansion of creditstill existed.
It was agreed that the Chineseeconomy in general was in good shape, and macroeconomic management had achievedsignificant results.
The financial system reform will be deepened, the two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies and the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be improved.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses, so as to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial market that features great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
Measures will be taken to foster financial reform and innovation,improve financial market system and enhance competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resource allocation.
Appropriate measures should betaken to improve coordination among the macroeconomic policies, focusing on fosteringconcrete progress in the building of the socialist new countryside, expandingdomestic consumption demand, managing the growth of fixed asset investment atappropriate level and optimizing the investment structure.
Global inflationarypressure continued to mount, the world economy slowed down, and more uncertainand disabling factors emerged.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote the virtuous circle of the economy.
However, the foundation for economic recovery was not solid, especially given the grave external environment due to the uncertain prospect of international economy and declining external demand.
Senior officials from the PBC’s Operation Office, Tianjin and Nanjing branches attended the meeting as observers.
The meeting pointed out that the economy performed stable in the first quarter by keeping the sustained and rapid development momentum.
They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Chinese economy is basically controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged.
Forceful actions should be taken to push ahead financialreform and innovation to improve competitiveness of financial institutions andefficiency of the financial market in resource allocation.
It will also step up financial support for large-scale equipment renewal and trade-in of consumer goods.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibria, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will also step up financial support for large-scale equipment renewal and trade-in of consumer goods.
By guiding financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, it will strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
The sound monetary policy has been forward-looking, targeted and timely, enabling vigorous support for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
In general, the Chinese economy and financialsector performed well.
The Committeeanalyzed current domestic and world economic and financial situation and agreedthat despite benign economic situation, China still faced such problems asunreasonable economic structures, extensive growth model and imbalances underbalance of payments.
The quality and effectiveness of financial sector’s support to the real economy will be enhanced by comprehensively implementing policies, while the financial services provided for small and micro enterprises, as well as agriculture, rural areas and rural people are to be improved, and a virtuous triangular cycle will be fostered among keeping monetary policies prudent, enhancing the vitality of micro entities and giving play to the functions of the capital market, so as to nurture the overall virtuous cycle of the national economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that to implement the decisions of the 18th CPC National Congress, the 3rd Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee and the Central Economic Work Conference, the latest developments in the financial market and real sector at home and abroad and the changes in international capital market will be closely monitored; in accordance with the general requirements of seeking progress while maintaining stability and carrying on reform and innovation, efforts will be made to continue the sound monetary policy, maintain appropriate liquidity, guide money, credit and the all-system financing aggregates to grow at a proper pace, and optimize the financing and credit structure.
The Committee conducted in-depth analysis of thecurrent economic and price development, agreeing that some of the macroeconomicmanagement measures taken since last year have already produced preliminarypositive results, but certain problems emerged in the process of economicoperation are yet to be resolved.
The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement the two monetary policy tools which enable direct support for the real economy, ensure deferred repayments of inclusive loans are applicable to all eligible micro and small businesses (MSBs) and substantively raise the portion of unsecured inclusive MSB loans.
Efforts will be made to optimize financial resources allocation, resolve structural imbalance in credit supply and demand, prevent financial risks and improve financial services to better serve the real economy and ensure a stable and relatively fast economy growth.
It was emphasized that the commercial banks should strengthen their efforts in transforming operational mechanism and increasing incentives for loan marketing to timely meet reasonable demand for liquidity and credit for technical innovation purposes of those enterprises with sound credit standing and marketable products.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, keep the growth of money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
It was noted that though China’s economic development was confronted with difficulties and challenges from home and abroad, the fundamentals and the long-term trend of the economy remained unchanged.
With financial risks effectively managed, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy have been gradually improved.
It was agreed in the meeting that, thanks to strongleadership of the State Council, the Chinese economy had maintained favorablegrowth momentum as great efforts were made both to control the SARS epidemicand promote economic development.
The Committee concluded that,the macro-economic control has achieved preliminary results and variousadjustment measures would continue to take effect.
The relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention and control will be handled properly, and the bottom line that no systemic financial risk should occur will be firmly defended.
Efforts should also be made tospeed up the reform of financial institutions, encourage financial innovations,improve financial services, develop financial market, promote a coordinated growthof direct and indirect finance, and increase the effectiveness of monetarypolicy transmission.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and abroad and changes in global capital flow, follow the principle of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, pay more attention to maintaining an appropriate monetary condition, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and realize reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 4thQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
It will implement a prudent monetary policy in a precise and effective manner, strengthen counter-cyclical adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus sustained overall economic recovery.
The overallperformance of the financial sector remained sound.
The RMB exchange rate and market expectations have remained stable, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks.
The solution of the problem needs cooperation among the enterprises, the commercial banks as well as authorities in different sectors.
The PBOC will make significant efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, old-age finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, so as to speed up the development of new quality productive forces.
It was stressedthat the sound monetary policy should be continued and the forward-looking,scientific and effective approach to macro financial management be furtherstrengthened in the coming period.
The PBOC should be highly concerned about marginal changes in price trends to keep prices basically stable.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, follow the Chinese’s path to modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
It was emphasized that more efforts should be made to improve financial services, strengthen credit control and enhance credit structure with a view to preventing duplicated construction.
The Committee heldthat, performance of the national economy featured relative fast growth,enhanced efficiency and low inflation in 2006.
Weighing themonetary policy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee heldthe view that a tight monetary policy should be implemented by taking variousmeasures in line with the guidance of the Central Economic Work Conference.
It was agreedthat, with the support of the macroeconomic management policies introducedsince the beginning of this year, the immanent force driving economic growthremained strong, although the overall growth rate dropped slightly.
Fixed asset investment continued to expandrapidly, consumer demand remained buoyant and CPI maintained its risingmomentum since the second half of 2003.
Improvement of the managed floating exchange rate regime shouldbe effected, continuously following the principle of “ making it aself-initiated, controllable and gradual process”.
The Committee held that efforts should be stepped up to monitor the international financial crisis and to improve the policy response mechanism to ensure safe and stable performance of the financial system.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and become more resilient against external shocks.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the guiding principles of the Two Sessions.
According tothe overall arrangement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitoredeconomic and financial performance and employed a combination of monetarypolicy instruments to enhance liquidity management, steadily advance market-basedinterest rate reform, and strengthen RMB exchange rate flexibility.
In particular, RMB loans grew by 462.5 billion yuan, 24.6 billion yuanmore than the growth recorded a year earlier.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2022 (its 96th meeting) in Beijing recently.
With these efforts, the PBC will enhance the resilience of economic development and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
The financing and credit structure will be improved and the financial sector reform will be deepened to improve efficiency and build stronger capacity to serve the real economy.
It will implement the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals, sci-tech innovation, inclusive elderly care services, and the transport and logistics sectors respectively.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held the 2nd Quarterly Meeting of 2005in Beijing days ago.
We will further strengthen policy coordination among departments, unleash the benefits of monetary and credit policies, balance internal and external equilibria, and coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, all of which will build a modern socialist country in all respects off to a good start.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at a reasonable and balanced level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Efforts will be made to adjust the economic structure andtransform economic growth pattern, promote a basic balance under the BOP andachieve sound and fast economic development.
The prudent and neutral monetary policy has brought about positive outcomes, as the macro leverage ratio has stablized, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided solid support for the real economy.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of the interest rates, and further improve the RMB exchange rate regime to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will work to maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, and stabilize investment and expectations.
The PBC will also give effective play to the role of structural monetary policy tools in accurate liquidity provision, make good use of the RMB300 billion special central bank lending, the RMB500 billion quotas of central bank lending and central bank discount and the RMB350 billion special credit quotas of policy banks.
Reform of the financial system will be deepened to enhance the efficiency of financial sector and its ability to serve the real economy.
The PBC, in line with the overall arrangement of the State Council, implemented a relatively loose monetary policy and strengthened financial support for economic growth.
In line with the arrangement of the CPC Central Committee and theState Council, the PBC has employed an array of monetary policy instruments toadjust money and credit aggregates on a timely and appropriate basis and guidethe commercial banks to optimize their credit structure.
It will concentrate on running its own affairs well and delivering good cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
Firmly implementing the “two unswervinglys”, the PBOC will provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy, while conquering the problems that restrain the small and medium-sized enterprises from getting financed.
Meanwhile, efforts should be made to quicken the steps inthe development of direct financing and promote a coordinated development offinancial market.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
In addition, the RMB exchangerate should be basically kept stable and the formation mechanism of RMBexchange rate improved to promote the equilibrium of the balance of payments.
Meanwhile, the financial open-up will be further expanded to boost the vitality and resilience of the financial sector.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
The Committee made an in-depth review ofcurrent economic and financial developments.
With financial risks under effective control, the financial sector has gradually improved its quality and efficiency in serving the real economy.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, and reinforce regulation over deposit rates.
The PBOC will intensify implementation of the existing monetary policies, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep credit growing reasonably at a stable pace, and ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
Renminbiexchange rate formation system should be further improved, and the exchangerate be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level topromote the balance of international payments.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts will be made to follow up the world’s economic and financial developments, enhance the research and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, and concentrate on doing our own affairs well.
The monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the financing costs for the real economy have continued to decline.
The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, promote the balance between internal and external equilibria, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Upholding the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm.
Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Su Ning, Mr. Xie Fuzhan, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Liu Mingkang,Mr.
However, economic stabilization and recovery is not firmly established.
Great support has been provided for pandemic containment, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
The Committee deliberated on the stance and measures of monetary policy in the next stage.
The PBC will deepen reforms to make the interest rate and exchange rate more market-based, improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, stabilize market expectations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It was noted that adverse factors in the global economy and severenatural disasters in China added new uncertainties to China’s economic performance, but thefundamentals remained unchanged.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, strengthen the guiding role of the central bank policy rates, unleash the benefits of the self-regulatory mechanism for the pricing of market rates and the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates, and steadily bring down the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for residents.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the factors pushing up prices and the impact ofthe sleet and snow disaster on economic growth, pointed out that prevention ofexcessive increase of general price should become the focus of financial macrocontrol, and a mix of measures ranging from increasing supply and stabilizingexpectations should be taken.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Central Financial Work Conference, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB12.8 trillion yuan, increased by RMB870.1 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB186.2 billion yuan over the same period of last year.
Appropriate measures should be taken to improve coordination of the monetarypolicy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy and financialregulatory policy, accelerate economic restructuring as well as thetransformation of economic growth pattern, improve growth quality andefficiency and promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
Market supply and demand offoreign exchange should be allowed to play a greater role in the process ofincreasing RMB exchange rate flexibility, with a view to keeping the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy, build the new development paradigm, focus on promoting high-quality development, pursue supply-side structural reform as its main task, stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and consolidate and expand achievements made in pandemic containment and economic and social development.
With financial risks under effective control, the financial sector has gradually improved its quality and efficiency of serving the real economy.
We will accelerate the improvement of the financial policy system for rental housing, and promote the smooth transition of the real estate sector to a new development mode.
The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to properly manage the strength and pace of structural deleveraging and strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, prevent and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Efforts should be made to strengthen coordination ofmonetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, trade policy andfinancial regulatory policy, accelerate economic restructuring and the shift ofgrowth pattern, mobilize the flexibility of market participants so that theycan play a greater role in improving the self-adjusting ability of the economy,and vigorously expand domestic demand to promote a basic equilibrium of thebalance of payments.
The PBC will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and strengthen the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies.
It will take the initiative to activate financial resources that are inefficiently occupied and improve the efficiency of capital utilization.
At the same time, the PBOC should pay attention to changes in long-term yields while focusing on the economic recovery.
It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development as well as the effective implementation of macro policies have bolstered the sustained recovery of the national economy in general.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterly meeting of 2009 in Beijing days ago.
The coordination between monetary policy and fiscal, industrial, trade and financial regulatory policies should be strengthened so as to maintain sound and rapid economic development.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Efforts will be made so that private enterprises receive financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development.
The Committee called for strengthening of macroeconomicmanagement to ensure a continuously steady development of the Chinese economyas well as a basic stability of the price level.
Therefore, private enterprises will get financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development.
The institutional reform in the financial sector will be deepened; the adjustment framework based on the two pillars of monetary and macro-prudential policies will be improved; the market-based interest rate reform and exchange rate regime reform will be deepened; and risk management will be strengthened to hold the bottom line of no systemic financial risks.
In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
The macro leverage ratio has remained basically stable.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy and build the new development paradigm.
The overallperformance of the financial sector has remained sound.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to play their leading role in providing financial services for the real economy, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and support banks in capital replenishment.
It is agreed at the meeting that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing old ones.
Market-based interest rate reform policies should be continuously carried out,and interest rate formation system and transmission mechanism should beimproved.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period,the Committee consented that sound monetary policy should be continued.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, follow the Chinese path to modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
In discussingmonetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, theCommittee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, and effortsshould be made to promote coordination between domestic and foreign currencypolicies and strengthen the preemptive nature of financial macro-management.While strengthening the liquidity management of banking system, an excessivelyrapid growth of money and credit should be further prevented and commercialbanks should be guided to properly control the scale and pace of mid andlong-term lending.
A combination of monetary policy instruments will be used to keep liquidity at reasonably adequate level.
It will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
It is their concensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained a stable growth momentum with strong resilience, the overall supply and demand remains broadly balanced, and the swtich to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable, market expectations have improved, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit rates has been brought into play, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have dropped significantly.
The PBOC will effectively advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the guidelines of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, the Central Financial Work Conference and the “two sessions”, as well as the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current situation and challenges facing theimplementation of the appropriately tight monetary policy, assessed relevantrisks in the process of global economic rebalancing and analyzed structural andunderlining factors affecting inflation trend.
Great efforts shouldalso be made to foster development of the financial market, quicken the stepsin financial reform, and promote a coordinated development of the direct andindirect financing so as to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policytransmission.
Although some new developments emerged in current economicoperation needed to be further examined, growth of money supply and credit wasfaster than desired, which could possibly lead to low-quality economic growthand worsen structural problems, thereby damping the sustainable and healthydevelopment of economy.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, and implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to expedite a virtuous circle of the economy.
Remaining generally stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and played its role as a stabilizer of the macro economy.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement with enhanced driving force, while it still faces challenges such as insufficient demand.
With these efforts, the financial market will become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed.
Furthermore, inflationary pressures are also building up andasset prices are rising persistently.
The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform, improve the two-pillar regulatory framework underpinned by monetary policy and macro prudential policy, and further improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
Considering the situation, the PBC will place the utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
The PBC will continue to give even greater priority to serving the real economy to keep the economy generally stable and to strengthen the resilience of economic development.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its second quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at the high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk control capability in an open economy.
It was also emphasized that greater financial support will be extended to shifting growth pattern and restructuring the economy.
We will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and maintain a reasonable growth and a stable pace of credit supply, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
At the same time, market-based interest rate reform should be steadily proceeded and the floating band of lending interest rate to SMEs needs to be widened.
However, the global pandemic and the world economy remains in a severe and complex situation, and preventing a resurgence of COVID-19 at home remains an arduous task, posing risks and challenges to China’s economic development.
It will keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable.
It will optimize consumer financial services in the areas of bulk consumer goods and social services, and continue to enhance financial support for enterprises to retain and recruit employees and for key groups of population to seek jobs or start businesses.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties as COVID-19 persists overseas and geopolitical conflicts escalate.
The domestic economy has seen stronger endogenous growth drivers but still faces instabilities and uncertainties such as the pandemic.
It was emphasized at the meeting that it was necessary to follow the latest developments in global economy and financial market and their impact, to continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, to give top priority to inflation control, to make macro-economic management more targeted, effective and forward-looking, and to manage the pace and strength of policies.
Besides, forceful actions should betaken to push ahead financial reform and innovation to improve competitivenessof financial institutions and efficiency of the financial market in resourceallocation.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote continuous economic recovery.
The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and develop funding chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby creating a virtuous circle and interaction among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector and industries.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, keep the sound monetary policy appropriate and flexible, use a mix of monetary policy tools to keep liquidity reasonably adequate, and to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth.
It will enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives to effectively stimulate private investment.
It will strengthen policy coordination across authorities to implement the package of economy-stabilizing policies and their follow-up policies, thus further consolidating the recovery and development of economy.
It will optimize consumer financial services in the areas of bulk consumer goods and social services, and continue to enhance financial support for enterprises to retain and recruit employees and for key groups to seek jobs or start businesses.
It will also support the coordinated regional development, and promote the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality.
While strengthening the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held the 2nd Quarterly Meeting of 2006in Beijing days ago.
It will continue to unleash the potential of the reform to lower lending rates, optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and facilitate further decline in real lending rates.
Measures will also be taken to advance the higher-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk control capability in an open economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that PBC will, following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era on economic work, earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Government Work Report and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
It will enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives to enhance the multiplier effect and stimulate more private investment.
It wasagreed that the good momentum of economic and financial development should bemaintained.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, stabilize banks’ liability costs, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans will be promoted in an orderly manner, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
While ensuring consistency andstability on the aggregate level, measures should be applied to strengthenpolicy coordination between the local and foreign currencies, and improve theeffectiveness of the monetary policy.
Participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situations.
Meanwhile, loanstructure should be further improved to prevent new credit risks and promotereform of the state-owned commercial banks.
It was held at the meeting that the implementation of the existing monetary policies should be strengthened.
The Committeestressed the necessity of taking increasingly forward-looking, scientific andeffective actions in the course of macro financial control.
It was put forward on the meeting that, according to the overall arrangements of the State Council, continued efforts would be made to implement a relatively easy monetary policy and strike a balance between maintaining stable and fairly rapid economic development, restructuring and managing inflation expectations.
The PBOC will appropriately increase the quota for central bank lending to support rural development and micro and small businesses (MSBs) as well as central bank discounts, make good use of the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF), and launch central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological upgrading.
The mechanism for the coordination and transmission of fiscal, monetary and employment policies should be improved to counter the impact of the outbreak on economic growth.
In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC has adopted a series of measures including cutting interest rates both on deposits and loans, strengthening open market operations and intensifying guidance on credit policy to promote appropriate growth of the monetary and credit aggregates.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rdQuarterly Meeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago.
The overallperformance of financial sector has remained sound.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to guide improvements in financing and credit structures, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development, to enhance the financial sector’s capacity to serve the real economy, and to nurture a virtuous circle of economic and financial development.
With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation bothat home and abroad.
The PBC will ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments, so as to get off to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period with high-quality development.
Following the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, we will pursue the general principle of making progress while ensuring stability, firmly grasp the primary task of high-quality development and steadily advance the Chinese path to modernization.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, and focus on performing its own duties.
Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
The PBCimplemented the CPC Central Committee and State Council's decision andarrangement on enhancing macro-economic management, and adopted variousmonetary and credit measures with the support of relevant government agenciesto reinforce aggregates control.
By coordinating both financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, the PBC will ensure the national economy performs within a reasonable range, promote high-quality economic development, and thereby stand ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
It will adopt city-specific measures and use the policy toolkit fully and effectively to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions.
The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Moneyand credit growth should be properly controlled, with credit structure to befurther improved and direct financing steadily advanced.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level but is still sticky, and the economic growth and monetary policies of major economies are diverging.
In general, the performance of the financial industry was soundand stable.
The PBC will guide financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system with an aim to having carbon dioxide emissions peak before 2030 and achieving carbon neutrality before 2060.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
On September 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the third quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 102nd meeting) in Beijing.
It was concurred that the principles mapped out at theCentral Economic Work Conference should be implemented fully and a scientificapproach should be applied to economic development.
Improvement of the managed floating exchange rate regime should be effected,continuously following the principles of “self-initiated, controllable andgradualistic”.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and promoting stability based on progress, the PBOC will intensify macro adjustments to maintain a good momentum of stable and sound economic growth.
Efforts will be made to improve a multi-layer capital market system, increase the share of direct financing, and maintain a reasonable scale of total financing.
Great support has been provided for pandemic prevention and control, work and production resumption and the development of the real economy.
Fluctuations in commodity prices and other factors have a larger impact on the world economy and the international financial markets.
It was concurred that efforts should be made to coordinatemacroeconomic policies, boost consumption demand, speed up economic andinternational trade restructuring, improve economic growth efficiency, promotetransformation of the economic growth pattern, and realize sustained growth aswell as price stability.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and give more support to banks in capital replenishment.
It was also agreed that, according to thecurrent economic development both at home and abroad, basic stability of theRMB deposit and loan interest rates should be maintained, and market-basedinterest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
The PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and promote the high-quality development of the economy.
RMB exchangerate regime should be further improved and the foreign exchange market shouldbe expanded to increase the floating flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, witha view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level.
It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Following the guidance of the CommunistParty of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC strengthenedfinancial macro control to preserve balances at aggregate level.
At the same time, the PBOC will include the purchasing and selling of government bonds into the monetary policy toolkit and pay attention to changes in long-term yields.
The PBC will innovate and improve marco adjustments and use a combination of monetary policy instruments to keep the RMB exchange rate generally stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, prevent and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
It was the first meeting of theadvisory body after the State Council appointed new members into the Committee.
The PBC will intensify the effects of structural monetary policy tools to provide targeted support for the economy.
The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers, better meet the reasonable demands of homebuyers, and foster a virtuous cycle of the real estate market for its sound development.
On September 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 86th meeting) in Beijing.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts should be made to thoroughly implement the scientific outlook on development, to continue to promote sound and rapid economic growth as the priority of economic work, to implement and improve the policy package and relevant policy measures, and to further enhance the momentum of economic stabilization and recovery.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote sound development of the financial markets.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform for lowering lending rates, adopt a mix of policies to significantly drive down overall financing costs, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, shore up weak links and foster strengths, and ensure that new financing primarily flows to the manufacturing sector and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).
It was held at the meeting that the regulation of monetary policies should be more intense and more targeted.
At the next stage, a mix of multiple monetary instruments will be used and macro-prudential policy framework will be improved to effectively manage liquidity and to keep all-system financing aggregate and money aggregates at reasonable levels.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, agreeing that the scientific development approach mushbe upheld as the overriding principles in guiding the overall economic andsocial progress.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to implement the decisions adopted at the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China and the overall arrangements of the Central Economic Work Conference, closely monitor the domestic and global economic and financial developments and changes in cross-border capital flow, continue to implement a sound monetary policy, and strike a balance among maintaining stable growth, adjusting economic structure, containing inflation and preventing risks.
However, the overall situation remains complex, with both positive and negative factors.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, pursued a prudent monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committee held that it was a critical time for the stability and recovery of the Chinese economy.
It is their consensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained sound growth momentum with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
The sound monetary policy will be kept appropriate in intensity, money supply properly managed, and massive liquidity injection avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth and prices are  generally stable.
Furthermore, city-specific measures should be adopted to meet people’s demand for buying their first home or improving their housing situation.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and abroad.
Work will also be done to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, and consolidate the capabilities of economic and financial regulation and risk prevention in an open market.
The PBC will work to maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of trade, foreign direct investment, and domestic investment, and keep market expectations stable in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, the PBC has scientifically managed market expectations, made practical efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented financial risks.
With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with their contribution to socio-economic development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual circulations with the domestic circulation as the mainstay and international and domestic circulations facilitating each other.
Supply and demand in the foreign exchange market have been basically in equilibrium, current account surplus has remained stable, and foreign exchange reserves have been adequate.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy and make it more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, and give full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools.
Prices will see a moderate recovery and remain at a reasonable level.
Measures should be taken to promote institutional building of the financial market, encourage innovation ofnew financial products and instruments and develop financial derivatives.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor the marginal changes in the economic and financial situations both at home and abroad, strengthen the sense of crisis, maintain strategic orientation, maintain counter-cyclical adjustments, and strengthen coordination among monetary, fiscal and other policies.
The market-based interest rate reform and RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will consolidate and expand achievements in pandemic containment and economic and social development, while ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and market expectations, and maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
On June 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 85th meeting) in Beijing.
The meeting discussed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
It was emphasized that underlying financial risks inreal estate development and low-efficient duplicated constructions brought byrapid credit growth should be closely monitored and prevented with credit riskearly-warning and surveillance arrangement to be strengthened.
Great efforts will be made to optimize credit structure, to facilitate further industrial restructuring, to guide financial institutions to improve financial services and enhance support to transformation of economic growth pattern.
Presidents from the Guangzhou Branch, Wuhan Branch and Chengdu Branch of the PBC were also present at the meeting.
It is their consensus that the Chinese economy has witnessed healthy development with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
In line with the Rules on Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China and with the approval of the State Council, presidents of two wholly state-owned commercial banks, Liu Mingkang, Zhang Enzhao and Wu Jinglian will withdraw from the Monetary Policy Committee as their term has expired.
The interest rates liberalization and RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee called for full implementation of thescientific development approach by stabilizing, improving and carrying out eachmacroeconomic policy, continuously strengthening macroeconomic management toprevent a shift from a relatively fast growth to an economic overheating andensure a sound and rapid development of the Chinese economy.
The participants analyzed the current economic and financial situation in China and beyond, and were of the view that performance of the Chinese economy is still within a reasonable range.
It was agreed that the economy hadmaintained steady and relatively fast growth momentum.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks, resolve risks in the course of reform and development, and hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 3rd quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex amid sluggish economic growth worldwide, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts.
The overall price level was basically stable.
The PBOC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to be risk-neutral, and improve their expectation management, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will reinforce inter-temporal adjustment, which is to be combined with countercyclical adjustment, and coordinate the monetary policies for this year and the next year, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
In theinternational market, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis worsened, anduncertainties and risks increased.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadily advanced and RMBexchange rate formation mechanism be further improved to keep RMB exchange ratebasically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and promote theequilibrium of the balance of payments.
The participants analyzed the economic and financial developments at home and abroad.
It was concurred that policy measures to strengthen and improvefinancial management have achieved evident effects, however, there stillexisted a possibility of fixed-asset investment rebound, inflationary pressureshad yet to be eased fundamentally, and the transmission mechanism of monetarypolicy needed to be further improved.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its fourth quarterly meeting of 2012 in Beijing days ago.
With regard to properly controlling the money and credit growth, commercial banks will be guided to expand the fee-based business and improve profit structure.Meanwhile, efforts should be made to quicken the steps in the development of direct financing and promote a coordinated development of financial market.
Under favorable conditions of stable and rising food production and smooth functioning of the energy market, prices will remain basically stable.
It will resolutely correct pro-cyclical behaviors, prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable.
After analyzingcurrent economic and financial situation both at home and abroad and discussingthe possible impact of the international financial turmoil on China’s economicand financial development, the Committee held that, as the US sub-primemortgage crisis had caused drastic fluctuations in the global financial marketand spilled over into financial institutions and even the real economy, theoutlook of the global economy was unfavorable, and proper measures should betaken accordingly.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced tangible results, with transmission efficiency of monetary policy enhanced and lending rates falling significantly.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy featuring a steady and moderate tighteningshould be continued while efforts need to be made to improve theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach in the making of monetarypolicy.
It was pointed out at the meeting that a sound monetary policy should be implemented in a flexible, appropriate, targeted and effective way.
The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform, speed up the building of a new development paradigm, and stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
At the same time, lessons should be drawn from the currentfinancial crisis to improve China’s banking system and the regulatory regime soas to maintain the stability of the country’s financial system and financialmarket.
Direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding, and to promote sound development of the financial markets.
In May, balance of broad money (M2) increased by 20.2 percentyear-on-year to RMB20 trillion yuan, and RMB loans of all financialinstitutions grew by RMB1.2561 trillion yuan from end-2002 to RMB14.4 trillionyuan, RMB719 billion yuan more than the expansion recorded for the same periodof 2002.
It was pointed out at the meeting that it is essential to follow up the world’s economic   and financial developments, enhance the judgment and analysis of international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and concentrate on running our own affairs well.
Forcefulactions should be taken to push ahead financial reform and innovation toimprove competitiveness of financial institutions and efficiency of thefinancial market in resource allocation.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding, and to promote sound development of the financial markets.
It is their consensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained a stable growth momentum with strong resilience, the overall supply and demand remains broadly balanced, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace.
It will optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and adjust the method of determining the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit rates.
It will remain focused on the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
With proper intertemporal adjustments, it will give better play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the quantity and the structure, and make every effort to stabilize growth, employment, and prices to provide practical support in expanding domestic demand and improve the consumption environment, thus facilitating a virtuous economic circle and providing stronger support for the real economy.
Various monetary policy instruments should beflexibly used to strengthen open market operations and ensure steady growth ofmoney supply so as to maintain the good momentum of economic and financialdevelopment.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
The overall performance offinancial sector remained sound, the new exchange rate regime has been running smoothly, and the flexibility of RMB exchange rate has gradually improved.
The PBOC will intensify the financial support for the housing supply system which features “market mechanism plus government subsidy”, and promote the establishment of a new development model of the real estate sector.
Financial services to the small and medium-sized enterprises should be further improved.
They agreed that, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Chinese economy is overall controllable, the economic growth remains resilient, and the long-term sound economic fundamentals stay unchanged.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) recently held its third quarterly meeting in 2017.
Efforts will be made to improve the coordination, transmission and implementation mechanisms for fiscal, monetary and employment policies, so as to effectively offset the impact of the pandemic on economic growth.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, so as to achieve risk prevention while facilitating high-quality development, properly manage the intensity and pace of risk resolution, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy, and give full play to the role of monetary policy tools in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
By taking proactive measures and rising up to the challenges, the PBC will enhance support for the real economy, focus on stabilizing employment and prices, and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
Besides, forceful actionsshould be taken to push ahead financial reform and innovation, promote developmentof a multi-layer financial market, and improve competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of the financial market in resource allocation.Development of the money market benchmark interest rate system should beaccelerated to further increase the role of price in macro financialmanagement.
It will increase support for micro and small businesses (MSBs) through inclusive MSB loans and help stabilize employment in micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).
It will continuously ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
At the sametime, the urgency of economic restructuring should be fully recognized, thecoordination of the monetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy,trade policy and financial regulatory policy should be enhanced and economicrestructuring accelerated to promote a basic equilibrium of the balance ofpayments.
We will adhere to the principle of “being focused, reasonable, moderate, and flexible” in implementing structural monetary policy tools, and the three monetary policy tools, including the carbon emission reduction facility (CERF), will continue to be implemented to increase support for key areas and weak links of the national economy, such as inclusive finance, green development, technological innovation, and infrastructure construction.
The PBOC will make significant efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, pension finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, so as to speed up the development of new quality productive forces.
The overall performance of the financial sector has remained sound.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and to meet the reasonable financing needs of real estate companies regardless of their ownership types, thus promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
Moreover, the PBOC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk-neutral, implement a mix of policy measures to stabilize market expectations, and resolutely prevent major exchange rate fluctuations, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts.
Under the guidance of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC continued to pursue sound monetary policy and adopted various monetary policy instruments to appropriately adjust money and credit growth.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 4th quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
Remaining flexible and appropriate, the sound monetary policy will be more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, with monetary policy tools playing their roles in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
It was agreed at the meeting that the economy maintained a steady and relatively fast growth with generally good performance, indicating that macroeconomic management achieved initial effects.
Besides, attentionshould be given to guide public expectation through the leverage role ofinterest rate.
In discussing monetary policy stance and measures tobe adopted in the coming period, the Committee suggested that the PBC shallcontinue to implement a sound monetary policy and strengthen coordination ofpolicies on local and foreign currencies as well as liquidity management in thebanking system so as to further enhance the forward-looking and scientificnature and effectiveness of monetary policy and maintain price stability.
The PBOC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
Balance of international payments will be enhanced and the RMB exchangerate will be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, the complexities of the situation should not be underestimated.
The participants were of the view that that performance of China's real economy and financial sector as steady with a good momentum for growth, but faced a complicated situation.
The transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans has been completed successfully.
The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote the sound development of the financial markets.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
The PBOC will effectively prevent and defuse the risk of high-quality leading property developers, and help improve their balance sheets.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, promoting stability based on progress, and establishing the new before abolishing the old, the PBOC will maintain a good momentum of stable and sound economic growth.
It will work unswervingly to consolidate and develop the public sector and to encourage, support and guide the development of the non-public sector, and provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy.
The prudent monetary policy has reflected the demand for counter-cyclical adjustments, as the macro leverage ratio has tended to stabilize, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided stronger and more efficient support for the real economy.
The RMB exchange rate is generally stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, coordinate pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development, and adhere to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability with the pandemic containment becoming a normal.
However, complexities of the situation should not be underestimated.
The growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) will be generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and the macro leverage ratio will be kept basically stable.
It was agreed that the continuity and stability of the macro-economicpolicies should be maintained to strengthen the scientific, forward-looking andefficient approach to macro-economic management.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2022, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterlymeeting of 2004 in Beijing days ago.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level but is still sticky, and interest rates remain elevated in developed countries.
Mr. Wu Dingfu and Mr. Guo Shuqing submittedtheir written opinions and Mr. Zhu Zhixin was absent due to another officialarrangement.
While the sound monetary policy stance should be maintained, various measures should be adopted to appropriately adjust money supply and improve credit structure, so as to ensure the Chinese economy further develop in a sustained, rapid and healthy manner.
Greater progress shall be made to boost domestic consumption demand,properly contain fixed asset investment, and optimize investment structure.Importance should be attached to adjust economic structure and growth model,enhance quality and efficiency of economic growth, and promote a basic balanceunder the BOP, with a view to accelerating sound and rapid economic growth.
The PBOC will promote sustained improvement in economic performance, enhance the endogenous growth dynamics of the economy, improve social expectations, and defuse potential financial risks, so as to set the stage for building a modern socialist country in all respects.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
It was stressed by the attendees that, the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and coordinate the efforts to support pandemic control and economic and social development.
The PBOC has adopted a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
It will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, so as to ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government.
With positive changes in global economy on a rise, the momentum of stabilization and recovery in China will further take hold.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 93rd meeting) on June 25 in Beijing.
Domestically, COVID-19 containment is generally improving but remains an arduous task, and the economic development faces triple pressures, namely shrinking demands, supply shocks, and waning expectations.
The PBC will not only stimulate the vitality of micro entities but also innovate and improve macro adjustments, so as to further maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, and stabilize investment and expectations.
The credit information system and capital raising system for SMEs should be established.
In line with the arrangement of the CPC Central Committeeand the State Council, the PBC has continued to pursue a sound monetary policy,closely monitored the economic and financial performance, strengthened the adjustmentof money and credit, and strove to improve credit structure.
Meanwhile, the PBC will also work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission, continue unleashing the potential of reforms in bringing down real lending rates, and guide financial institutions to increase support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
Moreover, the PBC will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its second quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
The real economy and financial sector have both made good progress in structural adjustments, yet the downward pressure on China’s economy is mounting.
The committee stressed the necessity of designing anoptimum pre-emptive and fine-tuning strategy featuring a combination of monetarypolicy instruments to further improve the scientific, forward-looking and effectiveapproach to macro-economic management.
Upholding the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBOC will firmly pursue high-quality development as a top priority, solidly promote Chinese modernization, apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, speed up building a new development paradigm, and effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output.
The PBC will deepen interest rate liberalization reform, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and promote the stable and sound development of economy.
Based on in-depth knowledge of the changes in the relationship between supply and demand in the real estate market and responding to people’s aspiration for high-quality housing, it will work to ensure that the financial policies introduced will deliver results, support revitalizing the inventory of unused land, and lower the interest rate on existing home loans, thus facilitating the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
The domestic economy is showing a recovery trend, but the foundation for recovery is not yet solid.
Tools such as central bank lending and discount, and monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy will play a guiding role.
The allocation of financial resources will be optimized to effectively alleviate the structural imbalances in the supply and demand of credit, prevent financial risks, and improve the financial service to the real economy, and the role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diversified demand of investment and financing in a better way, and promote the sound development of financial markets.
Specifically, it will extend the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, employ a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development, reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance, and guide financial institutions to step up support for sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its first regular quarterly meeting in 2014 in Beijing.
The PBOC will keep reasonable and sufficient liquidity level, guide reasonable growth and well-paced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level.
Upholding the Two Unswerving Commitments, the PBOC will employ an optimal combination of macro policies, demand expansion, reform and innovation, as well as risk forestalling and defusing.
Efforts should be made to maintain adequate liquidity in the banking system and to promote the stable money and credit growth.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rd Quarterly Meeting of 2006 in Beijing days ago.
Efforts would be made to tighten up lending extended to the enterprises in highly energy-consuming, heavily polluting and overcapacity industries.
After discussion, representatives held that China is facing complex economic and financial situations both at home and abroad.
Market-based interest rate reform should besteadily advanced, and RMB exchange rate formation system be improved tomaintain the exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibriumlevel so as to promote a balanced international payments.
The overall financing costs for businesses and the costs for individual consumption loans are expected to drop, with the LPR reform continuing to unleash its potential and playing a guiding role.
It will resolutely enhance economic vitality, forestall and defuse risks, and improve social expectations, thus reinforcing the momentum of economic recovery and effectively upgrading and appropriately expanding the economic output.
It wasstressed that the sound monetary policy should be continued and theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach to macro financialmanagement further strengthened.
The PBC will make good use of policy-based and developmental financial instruments, with priority on supporting infrastructure construction.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
With these efforts in place, we expect to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, build up a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system and the financial system support each other, and facilitate the formation of a new development pattern of dual cycles with the domestic cycle as the mainstay and international and domestic cycles facilitating each other.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People´s Bank of China (PBC) held its third quarterly meeting in 2009 in Beijing days ago.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and the lending rates have stabilized and dropped.
Days ago, the 4th quarterly meeting of Monetary Policy Committee in 2011 was held in Beijing.
In the coming period, continued effortsshould be made to maintain the continuity and stability of macroeconomicpolicies, consolidate the macro management effects, strengthen policycoordination, actively boost domestic consumer demand, optimize investment structure,and promote the appropriate growth of investment.
Considering the situation, the PBC will follow the requirements of “containing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and maintaining sound development,” coordinated the efforts to stabilize employment and prices, place the utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
It will pursue the strategy of expanding domestic demand while deepening supply-side structural reform, strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balance internal and external equilibria.
In line with the principles of differentiated policies to different sectors, greater credit support should be given to projects aimed to improve social welfare, SMEs, agriculture,rural areas and farmers, major construction projects, post-disaster reconstruction, energy conservation and emission reduction, scientific and technological innovation, technical upgrading, mergers & acquisitions as well as balanced regional development.
However, difficulties and structural problems still remain in China´s economic and social development, making it more pressing for China to shift growth pattern and restructure the economy.
A mix of policy tools will be used to keep liquidity reasonable and  adequate and maintain the overall stability of prices.
The structural monetary policy tools are expected to play more roles and become better targeted.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and guard against external shocks.
The Committee discussed monetary policy and measuresto be adopted in the period ahead and concurred that the sound monetary policyshould be preserved, interest rates of deposits and loans be maintained stableto ensure steady advancement of market-based interest rate reform.
The two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy should be developed into market-oriented policy tools rendering inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs) and self-employed businesses.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy should be continued while efforts need to bemade to improve the preemptive and fine-tuning actions and the forward-lookingapproach in the making of monetary policy.
In their view, China’s economic and financial sectors were developing in a generally stable manner.
Overall speaking,the strong growth momentum of money supply and loans had been reined in, andthe macro financial control measures had produced expected result.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate.
The meeting advocated maintaining the stability of RMB interest rates in the near term given the current domestic economic and price situation.
The task of controlling money and credit aggregates, optimizing credit structure and preventing financial risks is still arduous.
Broadly speaking, thefinancial sector performance was stable.
On June 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2024 (its 105th meeting) in Beijing.
It was agreed in the meeting that, despite variousdifficulties, the Chinese economy had maintained sustained rapid growthmomentum this year.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 95th meeting) on December 24 in Beijing.
The PBC will work to improve the mechanism for the formation and transmission of market-based interest rates and the central bank policy rate system.
Financial institution will be encouraged to issue loans to manufacturing and other key areas for equipment upgrading.
The participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
Against this backdrop, the PBC will follow the requirements of “containing the pandemic, stabilizing the economy, and maintaining sound development”, and seek progress while giving top priority to stability.
In discussing monetarypolicy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, theCommittee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, andefforts should be made to promote the policy become more forward-looking,scientific and effective.
It will implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthen both counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
On March 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 88th meeting) in Beijing.
Potential risks remain in the international financial market.
The PBC will continue to properly use the RMB1 trillion quota of central bank lending and central bank discounts for inclusive finance, well implement new instruments to enable direct support for the real economy, and support eligible locally incorporated banks to defer repayment of loan principal and interest for inclusive MSB loans and to issue MSB credit loans.
It will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to the communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, noting that while the economy broadly remained sound,problems of structural imbalances, heavy reliance on resources input and imbalancesof payments still existed.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) recently held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2017 in Beijing.
It was stressed at the meeting that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBOC will fully implement the requirements of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the guiding principles of the Two Sessions.
In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market.
With the help of the policy measure package to stimulate domestic demand and promote economic growth, China´s economy saw positive changes.
The managedfloating exchange rate regime will be further improved in a self-initiated,controllable and gradual manner to give market supply and demand a fundamentalrole in the formation of RMB exchange rate and keep RMB exchange rate broadlystable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, certain problems remained, such as the structural imbalances, increasing pressures on environment and energy, andinternational payment imbalances.
The meeting analyzed the current economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
In doing so, banking institutions will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market, hence contributing to the development of a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the economic recovery is still uneven despite the growth of driving forces for domestic economic development and the remarkable increase of positive factors.
The economic growth was within the range of the policy target while the growth of the overal price level slowed down.
The share of direct financing needs to be increased gradually and efforts should be made to further improve financing structure of the enterprises and convert more savings into investment.
It will also scale up financial support for government-subsidized housing construction, public infrastructure development for both normal and emergency uses, and urban village renovation, thus facilitating the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 91st meeting) on December 25 in Beijing.
Major economies are witnessing diverging economic performances, and are turning to cycle of rate cuts when it comes to monetary policy.
It was pointed out that continual attention should be paid to developments of both the domestic and international economic and financial situations in the 4th quarter of this year.
Meanwhile, it will strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balance internal and external equilibria.
While financialsupport to economic growth must be guaranteed, no negligence should be toleratedin preventing inflation and financial risks.
Measures should be taken to further improve the managedfloating exchange rate regime and maintain the exchange rate basically stableat an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will conduct regular supervision over platform economy to promote its regulated, sound and sustained development.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement and solid progress in high-quality development, but it still faces challenges such as insufficient effective demand and weak social expectations.
Participants analyzed the economic and financial landscapes at home and abroad and concluded that Chinese economy is stable and improving, though complex as usual.
It will work unswervingly to consolidate and develop the public sector and to encourage, support and guide development of the non-public sector, and provide better financial services for the development and growth of the private economy.
It will strengthen policy coordination across authorities to implement the package of policies to stabilize the economy and give full play to their roles in stabilizing the economy and providing reliefs for businesses.
It was pointed out at the meeting that amid sluggish economic growth, elevated inflation, and persistent geopolitical conflicts worldwide, the tightening effect of central bank policies in developed countries is evident, and the volatility of international financial markets is intensifying.
In general,policy measures have achieved preliminary effects, as evidenced in the moderategrowth of money and credit and sound performance of the financial industry The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of domestic and international economic andfinancial development.
While strengthening the coordination of policies across authorities, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
It was unanimously agreed that RMB interest rates should be maintained stable in the near term considering current domestic and international economic developments.
Moreover, measures will also be taken to further expand the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, consolidate the capability of managing economic and financial situation and preventing risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in the international financial governance.
The Committee called for advancedanalysis of the reasons and rationales behind the rapid increase of consumerand asset prices level by specifically identifying the roles of aggregatefactors, structural factors, international transmission and revaluation in sucha process so that relevant responses could be prepared.
The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, guide large banks to shift the focus of their services to the lower levels, and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and tasks.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has enhanced macro regulation, pursued a sound monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, steadfastly adhered to an accommodative stance, strengthened counter-cyclical adjustments, and improved monetary policy framework.
The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
In the meeting,participants analyzed current economic and financial situation and focused on the potential impact of the international financial crisis on China’s economic and financial development.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to improve financing and credit structures, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development, to enhance the financial sector’s capacity to serve the real economy by comprehensively implementing policies, and to foster a virtuous triangular cycle among keeping monetary policies prudent, enhancing the vitality of micro entities and giving play to the functions of the capital market, so as to nurture the overall virtuous cycle of national economy.
The domestic economy and financial sectors both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial situation has become more complex.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and relatively fastgrowth momentum since 2005.
The monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and social financing costs have continued to decline.
On June 28, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 101st meeting) in Beijing.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and aboard.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2020 (its 90th meeting) on September 25, 2020 in Beijing.
We will give full play to the important role of the market-oriented adjustment mechanism for deposit rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and bring into play its guiding role , so as to steadily bring down the overall financing costs for businesses and the costs for consumer loans.
It was agreed thatsince the beginning of 2004, the Chinese economy has maintained the rapid andsound growth momentum.
Specifically, the PBC will fully utilize the RMB300 billion new quota of central bank lending for micro and small businesses (MSBs), support the growth of loans granted to MSBs and self-employed businesses, continue the policy of deferred repayments on inclusive MSB loans and of the support plan for inclusive unsecured MSB loans, and introduce comprehensive policies to support coordinated regional development.
Efforts should be made tofully implement the scientific development approach by improving and carryingout each macroeconomic policy to prevent shifts from a relatively fast growthto an economic overheating and from structural price rise to full-scaleinflation, so as to realize good and rapid economic development.
The PBC will ensure good use of the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF), the facilities supporting inclusive loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs), as well as the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals, for sci-tech innovation, for inclusive elderly care services, and for the transport and logistics sectors, respectively.
Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to improve their financial services to better serve the real economy.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its third quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The participants emphasized the need to implement the decisions adopted at the 18th National Congress of the CPC and the Central Economic Work Conference, closely follow the latest developments in the real economy and financial markets at home and beyond as well as changes in international capital flow, continue the sound monetary policy to maintain policy continuity and stability, make policy measures more forward-looking, better-targeted and more flexible, properly handle the relationship among stable growth, structural adjustment, inflation control and risk prevention, and maintain a stable monetary environment.
With improved conditions and positive factors on the increase, the economic performance stabilized and took a turn for the better.
The PBOC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, speed up building a new development paradigm, effectively upgrade and appropriately expand the economic output, and promote the continuous overall improvement of economic operation.
It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
United with all relevant parties to make joint efforts unremittingly, it will firmly uphold the utmost priority of high-quality development, steadfastly follow the Chinese path to modernization, and apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, to speed up the establishment of a new development paradigm.
It will safeguard the overall stability of the economy and make its development more resilient.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the national economy is performing steadily with stable and sound momentum for growth, but the overall situations at home and abroad remain complicated and challenging.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy to improve the efficiency of capital utilization.
Moreover, it will keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is targeted and effective and maintaining its continuity, stability, and sustainability, the PBOC has scientifically managed market expectations, made practical efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented and controlled financial risks.
In order to cope with the impacts brought about by the crisis and promote the stable and relatively rapid economic development in China, the government adjusted the direction of macroeconomic policy in a timely manner and took a series of policy measures to stimulate domestic demand.
The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial situtaion has become more complex.
On April 12, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) holds the first quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 84th meeting) in Beijing.
On September 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third regular quarterly meeting in 2018 (its 82nd meeting) in Beijing.
While consistency and continuity ofmacroeconomic policies should be preserved, appropriate measures should betaken in due course to fine-tune the forcefulness and focus of the policy inline with the changing environment.
In the meantime, the two-way opening-up at a high level in the financial sector will be further expanded to enhance the capacity for economic and financial management, risk prevention and control in an open economy, and participation in the international financial governance.
It will guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector and focus on stabilizing industry and supply chains, trying to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, act skillfully in turning external pressure into strong drive for deepening reforms and opening up, and focus on performing our own duties.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 2ndQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform yielding continuous dividends, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient and loan rates have steadily dropped.
In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, consolidate the capability to manage economic and financial situation and prevent risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in international financial governance.
The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
The sound monetary policy has maintained its continuity, consistency, and sustainability to guide market expectations in a scientific way，to make great efforts to serve the real economy and to prevent and manage financial risks effectively.
Generally speaking, the financial industry remained in stable operation and the growth of money and credit was basically kept commensurate with the speed of economic development.
Weak external demand poses enormous pressures, domestic demand expansion faces multiple constraints, some industries and enterprises experience operation difficulties, and economic restructuring remains an arduous task.
The participants discussed the current economic and financial situations at home and abroad and were of the view that performance of the financial sector and real economy in China was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable, despite many difficulties and challenges; the global economy was expected to continue a slow recovery trend but also faced some unstable and uncertain factors.
Efforts should be made to optimize credit structure, to bolster the financial support for weak links such as agriculture, farmers and the rural areas and small- and medium-sized enterprises, to address financing difficulties of certain enterprises, and to tighten up lending extended to the enterprises in highly energy-consuming, heavily polluting and overcapacity industries.
The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of the monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and fast growth momentum.Following the guidance of the Communist Party of China’s Central Committee andthe State Council, the PBC closely monitored economic and financialdevelopments while at the same time applying various monetary instruments tostrengthen liquidity management, steadily push forward interest rate reform andincrease flexibility of the RMB exchange rate.
Prices will pick up at low levels and remain at a reasonable level.
The international economic situation and monetary policy of the major economies have diverged as there are more positive signals in the U.S., the euro area has further relaxed its monetary policy, and the real sector in some developing economies faces many difficulties.
Ma Jiantang was on business leave.
On December 27, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the fourth quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 103rd meeting) in Beijing.
The foreign exchange administration system should be improved to vigorously advance trade and investment facilitation.
The PBC will implement the prudent and neutral monetary policy, control total money supply, and use multiple monetary policy instruments to maintain reasonable growth of money, lending and social financing to keep adequate and stable liquidity, improve the efficiency of financial operations and its capacity to serve the real economy, and constrain the overall leverage ratio at an acceptable level.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to encourage large banks to promote financial inclusiveness and small and medium-sized banks to focus on their mandatory responsibilities and businesses, so as to advance a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, facilitate the transition of pricing benchmark of outstanding loans with floating rates, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committee held that the international financial crisis further spread and deepened, and the international financial market was still in turbulence.
At present, the work of pandemic prevention and control in China continues to improve, and the restoration of the order of production and life is picking up pace.
On December 27, 2019, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 87th meeting) in Beijing.
It was pointed out that close attention should be paid to developments of the world economic and financial situations in the second half of this year.
The meeting heldthat, as a series of well-targeted macro control measures formulated by theState Council began taking effect, China’s economy kept developing in thedirection intended by the macro control, the financial system remained safe andsound, and the overall situation was good.
In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in both directions.
At end-September of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17.7 trillion yuan, up 16.5%.
The world economy is still in a period of profound readjustment after the global financial crisis.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and the world and changes in global capital flow, follow the overall requirements of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and bring about reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
Renminbi exchange rate formation system should be further improved,with the exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level to promote the balance of international payments.
The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place a top priority on stability.
Atthe same time, the pace, priorities and intensity of financial macro controlshould be brought in alignment with changes in the economic and financialsituations at home and abroad.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held thefirst quarterly meeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
The PBOC will make good use of policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments, with the priorities on supporting infrastructure construction and promoting government investment to drive private investment.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 4th quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
The participants analysed the current domestic and international economic and financial situations.
It was stressed at the meeting that the creditstructure should be further adjusted to prevent credit flow to low-efficientand duplicated construction projects, and that coordinated development of themoney market, capital market and insurance market should be push forward.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstacles in monetary policy transmission.
The performance of the financial sector and the overall price level are both stable.
It has used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR), central bank lending, and purchasing and selling of government bonds to provide solid support for the real economy and effectively prevent financial risks, creating a favorable monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
The special lending facilitating real estate delivery will be put into use at a faster pace, even with appropriately higher intensity if needed.
With the sound monetary policy maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks.
Broad money (M2) reachedRMB22.7 trillion yuan at the end of February, a year-on-year increase of 19.4%.Outstanding balance of loans extended by all financial institutions increasedby RMB509.2 billion yuan, accelerating by 55.3 billion yuan from a yearearlier.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its 3rd regular quarterly meeting of 2002 in Beijing days ago.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 4th quarterly regular meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The domestic economy and financial sectors both have realized positive development in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial environments have become more complex.
At the same time, more channels should be explored to increase the proportion of direct financing, improve financing structure of the enterprises and strengthen funding capacity of the small and medium-sized enterprises.
It was agreed that, the economy was continuing to grow in asteady and relatively fast way with enhanced stability and coordination.However, problems still exist in economic operations including pressures on are bound in fixed-asset investment growth and imbalances in international balance of payments.
The spread of COVID-19 outside China and the world economy sees prospects for turnaround, but the overall situations remain complicated and challenging.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC)held its second quarterly meeting of 2008 in Beijing days ago.
Adhering to the Two Unwavering Commitments, the PBOC will make coordinated efforts to implement macro policies, expand demand, conduct reform and innovation, as well as prevent and defuse risks.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, and to meet the reasonable financing needs of real estate companies regardless of their ownership types, thus promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
The PBOC will also deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, guide large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to communities, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and give more support to banks in capital replenishment.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks and strike a balance between stabilizing growth, preventing risks and curbing inflation.
Necessary support has been rendered for economic recovery.
Their view is that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing the old ones.
Moreover, acute problems continued to exist in economic operations, includingexcessive fixed-asset investment in some sectors, bottlenecks in the supply ofcoal, electricity, oil and transportation, and a relatively large surplus offoreign trade.
However, the Chinese economy still faced a complex situation, with both favorable and unfavorable factors in sight.
The meeting emphasized the needs to further improve monetary policy transmission and promote the state-owned commercial banks to enhance both the incentives and restraints on loan marketing to actively meet the rational liquidity demands from those profitable and creditworthy enterprises with marketable products.
More work will be done to promote the well-regulated and healthy development of the financial businesses of platform enterprises and strengthen the normalized regulation on their financial activities.
The pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more severe and complex, and the domestic economic recovery remains unstable and imbalanced, said the meeting.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, implemented a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates and the required reserve ratio (RRR), thereby providing effective support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
Under favorable conditions of stable and rising food production and smooth functioning of the energy market, we will keep prices basically stable.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government.
In the next quarter, the PBC will follow the State Council´s decisions on macroeconomic management, continue the relatively easy monetary policy, and maintain policy continuity and stability.
Work will be done to implement financial policy measures to promote the healthy development of the platform economy.
On December 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) holds the fourth regular quarterly meeting in 2018 (its 83rd meetings) in Beijing.
Following the guidance of the CommunistParty of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC closelymonitored economic and financial developments while at the same time strengtheningthe preemptiveness of monetary policy by applying a mix of policy measures toimprove financial macro control and preserve balances at the aggregate level.Despite the fact that volatilities in the USsubprime mortgages market have caused turbulences in the internationalfinancial market recently, the impact was so far quite limited on China.
The macro leverage ratio remains basically stable, financial risks have been effectively controlled, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
Outstanding balance of loans in both local and foreign currencies extended by domestic financial institutions amounted to RMB13.3 trillion yuan, increased by RMB1403.5 billion yuan or accelerated by RMB496.8 billion yuan over the same period of last year, a record high growth of the last four years.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policymeasures to be adopted in the coming period, the Committee consented that thesound monetary policy should be continued, and efforts should be made topromote the financial policy become more forward-looking, scientific andeffective.
The PBC will render more financial support for helping enterprises stabilize jobs and expand recruitment, as well as for the entrepreneurship and employment of targeted groups.
Various policy instruments should be adoptedto manage the liquidity of the financial system in a timely and appropriatemanner.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor the marginal changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, strengthen the sense of crisis, amplify counter-cyclical adjustments, and make monetary policies more forward looking, flexible and targeted.
In this connection, the PBC would further streamline the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, maintain adequate liquidity of the banking system and ensure that the aggregate money supply be sufficient to support economic development.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to monitor the lastest domestic and international economics and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a sound monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, conduct timely and well-designed fine-tunings according to the situations, and strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast growth, economic restructuring and managing the inflationary expectation.
We will closely monitor the latest development  in the international and domestic economy and financial markets, and changes in international capital flows, adhere to the general principle of seeking progress while maintaining stability, adapt to the new norm of economic development, implement the prudent and neutral monetary policy, and use a variety of monetary-policy instruments, in order to maintain of the volume of liquidity generally stable, and to guide reasonable growth of monetary credit and social financing scale.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, while strengthening coordination of international macroeconomic policies.
Measures should also be taken to improve the managed floating exchange rateregime in a self-initiated, controllable, and gradual way and enable the market supply and demand to play a fundamental role in the formation of the RMB exchange rate so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Supply and demand in foreign exchange market have been basically balanced, China’s current account surplus has remained at a stable level, and foreign exchange reserves have been in a sufficient state.
The market-based interest rate reform and the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime will be advanced to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
It will press ahead with financial reform and innovation, strengthen risk management, and make financial institutions more resilient.
The Committee discussed monetary policy and measuresto be adopted in the period ahead and concurred that the sound monetary policyshould be preserved and various monetary policy instruments be flexibly employedto ensure steady growth of aggregate money supply and credit and the continuityof the recent policy guidance.
Senior officials from the PBC’s Tianjin and Nanjing Branches attended the meeting as observers.
Meanwhile, effortsshould be made to promote restructuring of the industries and foreign trade andto facilitate the transformation of economic growth pattern and the improvementof growth quality.
It will resolutely enhance economic vigor, forestall and defuse risks, and improve social expectations, thus reinforcing the momentum of economic recovery and effectively upgrading and appropriately expanding the economic output.
The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and pronounced contradictions still persist.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2022, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and stabilized economic and social development to the greatest extent possible.
Consistency and stability of policy conducts will be kept whereas their intensity, pace and focus will be flexibly handled to enhance the targeting of such policies to enable the financial sector to support economic development in a more sustainable manner and maintain the healthy and stable operation of the financial system.
It is emphasized by the attendees that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Economic Work Conference, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, properly and soundly manage the intensity of countercyclical adjustments of macro policies, strengthen its efforts to invigorate micro entities, and fully maintain stability in employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign and domestic investments, and expectations.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market, hence contributing to the development of a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive.
Direct financing will be expanded to promote the development of the financial market.
Days ago, the 3rd quarterly meeting of Monetary Policy Committee was held in Beijing.
The market-based reform of interest rates and the RMB exchange rate regime reform will be advanced steadily to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Specifically, the PBOC will integrate implementation of the strategy to expand domestic demand with efforts to deepen the supply-side structural reform, and it will motivate business entities while ensuring policy effects, aiming to strengthen policy coordination across authorities, give full play to the role of monetary and credit policies, and properly balancing internal and external equilibria.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, give play to the guiding role of the central bank policy rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates, and help stabilize and bring down the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for individuals.
The international economic and financial situation has become more complex, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
Structural monetary policy tools will play a supportive role to further back key areas, weak links, as well as the sectors battered by COVID-19.
Furthermore, measures will be adopted to perfect the macropurdential framework and use various monetary policy instruments to strengthen and improve liquidity management and guide the stable and appropriate growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, innovate and improve approaches to macro control, make timely and appropriate countercyclical adjustments, and enhance macro policy coordination.
Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse major financial risks, hold the bottom line that no systemic financial risks should occur, and strike a long-term balance between stabilizing growth and preventing risks.
Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy, build the new development paradigm, and focus on promoting high-quality development.
Coordination and cooperation between monetary policy and other policies including fiscal, industrial, trade and financial regulatory policies shall be improved, and the forward-looking nature of the monetary policies be enhanced to maintain stable and relatively rapid economic development.
Besides, forceful actions should be takento push ahead institution building in the financial market, expand directfinancing, and promote a balanced development of the financial markets.
Staying committed to the central task of economic development, the Two Unwavering Commitments and the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm.
While ensuring continuity and stability at aggregate level, preemptive andfine-tuning measures should be strengthened.
The PBC will also strive to remove obstructions in monetary policy transmission, continue to release the potential of the reform to drive down lending rates, encourage financial institutions to enhance support for the real economy, especially for MSBs and private enterprises, and increase the proportion of MSB loans, credit loans and loans to the manufacturing sector.
On the international side, although the European debt crisis abated and the global economy recovered moderately, uncertainties remained.
The prudent monetary policy will remain neutral, money supply will be properly managed to keep liquidity at reasonably ample levels, and steps will be taken to guide the reasonable growth of money supply, credit and aggregate financing to the real economy.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It will resolutely correct pro-cyclical behaviors and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting so as to prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at a reasonable and balanced level.
The structural monetary policy tools will be fully leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct accessibility” of policies.
The PBC will refrain from “flooding the market with liquidity,” and maintain generally stable prices.
It was noted that supported by steady expansion of public demands, the Chinese economy had maintained its rapid growth momentum during the first three quarters of this year.
Foreign exchange management system reform should be deepenedto promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
While the sound monetary policy stance is maintained, a mix of policy instruments should be flexibly used to appropriately adjust money supply on a timely basis.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2024, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, pursued a prudent monetary policy that is flexible, moderate, precise, and effective, strengthened the counter-cyclical adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
The PBOC will continue its efforts and ride on the momentum to intensify macro adjustments, implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthen both counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and give full play to the role of monetary policy instruments in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure.
The PBC carried out sound monetary policy and adoptedeconomic measures to address the excessive growth of money and credit.
The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of expectations has been scientific and effective.
By implementing the sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, and strengthening counter-cyclical adjustments, the PBOC has used a mix of policy instruments to earnestly serve the real economy and effectively prevent and control financial risks.
At present, these policy measures have taken preliminary effects, and the Chinese economy is showing positive signs, including adequate liquidity in the banking system, rapid growth of money and credit supply and stable operation of the financial system.
The Committee called for strengthening ofmacroeconomic and financial management to ensure the rapid and steadydevelopment of the Chinese economy.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be leveraged to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all-system financing aggregates at reasonable volumes.
The market-based reform of interest rates will be deepened, lending rates will be further guided downwards, and the RMB exchange rate will be kept basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments.
Efforts will be made to guide financial institutions to optimize their credit structure, prevent financial risks and improve their financial services to better serve the real economy and ensure a stable and relatively fast economy growth.
In addition, it will focus on expanding domestic demand and boosting confidence so as to promote the virtuous circle of the economy.
However, some emerging market economies still face challenges, and the international financial market has potential risks.
It was also agreed that the deposit and loan interestrates and the exchange rate of RMB should be kept stable, and market-basedinterest rate reform should be steadily advanced.
It was noted that the Chinese economy has maintainedgood growth momentum since the beginning of the year.
It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
Market should play a fundamental role in determining the exchange rate so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The financial system reform will be deepened, the two-pillar framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies and the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be improved.
The PBC will keep the aggregate at an appropriate level to drive a virtuous cycle between finance and the real economy and provide full support for “ensuring stability on the six fronts” (employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and “maintaining security in the six areas” (employment, people’s basic livelihood, market entities, food and energy, stability of industrial and supply chains, and smooth functioning of grassroots administration).
Atend-November, balance of broad money (M2) reached RMB21.6 trillion yuan,representing a year-on-year increase of 20.4 percent, and new loans of allfinancial institutions registered RMB2.87 trillion yuan, an acceleration ofRMB1.23 trillion yuan on year-on-year basis.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) held its second quarterly meeting of 2009 in Beijing days ago.
Appropriatemeasures should be taken to improve coordination of the monetary policy with fiscalpolicy, industrial policy, trade policy and financial regulatory policy,actively expand domestic consumption demand, manage the growth of fixed assetinvestment at appropriate level and optimize the investment structure.Meanwhile, efforts should be made to accelerate economic restructuring as wellas the transformation of economic growth pattern, improve growth quality andefficiency, and promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
It will continue to improve the credit structure, step up financial support to agriculture, rural areas, farmers, SMEs and other weak links, develop consumer credit, support the adjustment and revitalization of key industries and the development of emerging strategic industries, and promote independent innovation, mergers and reorganization, industrial relocation and balanced development across regions.
It will remain focused on the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform, implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and continue to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas.
In linewith the policy instructions of the CPC Central Committee and the StateCouncil, the PBC has implemented the sound monetary policy, closely monitoredthe economic and financial development, and kept monetary aggregates underproper control.
The PBOC will improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Vigorous actions should be taken to push aheadfinancial reform and innovations to improve the competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resources allocation.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 3rdQuarterly Meeting of 2003 in Beijing recently.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 94th meeting) on September 24 in Beijing.
Several days ago, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 3rd regular quarterly meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The PBC would further advance financial reform and innovation, and reinforce risk management, in order to enhance the financial enterprises´ capability in fending off risks.
In general, policymeasures have been proved effective in that the monetary and credit performancewas broadly kept in line with the policy stance of steady growth of money andcredit.
The PBOC has achieved remarkable results in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, and given full play to the role of the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the decisions and resolutions adopted at the 18th CPC National Congress, 3rd Plenum of 18th CPC National Congress and Central Economic Work Conference will be earnestly implemented.
The second quarterly meeting in 2002 of the monetary policy committee of the PBC was held in Beijing recently.
While providing guidance to ensure a rational growth of money andcredit on the aggregate level, measures should be applied to strengthen policycoordination between the local and foreign currencies, enhance liquiditymanagement of the banking system and apply a mix of monetary policy instrumentsto maintain basic stability of the price level.
Liquidity in the banking system remains adequate, money and credit supply grows rapidly, and the financial system functions in a stable manner.
It will remain committed to the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
The sound monetary policy will be flexible, precise, adaptive and appropriate.
In general, the financial industry performed well in the first fivemonths of this year.
The global economy is gradually recovering, with continued recovery in major developed countries and certain challenges in some emerging economies.
The financial system reform will be deepened by refining the two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies, advancing the reform in interest rate and other key areas, and smoothing the monetary policy transmission channels.
Financial services with respect to consumer commodities and social services will be improved.
The international economic and financial situation is complicated, and it has been more apparent that global uncertainty is evolving at a faster speed.
In addition, the PBOC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial management as well as risk prevention and control in an open economy.
The market-based interest rate reform will be furthered so that the market mechanism will play a fundamental role in resource allocation.
After analyzing domestic and global economic and financial developments, the Committee held that policy measures adopted to address the international financial crisis have produced remarkable results, with investment growth accelerating, consumption expanding rapidly, and domestic demand playing a greater role in driving economic growth.
It will put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector based on market demands, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
Meanwhile, efforts shouldbe made to advance financial reform, and promote a coordinated development ofthe direct and indirect financing so as to enhance the effectiveness ofmonetary policy transmission.
Efforts should be made to increase the contribution of domestic demand, household consumption in particular, to economic growth, to shift development pattern, and to speed up strategic adjustment of economic structure.
It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development have bolstered the sustained economic recovery.
Efforts will be made to improve the RMB exchange rate mechanism and keep the RMB rate basically stable at an equilibrium and adaptive level.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2006 in Beijing days ago.
Shang Fulin and Mr.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy featuring a steady and moderate tighteningshould be continued while efforts need to be made to further improve theforward-looking, scientific and effective approach in the making of monetarypolicy.
It was agreed in the meeting that, despite variousdifficulties, the Chinese economy had maintained the rapid growth momentumduring the first three quarters of this year.
The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform and improve the regulatory framework underpinned by the two pillars of monetary policy and macro prudential policy.
It will put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
In accordance with the overall arrangement ofthe State Council, the PBC properly managed the priorities, pace and intensityof financial macro control.
The Chinese economy still faces many uncertainties.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment.
The international economic situation and monetary policy of the major economies have diverged as there are more positive signals in the developed economies and growth in some emerging economies has continued to moderate.
It was agreed that remarkable results have been achieved in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development since the beginning of this year, and the Chinese economy has gradually returned to normal.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large banks to focus more attention on financial inclusiveness and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main businesses and responsibilities, thus advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
The PBC will enhance market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism by improving the central bank policy rate system, optimize regulation over deposit rates, constantly unleash the potential of the LPR reform and further bring down actual loan rates.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the decisions and resolutions adopted at the 18th CPC National Congress, 3rd Plenum of the 18th CPC Central Committee and Central Economic Work Conference will be earnestly implemented.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, guide financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, and strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development.
Instead, Jiang Jianqing, Shang Fulin and Li Yang will join the Committee as new members.
Measures should be taken to actively advance industrial andinternational trade restructuring, promote the equilibrium of the BOP, fosterthe transformation of economic growth pattern, and improve the efficiency ofeconomic growth.
The RMB exchange rate has remained stable overall and become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks.
It will also focus on expanding domestic demand, boosting confidence, and expediting a virtuous circle of the economy so as to provide stronger support for the real economy.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial development.It was agreed that the PBC shall meet the requirements of strengthened macroeconomic control, flexibly adopt a mix of monetary policy instruments, furtherpromote the fundamental role of market mechanism in resource allocation,continue to appropriately manage the money and credit aggregate, improvefinancial services and optimize credit structure.
The transition of the pricing benchmark for outstanding floating-rate loans has been completed, and the loan prime rate (LPR) reform has been delivering benefits, with monetary policy transmission becoming more efficient and loan rates significantly lowered.
It will make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, and move ahead with the effective implementation of new facilities such as the swap facility for securities, fund and insurance companies, and central bank lending for share buybacks and holdings increase, which shall stabilize the capital market.
It was noted thatat present China’s economy maintained a steady and rapiddevelopment momentum, but problems such as a potential rebound of fixed assetinvestment, excess money and credit supply and excessive liquidity were notadequately addressed, accompanied by a palpable pressure of price hike.
Monetary policy instruments should be adoptedto timely and moderately manage the financial system liquidity while avoiding majorfluctuation.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used and innovated to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
We will guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector and support accelerating the development of a modern industrial system, in a bid to provide private enterprises with financial support that is commensurate with their contribution to economic and social development.
The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio.
The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
The meeting waschaired by Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy CommitteeZhou Xiaochuan, and attended by committee members Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong,Ms.
Effective performance assessment system and risk management system should be in place so that commercial banks would attend to both near-term and long-term development goals, manage balanced credit extension throughout the year.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, serving as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Considering the situation, the PBC will place an utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability.
While fixed-asset investment should be brought undercontrol, domestic consumption shall be boosted to rationalize the relationshipbetween investment and consumption.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC convened its first quarterly meeting in 2012 in Beijing days ago.
The Committee also agreed to keep the RMB interestrates basically stable while pushing ahead the market-based interest ratereform.
A mix of new monetary policy tools will be used to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
Towards this end, measures would be taken to further improve the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, optimize credit structure, bolster the financial support for weak links such as agriculture, farmers and the rural areas and small- and medium-sized enterprises, develop consumer credit, support independent innovation, merger and acquisition, industrial relocation and coordinated regional development.
The meeting stressed the necessity to conscientiously implement the decisions of the eighteenth National Congress of the CPC and the third, fourth, fifth and sixth plenary sessions of the eighteenth CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, the National Financial Work Conference, and government work report.
The international economic and financial situation has become more complicated, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
The performance of the world economy diverged, with increasing signs of growth momentum in the U.S. and the euro zone, and further moderation of growth in some emerging economies.
Renminbiexchange rate shall be maintained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibriumlevel to promote the balance of international payments.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will fully implement the requirements of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
It was pointed out at the meeting that as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties, and the domestic economic development faces triple pressures, namely demand contraction, supply shocks, and weakening expectations.
On June 24, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2022 (its 97th meeting) in Beijing.
While ensuring continuity and stability at aggregate level,preemptive and fine-tuning measures should be strengthened and the marketitself should be allowed to play its role in economic restructuring.
Participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
The sound monetary policy is practiced responding to the requirements of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, the prevention and control of financial risks is steadily and resolutely carried forward, and continued improvements have been made to the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
At the same time, the urgency of economic restructuringshould be fully recognized, the coordination of the monetary policy with fiscalpolicy, industrial policy, trade policy and financial regulatory policy shouldbe enhanced and economic restructuring accelerated to promote a basicequilibrium of the balance of payments.
The PBC carried out soundmonetary policy, strengthened open market operations and employed variousmonetary policy instruments including raising reserve requirement ratio by 1percentage point to keep money supply and credit grow in a steady way.
The PBC will facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
The PBC will impose strict controls over lending to highly energy-consuming and heavily polluting industries and enterprises with excess capacity.
The PBOC will accelerate building a diversified and seamless financial service system that covers the entire life cycle of sci-tech-based enterprises, which will facilitate building China into a great power in science and technology, and achieving sci-tech self-reliance and self-strengthening at higher levels.
It will pursue the strategy of expanding domestic demand while deepening supply-side structural reform, and leverage policy effectiveness while stimulating the vitality of business entities.
With these efforts, the financial market is expected to become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed.
The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
The meeting urged that special attention should be paid to expand access to credits by the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and county-level economic agents.
The economic and financial performance has broadlyremained in sound situation.
We will improve consumer financial services with respect to commodities and social services, and proceed with greater financial support for enterprises to stabilize and expand employment, as well as for targeted groups to start businesses and seek employment.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the spread of COVID-19 outside China and the world’s economic landscape are still complicated and challenging for the time being.
It will improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China held its 2nd quarterly meeting a few days ago in Beijing.
The Committee held that, the package to cope with the international financial crisis would be implemented in a comprehensive manner, enriched and improved according to changes of the situation.
The monetary and credit aggregates are basically commensurate with the needs to sustain economic growth.
It will work on developing tools to support carbon emissions reduction, and improve the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality.
Work will be done to prevent and defuse financial risks, strike a balance between ensuring stable growth and preventing risks, focus on diffusing risks amid reform and development, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
China should monitor the impact of the fresh bailout and stimulus measures taken by Europe and the United States recently.
Various policy instruments should be adoptedflexibly to manage the liquidity of the financial system in a timely andappropriate manner, guide the financial enterprises to improve their creditstructure, appropriately control the proportion of medium and long-term loans inthe overall lending business, and gradually rationalize the ratio ofconsumption to investment.
It will take steps to put in place the support instrument for carbon emission reduction, and promote the green finance system for peaking carbon dioxide emissions and achieving carbon neutrality.
Financial institutions will be encouraged to increase credit support for enterprises providing supplies for epidemic containment, resumption of work and production, poverty alleviation, spring farming and tillage preparation, poultry and livestock breeding and foreign trade.
Market supply and demand of foreign exchange should be allowed toplay a greater role in the process of increasing RMB exchange rate flexibility,with a view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level.
In line with the arrangement of the StateCouncil, the PBC has closely monitored the economic and financial performance,and curbed the overly rapid growth of money and credit with a mix of variousmonetary policy tools.
In accordance with the principle of keeping a prudent stance, making proper adjustment and optimizing structure, a mix of monetary tools will be adopted to control liquidity and bring the monetary and credit conditions back to a normal state.
The PBOC will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and maintain a reasonable growth and a stable pace of credit supply, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with the nominal GDP growth.
At end-June of 2002, broad money (M2) reached RMB17 trillion yuan, up 14.7%.
After studying the direction and measures of monetary policy in the next stage, the Committee held that, in view of implementing the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on macroeconomic management, relatively loose monetary policy should be conducted and policy consistency be maintained.
The PBOC will work to ensure delivery of presold housing projects and safeguard stability as well as people’s livelihood, promote the healthy and stable development of the real estate market, and accelerate to improve the financial policy system for housing rental, so as to facilitate the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector.
It has achieved remarkable results in the loan prime rate (LPR) reform, and given full play to the role of the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates.
However, the downward pressure on the economy is mounting, and the spread of COVID-19 outside China has not only exerted adverse impact on the world economy, but also posed new challenges to China’s pandemic control and economic growth.
The PBC will keep its monetary policy consistent, stable and sustainable by properly managing the timeliness, intensity and effectiveness of the policy, so as to maintain necessary support for economic recovery.
The trend of faster than desiredincrease of money and credit had been preliminarily reined in, and theperformance of financial industry remained stable.
Coordinated efforts have been made to help turn around overall economic performance, enhance the endogenous growth dynamics of the economy, improve social expectations, and defuse potential risks in a sustained way, thereby setting the stage for building a modern socialist country in all respects.
The countercyclical adjustments of macro policies should be intensified so as to invigorate micro entities and make all-round progress in stabilizing employment, the financial sector, domestic and foreign investment, foreign trade and expectations.
It was emphasized that commercial banks should makeefforts to prevent new credit risks, further improve loan structure, strengthenliquidity management, and steadily promote various reforms, includingstrengthening internal control mechanism and corporate governance.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to deliver its benefits, the role of the market-based adjustment mechanism for deposit rates has brought into play, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and lending rates have dropped significantly.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, trade and investment, elevated inflation, and persistently tightened central bank policies in developed countries, and increased volatility in global financial markets.
However, its endogenous growth dynamics is still not strong enough, and the demand drivers are still inadequate.
The mechanism for the coordination between  and the transmission and implementation of fiscal, monetary and employment policies will be improved to ensure that the economic performance is within a reasonable range.
We will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and develop funding chains for innovation chains and industrial chains, thereby creating a virtuous circle and interaction among the financial sector, the sci-tech sector and industries.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stable expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The overall domestic economy is gradually rebounding with a steady recovery in market demand and a growing supply of production.
The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses.
It will make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, and move ahead with the implementation of newly initiated facilities such as the central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological transformation, and the central bank lending for affordable housing.
It was noted at the meeting that efforts should made to implement the prudent monetary policy, make the financial measures more targeted, flexible and effective, and give more priority to stabilizing the general price level in 2011.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used in a flexible way to keep liquidity reasonably adequate.
It was unanimously agreed that the Renminbi interest and exchange rates should be basically maintained stable in the near term taking into consideration of current economic and financial developments.
It will also stabilize banks’ liability costs, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform and give full play to its guiding role, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses.
It will continue to make good use of the funds already injected under the policy-backed and development-oriented financial instruments, and enhance the guiding role of government investment and policy incentives, thereby effectively stimulating the private investment.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held its fourth quarterly meeting in 2006 in Beijing recently.
The PBC will take more proactive measures to boost support for the real economy.
Itwas agreed that the economy had maintained steady and relatively fast growthmomentum.
The U.S. economy has shown more positive signs, the euro zone faces deflationary risk, and the real sector in some emerging economies has to address many difficulties.
It was agreed that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to stability and promoted the overall improvement of economic operation.
It was noted at the meeting that since the beginning of 2023, the PBOC has sought progress while giving top priority to the stability of macro policies, implemented a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, strengthened the counter-cyclical and inter-temporal adjustments, and used a mix of policy tools, such as interest rates, the required reserve ratio (RRR) and central bank lending, thereby providing effective support for the real economy, effectively forestalling financial risks, and creating a sound monetary and financial environment for economic recovery.
In addition, the PBOC will fully understand the new changes in the relationship between supply and demand in the real estate market, meet people’s new aspiration for high-quality housing, and strive to ensure that the financial policy measures that have been introduced will deliver results, thus promoting the stable and sound development of the real estate market.
The Chinese economy faces tougher challenges.
The growthof money and credit shall be properly controlled and credit structure furtheroptimized.
The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to keep the RMB exchange rate generally stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, forestall and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
The structural monetary policy tools will be effectively leveraged for accurate liquidity provision to strengthen “direct reach” of policies.
Moreover, measures will be taken to promote the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, in a bid to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
In line with the scientific approach to development, efforts would be made to enable domestic demand to play a greater role in driving economic growth, shift the development model and accelerate strategic restructuring.
Efforts will be made to facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development.
It will implement a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
The performance of the financial sector and the overall price level were both stable.
It will focus on promoting high-quality development and pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task by staying committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand.
The PBC will pursue a sound monetary policy in a more flexible, appropriate and well-targeted manner, and use a mix of monetary policy tools and innovate new ones to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level.
The loan prime rate (LPR) reform has produced initial results, and real lending rates have seen a marked decline.
Work will be done to implement financial policy measures to promote healthy development of the platform economy so as to promote standardized, healthy and sustainable development of platform enterprises.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and fast growth momentumin the third quarter of this year.
The PBC continued to conduct sound monetarypolicy and ensured timely provision of financial services for SARS preventionactivities.
Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, implement a mix of policy measures to rectify deviations and stabilize expectations, resolutely correct one-sided and pro-cyclical behaviors, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting, hence keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Efforts should be made to curb excessive growthof money and credit by adopting various monetary policy instruments, restrainthe excessive growth of money and credit and further improve credit structureto encourage growth in some sectors and discourage in others to ensure creditsupport to agricultural economy, job creation, students, small &medium-sized enterprises and other vulnerable groups.
To protect the legitimate rights and interests of home buyers and boost the sound development of the real estate market, the PBC will guide commercial banks to provide supplementary financial support.
By promoting the balance between internal and external equilibria, and coordinating financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, the PBC will ensure the national economy performs within a reasonable range, promote high-quality economic development, and thereby stand ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
Itwas concurred that efforts should be made to fully carry out the guidelineslaid out by the Central Economic Work Conference, firmly adopt a scientificdevelopment approach and continue to strengthen and improve macro financialadjustment to ensure price stability and healthy economic development.
Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be used and macro-prudential policy measures will be employed to make counter-cyclical adjustment, to keep the money and credit aggregates and all system financing aggregates at reasonable volumes.
Domestically, the economy is on a recovery trajectory, but the pressures of shrinking demands, supply shocks and waning expectations still exist.
The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of market expectations has been scientific and effective.
It will make good use of the support instruments providing inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs), increase central bank lending for rural development and MSBs, and implement the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, to enhance flexibility of fluctuation in both directions and to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Further studies will be conducted on establishing a macro-prudential regulatory system to prevent and mitigate potential systemic risks.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterlymeeting of 2004 in Beijing days ago.
As the expectations remain stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and served as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
Economic and financial structure has experienced positive changes.
Liquidity of thefinancial system shall be managed in a timely and appropriate manner.
In the meantime, efforts will be made to integrate reform measures into macroeconomic regulation, and enhance the efficiency of financial sector operation and its ability to serve the real economy.
The meeting called for promoting structural adjustment,institutional reform and growth pattern while strengthening aggregates control soas to fully adopt the scientific approach to economic development; and speedingup construction of financial markets to improve the efficiency of monetarypolicy transmission.
Global economy still showed a sign of weakness.
The Committee held that recovery of the global economy was likely to continue in 2011, although with a lot of unstable factors and uncertainties.
Liquidity was adequate in the banking system, growth of money and credit supply rapid and the financial system operated in a stable manner.
After analyzing the economic and financial situation, the Committeeheld that the Chinese economy maintained a sound and rapid developmentmomentum, but the inflationary pressure was noticeable and the BOP imbalancesstill remained despite the generally upbeat situation.
On the other hand, due to a number of factors such as the European debt crisis, with global economic growth remaining tepid, instability and uncertainty rising, the Chinese economy still faced complex domestic and external situation.
The Committeediscussed monetary policy stance and measures in the coming period.
The PBOC will guide large-sized banks to play their leading role in providing financial services for the real economy, encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and support banks in capital replenishment.
The RMB exchange rate regime will be further improved to keep.
With the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates playing an important role and the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously unleashing its potential and offering guidance, the financing costs for businesses and the credit costs for personal consumption are expected to remain stable with a slight decline.
Adhering to the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, and placing a top priority on stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively.
Adhering to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability and the strategic orientation of structural adjustments, the PBC will keep firmly in mind the strategic basis of expanding domestic demand, take solid steps to ensure stability on the six fronts (employment, financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations) and fully implement the task of maintaining security in the six areas (the employment of residents, the basic livelihood of the people, operations of market entities, food and energy security, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normal functioning of primary-level governments).
The attendees has analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation.
The PBC will further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for countercyclical adjustment.
It will ensure that the mechanism for market-oriented adjustments of deposit rates will play an important role.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the 2020 Central Economic Work Conference, act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and prioritize stability and refrain from making abrupt changes.
Operation of the financialindustry broadly remained stable.
Members of the Committee and heads of relevant government ministries including Wang Chunzheng, Zhang Zhigang, Jin Liqun, Xiao Gang, Guo Shuqing, Ma Yongwei, Zhu Zhixin, and Zhang Enzhao attended the meeting.
In this way, private enterprises will get financial support proportionate to their contribution to the economic and social development.
With financial risks under effective control, the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy has been gradually improved.
It will take solid steps to ensure the delivery of presold housing projects, people’s livelihood and stability, and adopt city-specific measures to meet residents’ rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions.
The economicand financial performance has broadly remained in sound situation.
The monetary policy committee of the PBC convened its first quarterly meeting in 2010 in Beijing days ago.
Atend-August, balance of broad money (M2) increased by 21.6 percent year-on-yearto RMB21 trillion yuan, and RMB loans of all financial institutions grew byRMB2.1680 trillion yuan from end-2002 to RMB15.3 trillion yuan, RMB1.1025trillion yuan more than the expansion recorded for the first eight months of2002.
The PBOC will guide the sound and well-regulated development of the financial business of platform enterprises and improve the regular supervision on their financial activities.
Staying committed to the central task of economic development, the Two Unwavering Commitments, and the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up building a new development paradigm.
The PBOC will keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, guide reasonable growth and balanced supply of credit, and ensure that the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) and the money supply are in line with the economic growth and the expected price level, so as to keep prices at a reasonable level.
The PBC will ensure stability on six key fronts and maintain security in six key areas.
Market-based interest rate reformpolicies should be continuously carried out, and commercial banks and rural credit cooperatives should be encouraged to enhance their capabilities in risk pricing and liability management.
The meeting further pointed out that facing with the favorable recovery of global economy and domestic demands, the sound monetary policy should be continued through flexible use of a broad mix of monetary policy instruments to increase money supply and strengthen financial support to economic development.
The PBOC will also make significant efforts in the areas of sci-tech finance, green finance, inclusive finance, pension finance and digital finance, make good use of the existing structural monetary policy tools, ensure effective use of the central bank lending and discount quotas, continuously increase support for inclusive finance, green transition, sci-tech innovation, digital economy and infrastructure construction, and adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development.
Weighing the monetary policy stance and measures for the comingperiods, the Committee held the view that efforts should be made to keep thecontinuity and stability of the monetary policy, take more preemptive, targetedand flexible financial macro control measures, properly manage the focus, paceand intensity of these measures and various monetary policy instruments in linewith the macroeconomic adjustment policies of the State Council, so as tocreate a benign monetary environment for sound and rapid economic development.It is necessary to improve the credit structure in the principle of encouraginggrowth in some sectors while discouraging it in others, to increase financialsupport for agriculture, rural areas and farmers, post-quake reconstruction,students, consumption, those industries that have created lots of jobs but arein difficulties, to support balanced economic development across regions, to guidefinancial institutions to provide proper financial products and services and render more lending support to small- and medium-sizedenterprises.
Adhering to the Two Unwavering Commitments, the PBOC will make coordinated efforts to implement macro policies, expand demand, conduct reform and innovation, as well as prevent and defuse risks, and integrate the implementation of the strategy of expanding domestic demand with deepening supply side structural reform.
In their view, China's economic and financial sectors performed in a relatively moderating and stable manner.
It was emphasized at the meeting that it was necessary to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, maintain policy stability and consistency, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, properly handle the intensity, pace and focus of policy implementation, conduct fine-tunings and take preemptive measures in a timely manner in view of changing situations, strike a balance among stable and relatively fast economic growth, economic structural adjustment and inflation expectation management, and strengthen systemic risk prevention.
It will build the systems and mechanisms for providing effective financial support for the real economy, implement the action plan to increase financial support for technology-based enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term loans to the manufacturing sector, thereby expediting the building of a modern industrial system.
It will resolutely prevent the formation and self-reinforcement of one-sided and unanimous expectations, and guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting.
The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of the economic situations, strengthen coordination of international macroeconomic policies, concentrate on running its own affairs well, and make fine cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development.
The RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with stabilizing expectations and remained basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The participants analyzed the current economic and financial situation in China and beyond, and were of the view that performance of the Chinese economy was within a reasonable range.
It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, strengthen countercyclical adjustment, and enhance macro policy coordination to forge synergy.
There will be continued efforts to optimize the financing structure and credit structure, and to increase the proportion of direct financing according to the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform.
Meanwhile, excessive growth of investment and credit in real estate development in some areas should be closely monitored.
Market-based interest rate reform should be steadilyadvanced.
In addition, the PBOC will ensure the implementation of the city-specific housing credit policy to meet the rigid demand for housing and the needs to improve living conditions, follow the mechanism that allows dynamic adjustments to first-home mortgage rate policies, lower the ratio of down payment and the floor on second-home mortgage rates, urge the reduction of the interest rates on existing first-home mortgage loans, and increase financial support for public infrastructure development for both normal and emergency uses, urban village renovation and government-subsidized housing construction, thus facilitating the establishment of a new development model for the real estate sector and promoting the stable and healthy development of the real estate market.
Financial macro adjustmentshould be further improved to promote a steady and rapid economic growth aswell as price stability.
In doing so, the financial sector will work together to safeguard the steady development of the financial market.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
The market-based interest rate reform and the RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee agreed that China’seconomy continued to expand in a stable and relatively rapid pace.
Considering the situation, the PBOC will overcome difficulties, and build on this momentum to intensify macro adjustments, and implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner.
In discussing monetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, the Committee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, andsteps should be taken to promote coordination between domestic and foreign currency policies and strengthen the liquidity management of banking system.
It will pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task, stay committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand, and consolidate and expand achievements made in pandemic containment and economic and social development.
Following the guidance ofthe Communist Party of China’s Central Committee and the State Council, the PBCstrengthened financial macro control to preserve balances at aggregate level.The economic and financial performance has broadly remained in sound situation.
The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, improve the loan prime rate (LPR) formation mechanism to promote its application, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and boost the sustained and sound development of the economy.
Improvement of the foreign exchange managementregime reform should be effected by strengthening the oversight overcross-border capital flow.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to monitor the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, conduct timely and well-designed fine-tunings according to the situations, and strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast growth, economic restructuring and managing the inflationary expectation.
The PBC has continued to implement the sound monetary policy while the commercial banks gradually established and improved their incentive and restraint mechanisms to promote loan marketing, resulting in acceleration of the growth of monetary credit and strengthening of financial support to economic development.
It was agreed thatthe Chinese economy has run smoothly and continued to develop towards theexpected targets of macro control.
Market supply and demand of foreign exchange should be allowedto play a greater role in the process of increasing RMB exchange rateflexibility, with a view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable atan adaptive and equilibrium level.
However, the trend of relatively rapid economic development to aneconomic overheating has yet not been contained, represented by excessivecredit extension and increased inflationary pressure.
It was emphasized at the meeting that to implement the decisions of the 18th CPC National Congress, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Executive Meetings of the State Council, the latest developments in the financial market and real sector at home and abroad and the changes in international capital flow will be closely monitored; in accordance with the general requirements of keeping the continuity and stability of macro-economic policies, the sound monetary policy will be continued, and policy measures will be more targeted and balanced; fine-tuning and preemptive adjustment will be conducted when necessary; efforts will be made to strike a balance among pursuing stable growth, adjusting economic structure, promoting reform and preventing risks; optimize the allocation of financial resources; make good use of the new loans and mobilize the stock of credit assets in order to create a good financial environment and monetary conditions for the adjustment of economic structure, upgrading and transformation of the economy.
Financial reform and innovation should be pressed ahead to improve the competitiveness of financial institutions and the efficiency of the financial markets in resources allocation, and to streamline the transmission mechanism for the conduct of moderately loose monetary policy.
The PBOC will effectively advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and enhance the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
China’s economy has witnessed an on-going recovery and improvement with enhanced driving forces and solid progress in high-quality development, but it still faces challenges such as insufficient effective demand and weak social expectations.
In their view, both the real economy and the financial sector in China was moving in the direction intended by the macro-economic management policy, though the external environment remained complex with the world economy slowly recovering amongst a multiple of risk factors; the Chinese economy had continued its stable and fairly rapid growth with inflation pressure moderated but remaining high.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterly meeting of 2010 in Beijing days ago.
The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation bothat home and abroad.
The Committee held that, to implement the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on macroeconomic management, the PBC would implement a relatively loose monetary policy, maintain policy consistency and stability, and guide money and credit supply to grow in an appropriate manner.
It was pointed out at the meeting that as the overseas pandemic situations and the world economy remain severe and complex, efforts should be made to enhance the research and analysis of the international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies, concentrate on doing our own affairs well, improve cross-cyclical policy designs and adjustments, and support high-quality economic development.
The Committee conducted an in-depth analysis ofcurrent economic and financial situation at home and abroad and agreed that China’s economy was broadly in good shape although it stillfaced some problems such as inappropriate economic structure, extensive growthmodel and imbalanced BOP.
It was agreed thatthe Chinese economy has maintained the rapid and sound growth momentum.
Weighing themonetary policy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee heldthe view that a tight monetary policy should be implemented by taking variousmeasures in line with the guidance of the Central Economic Work Conference.Efforts should be made to strengthen liquidity management by taking effectivemeasures, improve guidance on financial institutions, restrain the excessivegrowth of money and credit and further improve credit structure to ensurecredit support to agricultural economy, job creation, students, small&medium-sized enterprises and other vulnerable groups.
Improvement of themanaged floating exchange rate regime should be effected, continuouslyfollowing the principle of “ making it a self-initiated, controllable and gradualprocess”.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregate and the all-system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
In their view, both the real economy and financial sector in China were moving in the direction intended by the macro-economic management policy, the economic growth and the overall price level stabilized, and the balance of payments became more balanced.
It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy, and give full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools.
Specifically, it will continue to implement the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, to reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance through central bank lending and central bank discounts, and to guide financial institutions to step up support for areas such as sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development.
The principle of makingthe RMB exchange rate reform a self-initiated, controllable and gradual processshould be followed to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at anadaptive and equilibrium level.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the PBC held the 2ndQuarterly Meeting of 2004 in Beijing on June 18th.
Comprehensive measures should be taken to accelerate economic restructuring and transformation of growth pattern, intensify the system reform and promote equilibrium of international payments so as to achieve a balanced and sustainable development of the national economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, PBC will earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC),  the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council.
Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of interest rates and explore an effective way to that end; to further improve the RMB exchange rate regime, increase the two-way flexibility of RMB exchange rate fluctuations, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBOC will make great efforts in the areas of technology finance, green finance, inclusive finance, old-age finance, and digital finance, and continue to intensify support for major national strategies, key fields, and weak links, thus accelerating the development of new quality productive forces, and better satisfying reasonable demand for consumption and financing in a targeted manner.
More credit will be channeled to the real economy, especially to support agriculture, the countryside, farmers and medium-sized and small enterprises, so as to help promote the strategic and economic restructuring.
The PBC will work vigorously to smooth monetary policy transmission to lower the cost of social financing, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, and encourage financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
The world economy continues to undergo profound adjustment in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Measures should be applied to strengthen policy coordination (such asinterest rate and exchange rate policies) between the local and foreigncurrencies, enhance liquidity management of the banking system, improve policyinstrument innovation and appropriately strengthen policy adjustment to keepmoney and credit grow at reasonable speed.
The PBC will work vigorously to improve monetary policy transmission, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, guide financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises.
The global economy is recovering gradually and the recovery of major developed countries has continued.
The participants discussed the economic and financial situation at home and abroad and were of the view that performance of the financial sector and real economy in China was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable, despite the many difficulties and challenges; the global economy took a turn for the better but the situation remained complex.
The PBC will take proactive measures to boost market confidence, enhance support for the real economy, and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy.
The PBC will keep the real estate market stable and protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers.
The PBC shall closely monitor the latest development of the economy and financial sector both home and abroad as well as the changes in international capital flows, remain committed to the underlying principle of making progress while ensuring stability and adjust to the new normal of economic development.
The PBC continued toimplement sound monetary policy and closely monitored economic and financialdevelopments while at the same time applying various instruments to strengthenpolicy fine-tuning and open market operations to control liquidity of thefinancial system and the growth of the base money.
The PBC will work to improve the market-based mechanism of interest rate formation and transmission and the central bank policy rate system.
The sound monetary policy responds well to the requirement of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, financial risks are generally under control, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy.
The PBOC will make institutional arrangements for providing effective financial support for the real economy and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation.
The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place an utmost priority on stability.
It was forecast that increased loans of all financial institutions would reach RMB1.6-1.7 trillion yuan with broad money (M2) growing by 16%-17% in 2002.
While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline.
It will further encourage the use of central bank lending for sci-tech innovation and technological transformation, and step up financial support for large-scale equipment renovation and trade-in of consumer goods.
It was concurred that the economic situation continued to be broadly favorable.
By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, the PBC has scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy, and effectively prevented financial risks.
The PBC will further deepen market-based reform of interest rates, advance the transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans to loan prime rate (LPR) in an orderly manner, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBOC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, put efforts into implementing the Action Plan for Stepping up Support for the Financing of Sci-tech Enterprises, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, so as to expedite the building of a modern industrial system.
The PBOC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism and optimize the central bank policy rate system.
The RMB exchange rate regime reform will be continued to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The PBC will ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments.
Meanwhile, efforts shall be made to advance financial reform andinnovation, foster a multi-layered financial market system, and enhance the competitivenessof financial institutions and resource allocation efficiency of financialmarket.
Domestically, the COVID-19 is recurring more frequently, and the economic development faces triple pressures, namely shrinking demand, supply shocks, and waning expectations.
The managed floating exchange rate regime shall be improved in aself-initiated, controllable and gradual way to enable market supply and demandto play a fundamental role in RMB exchange rate formation and keep the RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and loan rates have remained stable and witnessed a slight decline.
The sound monetary policy will be maintained appropriate in intensity, money supply will be properly managed, and massive liquidity injection will be avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy is in line with the nominal GDP growth.
The Committee had in-depth review of thecurrent economic and financial development both at home and abroad.
Generally speaking, the financial industry has beenoperating sound, and the new RMB exchange rate regime has been workingsmoothly, with the RMB exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level.
They agreed that since the beginning of this year, great achievements have been made in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development, and the economy has been recovering steadily.
The financial supply-side structural reform will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their major businesses and responsibilities, advancing a modern financial system featuring great adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness.
It will contribute to a good start for the 14th Five-Year Plan period with high-quality development, and celebrate with outstanding accomplishments the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC.
Theformation mechanism of RMB exchange rate should be further improved to keep RMBexchange rate basically stable at an adaptive equilibrium level and promote theequilibrium of the balance of payments.
It will maintain the stability of policy instruments like central bank lending and discounts, continue to implement inclusive micro and small business (MSB) loan facilities as well as the loan support scheme to ensure deliveries of presold housing projects, and step up support for key areas and weak links in the national economy such as inclusive finance, green development, sci-tech innovation, and infrastructure construction, thus facilitating the coordinated regional development by adopting a mix of policies.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad.
Given the difficulties and setbacks in global recovery and capricious development of the European debt crisis, large uncertainty remained in the global outlook.
Preemptive adjustments and fine-tuning will be made at proper time so as to prevent risks with the priority of stabilizing growth.
Meanwhile, based on the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform in the financial sector, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems.
The Committeediscussed monetary policy stance and relevant measures in the period ahead andagreed to continue the sound monetary policy and strengthen policy coordinationbetween domestic and foreign currencies and banking liquidity management inorder to enhance the forward-looking and scientific approach and effectivenessof monetary policy and maintain price stability.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad.
Efforts will be made to keepmoney and credit growth at an appropriate level and promote optimal creditstructure.
The meeting stressed that a mix of monetary policy tools would be adopted to maintain adequate liquidity in the banking system and to guide reasonable increase of money and credit supply.
A mix of monetary policy tools will be employed to keep the money and credit aggregates and the all-system financing aggregate at reasonable volumes.
It will work toward an economy with a higher-level equilibrium in the course of economic recovery, and celebrate the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC with outstanding accomplishments.
The PBC will further bring into play the propelling force of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy, to increase financial support for sci-tech innovation, micro and small businesses (MSBs) and green development, and to continue to implement the policy of deferred repayments on MSB loans and the support scheme for unsecured loans.
On March 29, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2024 (its 104th meeting) in Beijing.
Measures will also be taken to further expand the two-way opening-up of the financial sector at a high level, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
The participants discussed the current economic and financial situations at home and abroad and were of the view that the performance of the Chinese economy remained in a reasonable range, performance of the financial sector was generally sound, and the price situation was basically stable.
The PBC would further advance the financial reform and innovation, and reinforce risk management, in order to enhance the financial enterprises´ capability in fending off risks.
It was emphasized at the meeting that efforts should be made to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, strike a balance among maintaining stable and relatively fast economic growth, keeping the general price level stable, and preventing financial risks according to the requirements of keeping the financing volumes at a reasonable level and making counter-cyclical adjustment in a prudential and flexible manner.
The central bank will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The Committee had in-depth review of the currenteconomic and financial development both at home and abroad and the policymeasures to be taken in the coming months.
In line with the overallrequirement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitored the economic and financialperformance, made use of various monetary policy instruments to strengthenliquidity management, control credit growth, improve credit structure andsteadily enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility.
We will focus on supporting the expansion of domestic demand and providing stronger support for the real economy.
The PBOC will effectively combine the strategy of expanding domestic demand and deepening supply-side structural reform, strengthen coordination and cooperation among macro policies, and spare no efforts to put into practice the incremental policies, so as to substantially improve social expectations, rejuvenate the economy, and consolidate and fortify the upward trend of economic recovery.
Efforts should be madeto fully implement the scientific development approach by improving andcarrying out each macroeconomic policy and continuously strengtheningmacroeconomic management to prevent a shift from a relatively fast growth to aneconomic overheating and ensure a sound and rapid development of the Chineseeconomy.
The PBC will adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development and guide financial institutions to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
It was noted at the meeting that the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector should be deepened to build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy.
Efforts should be made to thoroughly implement the scientific outlook on development and, with a view to expanding domestic demand, to accelerate the shift of development strategy and economic restructuring.The coordination of monetary policy with fiscal policy, industrial policy, foreign trade policy and financial regulatory policy should be strengthened to maintain stable and relatively rapid economic growth.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe amid the worldwide sluggish economic growth, trade and investment, elevated inflation and persistently high interest rates in developed countries.
The prudent and neutral monetary policy has brought about positive outcomes, as the macro leverage ratio has stabilized, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided stronger support for the real economy.
The PBC will innovate and improve macro regulation, practice the sound monetary policy that is more flexible and appropriate, and put more emphasis on supporting the recovery and sustainable development of the real economy.
Measures should also be taken to improve the managed floatingexchange rate regime in a self-initiated, controllable, and gradual way andenable the market supply and demand to play a fundamental role in the formationof the RMB exchange rate so as to keepthe RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The sound monetary policy responds to the need for forward-looking and targeted regulation and countercyclical adjustments.
The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its fourth quarterlymeeting of 2007 in Beijing days ago.
Financial institutions will be guided to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fourth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, stick to the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and better coordinate routine pandemic containment efforts with economic and social development.
We will improve consumer financial services with respect to commodities and social services, and proceed with greater financial support for enterprises to stabilize and expand employment, as well as for targeted groups to start businesses and seek employment.
In line with the policy instructions of the CPC CentralCommittee and the State Council, the PBC continued to implement the soundmonetary policy, strengthened and improved financial management, kept monetaryaggregates under proper control and optimized credit structure.
And in line with the principle of differentiated treatment to different sectors, the PBC will vigorously guide and promote credit structure optimization, step up financial support to key areas and weak links in the economy, guide financial institutions to improve their financial services so as to better serve the real sector.
Vigorous support has been rendered to pandemic containment, the resumption of work and production, and the development of the real economy.
Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures with an emphasis on adjusting and optimizing the structure of financial system, and to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development.
Recently, the Monetary Policy Committee of PBC held its first quarterly meeting in 2013 in Beijing.
The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector.
It was noted that the Chinese economy had maintained rapid growth momentum during the first half of this year with steady improvement of both domestic and external demands.
A mix of policies will be adopted to support coordinated regional development.
It was alsoagreed that capital markets should be developed to diversify market productsand to improve monetary policy transmission.
The PBC will give more support to banks in replenishing capital so that banks will be more capable of serving the real economy and forestalling and defusing financial risks.
Moreover, based on the requirements of deepening the financial supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems.
At present, the external environment is becoming increasingly complex and severe as the world economic growth, trade and investment is sluggish, inflation is expected to fall from a high level and interest rates are persistently high in developed countries.
The PBC will closely monitor the latest developments in the real economy and financial sector at home and in the world and the changes in global capital flow, follow the overall requirements of making progress while maintaining stability, reform and innovation, continue to implement the sound monetary policy, use a multiple of monetary policy tools flexibly, keep liquidity at appropriate levels, and bring about reasonable growth of money, credit and all-system financing aggregates.
With innovation and high-quality supply leading and creating new demands, the PBC will make its contribution to accelerating the establishment of a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other.
The financing and credit structure will be improved and financial sector reform will be deepened to improve efficiency and build stronger capacity to serve the real economy.
They were of the view that China’s real economy and financial sector in general maintained a steady growth momentum, prices were stable but the future trend was uncertain, and the global economy showed signs of improvement but still faced complex situations.
On April 7, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2023 (its 100th meeting) in Beijing.
In the coming periods, close attention should bepaid to the impact of the US subprime mortgages market turbulence onthe international financial market and its potential impact on the Chineseeconomy.
It was agreed in the meeting that the Chinese economyhad maintained rapid growth momentum, and macro-economic management measureshad further produced results since the beginning of this year.
We need to implement a sound monetary policy in a targeted and effective manner, make intertemporal adjustments, give better play to the role of monetary policy tools in adjusting both quantity and structure, and make every effort to stabilize growth, employment, and prices.
Great efforts should also be madeto foster development of the financial market construction and financialinstrument innovation, quicken the steps in foreign market development, improveforeign exchange administration, and guide the enterprises and individuals to enhancetheir foreign exchange risk control capability.
Continued efforts would be made to improve the internal governance structure of commercial banks.
The reform of the financial system will be deepened further to improve the efficiency of financial sector and abilities of serving the real economy, and to improve risk management.
It will make continued efforts to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas.