In this scenario of heightened prospective uncertainty, the need for greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy is reinforced.
Regarding the sources of disinflation, the Committee focused to a greater extent on the role of monetary policy in the U.S.
The Committee noted that the current stage of disinflation is more challenging and requires caution in the conduct of monetary policy.
It was observed that market expectations regarding the monetary easing process have shown significant fluctuations, suggesting a broader scenario regarding the next steps in the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy.
Beyond the broader scenario, there has also been a repricing of the cutting cycle in the U.S., with reduction in its extension and a postponement of its beginning.
Copom reinforced that there is no mechanical relationship between the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy and the determination of the domestic policy interest rate and that, as usual, it will focus on the transmission mechanisms from the external environment to the domestic inflationary dynamics.
Regarding the speed of disinflation, the Committee discussed the role of the U.S. fiscal policy, which tends to reduce the effects of the ongoing monetary tightening, and the impact on final prices of the wage pressures resulting from the current labor market dynamics.
It was also emphasized that a scenario of increased global uncertainty suggests greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy, due to the possible occurrence of more abrupt movements in the prospective scenario.
Over the last few quarters, economic activity data have surprised with higher growth rates in different components of demand.
May 7-8 activity and the sustainability of consumption over time, in contrast to the scenario of gradual deceleration originally anticipated by the Committee.
Regarding data at the margin, it was debated whether the upward revisions, partly explained by methodological issues related to seasonal adjustments, really reflected stronger activity.
The conclusion was that, despite these mitigating factors, activity has in fact been stronger over the year.
Copom reinforced its view that the lack of commitment to structural reforms and fiscal discipline, the increase of earmarked credit granting, and the uncertainties about the stabilization of the public debt have the potential to raise the neutral interest rate of the economy, with harmful impacts on the power of monetary policy and, consequently, on the cost of disinflation in terms of activity.
The Committee has followed closely the recent developments on the fiscal side and their impacts on monetary policy.
The Committee stresses that a credible fiscal policy, committed to debt sustainability, contributes to the anchoring of inflation expectations and to the reduction in the risk premia of financial assets, therefore impacting monetary policy.
Although the projections for the primary balance and the debt trajectory have not changed significantly, there has been an increase in the risk premium and a perception of worsened fiscal situation over the period, according to the respondents to the Pre-Copom Questionnaire.
More importantly, the Committee unanimously believes that the reanchoring of inflation expectations should be pursued, regardless of the sources of the currently observed deanchoring.
Reanchoring inflation expectations is seen as an essential element to ensure the inflation convergence to the target.
The Committee believes that reducing expectations requires a firm action by the monetary authority, as well as continuous strengthening of the credibility and reputation of both the institutions and the fiscal and monetary frameworks that make up the Brazilian economic policy.
The Committee will not shy away from its commitment of reaching the inflation target and understands the fundamental role of expectations in the inflation dynamics.
Copom reinforces that there are recurring surprises pointing to high dynamism in the labor market, which manifests itself in multiple dimensions.
Firstly, expectations for the unemployment rate collected by the Focus Survey, both in the short and medium term, have been falling over the last few quarters.
Moreover, formal jobs creation remains at strong levels and there is still a high proportion of voluntary layoffs.
In addition, the participation rate, and other alternative measures broken down by sector, demography, or region corroborate a tight labor market scenario.
The debate therefore focused on the possible transmission of the tightness in the labor market to wages and prices.
The dynamics of employment and wages were highlighted, recalling the fundamental role of the labor market in determining the output gap and the prospective path of inflation.
On the other hand, it was mentioned that there is no conclusive evidence yet about the labor market impact on inflation.
Finally, the combination of stronger activity and labor market has led to reassessments of the output gap level.
Despite restrictive monetary conditions, Copom emphasized that the cycle of monetary easing is already being transmitted to the credit market, in line with what was expected.
Some members emphasized, however, that the recent increase of longer- term rates could result in lower credit market dynamics.
These members highlighted the importance of longer vertices in the yield curve in the determination of credit supply and demand.
After a sequence of upward surprises, inflation core measures slowed down, although remaining above the target.
Some members showed greater concern with food inflation in the short term, while others continued stressing the role of services inflation.
The tragedy in Rio Grande do Sul, in addition to its humanitarian impacts, will also affect the economy.
Copom will continue to monitor the situation.
Copom concluded by assessing that the inflation outlook has become more challenging, with the increase of medium-term inflation projections, even conditioned to a higher interest rate.
Benign surprises were noted in the recent period, but also rising projections for shorter periods, involving market and administered prices.
In the end, it was unanimously concluded that a more contractionary and more cautious monetary policy was needed to reinforce the disinflationary dynamics.
The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions.
The Committee judges that the domestic and international environments should remain more uncertain, requiring greater caution on the conduct of monetary policy.
Some members noted merit in the debate about an asymmetrical balance of risks tilted to the upside.
These members deemed that, besides the persistent and high uncertainty of domestic and international outlooks, the weight of upside factors, at this moment, is higher than that from downside factors, therefore judging that the balance of risks is asymmetric.
For those members, the resilience of activity and the strength of the labor market suggest lower elasticity of the output gap to the monetary policy, which could lead to an even slower disinflation process.
The debate began with the analysis of the objective dimensions that guide the decisions in the inflation-targeting regime.
Firstly, despite an upward interest trajectory collected by the Focus survey, used in the reference scenario, projected inflation increased for the relevant monetary policy horizon.
Also, the labor market and activity scenarios have shown dynamism greater than expected by Copom.
Finally, the external scenario was deemed more adverse, requiring greater caution in the conduct of monetary policy.
After the scenario analysis, most Copom members assessed that it was appropriate to reduce the Selic rate by 0.25 percentage points.
For this, they evaluated that the expected scenario has not materialized due to the additional deanchoring of expectations, increased inflation projections, the more adverse external scenario, and greater-than-expected economic activity dynamics.
They stressed that much more important than the possible reputational cost of not following some guidance, even if conditional, is the risk of loss of credibility about the commitment to fighting inflation and anchoring expectations.
In view of the analysis, these members considered that a reduction of 0.25 percentage points was more appropriate to achieve the inflation target in the relevant horizon.
May 7-8 The members who voted for a reduction of 0.50 percentage points in the Selic rate also shared the perception of increased internal and external uncertainties between the meetings of March and May, which have already been discussed here.
They also share the firm commitment to the fundamental goal of achieving the target and reanchoring expectations.
The debate proposed by these members focused on the opportunity cost of not following the guidance vis-a-vis the change in the scenario in the period.
As in the debates that occurred in other meetings, such members discussed whether the prospective scenario diverged significantly from what was expected to the point of being worth the reputational cost of not following the guidance, which could lead to a reduction in the power of the Committee's formal communications.
For these members, it was deemed appropriate, as in previous meetings, to follow the guidance, but reaffirming the firm commitment to the target and the required terminal interest rate to achieve the Committees primary objective of inflation convergence to the target.
They emphasized that extracting the underlying trend from the inflation dynamics in an uncertain environment is difficult, but it should by no means be confused with leniency towards the indicators released in the period, particularly inflation expectations.
Strengthening the analysis, they noted that inflation projections were more affected by the determination of the terminal interest rate and that the reduction of 0.50 percentage points would keep monetary policy sufficiently contractionary.
Finally, this group also emphasized the need for flexibility in the decisions as of June, which would allow, in view of the new set of information, to adequately calibrate the path of the monetary policy instrument.
All members agreed that the adoption of a tighter and more cautious monetary policy and with no indications about future movements was more appropriate in view of the uncertain global scenario and the domestic scenario marked by activity resilience and unanchored expectations.
The Committee also stressed that monetary policy must remain contractionary and that the terminal interest rate will be the one that consolidates not only the disinflation process but also the anchoring of inflation expectations around the targets.
Finally, all members corroborated the understanding that the extension and adequacy of future interest rate changes will be determined by the firm commitment of achieving the convergence of inflation to the target.
The current context, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process tends to be slower, deanchored inflation expectations, and a challenging global outlook, requires serenity and moderation in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee unanimously judges that the uncertain global scenario and the domestic scenario, marked by resilient economic activity and deanchored expectations, require greater caution.
The Committee also stresses that monetary policy should continue being contractionary until the consolidation of both the disinflation process and the anchoring of expectations around the targets.
The Committee also reinforces, with special emphasis, that the extension and adequacy of future changes in the interest rate will be determined by the firm commitment of reaching the inflation target in the relevant horizon.
May 7-8 Abry Guillen, Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, and Renato Dias de Brito Gomes.
