The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2005 in Beijing days ago. It was agreed thatthe Chinese economy has maintained the rapid and sound growth momentum. In linewith the policy instructions of the CPC Central Committee and the StateCouncil, the PBC has implemented the sound monetary policy, closely monitoredthe economic and financial development, and kept monetary aggregates underproper control. In general, the performance of the financial industry was soundand stable. The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of the current macroeconomic and financialsituation. It was concurred that policy measures to strengthen and improvefinancial management have achieved evident effects, however, there stillexisted a possibility of fixed-asset investment rebound, inflationary pressureshad yet to be eased fundamentally, and the transmission mechanism of monetarypolicy needed to be further improved. It was stressedthat the sound monetary policy should be continued and the forward-looking,scientific and effective approach to macro financial management be furtherstrengthened in the coming period. Various policy instruments should be adoptedflexibly to manage the liquidity of the financial system in a timely andappropriate manner, guide the financial enterprises to improve their creditstructure, appropriately control the proportion of medium and long-term loans inthe overall lending business, and gradually rationalize the ratio ofconsumption to investment. Market-based interest rate reform should be steadilyadvanced. Renminbi exchange rate formation system should be further improved,with the exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level to promote the balance of international payments. Effortsshould also be made to cultivate and develop financial market, speed up thereform of financial sector, promote a coordinated growth of direct and indirectfinancing, and increase the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission.