Over the last year (May–July 2008 compared with May–July 2007) the index of manufacturing production has risen by 10.6 percent.
In the Committee’s discussions, it was noted that the plan to purchase $30 billion in 2021 was a special program for a very special situation, which supported the economy’s dealing with the economic ramifications of the COVID-19 crisis.
The nominal wage per employee post rose by 3.1 percent in that period.
The Committee agreed that the current rate of increase in prices does not indicate a renewed trend of price increases, but the risk inherent in a future renewal of such a trend cannot be ignored.
These indicators include the modest rise in the composite state-of-the-economy index (details below), the standstill in exports and the drop in export orders as reflected in the Bank of Israel's Companies Survey, the decline in the Purchasing Managers Index and in consumer confidence indices, and the slowdown in tax revenues.
In addition, the Committee members noted that the labor market remains tight: the most recent data indicate a decline in unemployment, even if with a decline in the participation and employment rates.
Following that, the investment houses raised their forecasts for the Fed rate and they now expect on average, with high probability, an interest rate of 5.25 percent at the end of the second quarter and a rate of 5.5 percent at the end of the year.
The Committee decided to leave the other policy measures previously decided upon in place.
Although consumer confidence indices are maintaining their relatively high levels, it seems that global economic developments and geopolitical developments in Israel are having a negative effect on some of the components of expectations in these indices.
The lowering of the global interest rate environment, and in particular the sharp cut in the Fed rate last month and the expectation of further reductions––in reaction to the slowdown in US growth and intended to achieve financial stability––serve to strengthen the shekel and to moderate inflationary pressures.
The Purchasing Managers Index continued to fall, and reached 33.3 points, the fourth month in succession below the 50-point mark that indicates deteriorating conditions and a slowdown.
In the last twelve months the M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed term deposits of up to one year) increased by 13 percent, and in December it rose by only switching from term deposits to demand deposits in light of the low level of the interest rate on term deposits.
The slowdown in the growth of the local economy was primarily a result of moderation in global demand and its impact on exports, but some weakness also began to be evident in domestic demand.
In the three months May–July the index rose at annual rate of 4.4 percent (compared with the previous three months, seasonally adjusted).
In November and December, there was a recovery in the scope of credit card purchases, with total purchases returning to a level similar to that in routine times, except for the tourism industry.
According to the latest Federal Reserve's Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions (the "Beige Book"), the sharp decline in the US economy moderated in the spring, and in some areas there were improved expectations regarding the future, although no significant upturn in activity is expected before the end of the year.
The monetary policy at major central banks continues to be very accommodative despite the increase in inflation, while in contrast, in emerging markets interest rates continue to be raised, against the background of higher inflation.
These participants noted that as yet there were no evident signs of inflationary pressures on the price indices, not even on the indices of domestic prices (such as GDP prices) published by the Central Bureau of Statistics.
Economic data from other regions of the world show limited reaction to the expected US slowdown.
The inflation rate over the preceding August.
The Central Bureau of Statistics trends survey reflects positive expectations of activity in the principal industries in the next few months.
The dollar continues to strengthen vis-à-vis the basket of major currencies (DXY), which may also weigh on the recovery of the US economy.
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose in October by 0.6 percent.
The CDS spread also increased in other emerging market economies.
The Committee noted that there was an increase in the inflation environment in recent months.
The yield to maturity on CPI-indexed five-year government bonds declined in November (to the 19th of the month) from their October level of about 1.1 percent to an average of about 1 percent.
Share price indices fell, and credit risk premiums rose.
The number of building starts in the twelve months to June 2010 was about 37,000, compared with about 33,000 in the equivalent period a year earlier––an increase of about 12 percent.
Following the publication of the CPI for April, inflation over the previous twelve months is expected to enter the inflation target range (an annual rate of 1–3 percent), and the annual rate for the whole of 2010 is expected to be slightly below the midpoint of the range.
Share markets around the world showed a mixed trend, with share price indices in the advanced economies rising, and declines of the indices in the emerging market economies.
The gradual nature of the process is expressed by the fact that the Bank is not changing the interest rate every month, but only in accordance with the inflation environment, the firm entrenchment of growth in the global economy, and the interest rates of the major central banks, while taking into consideration the exchange rate of the shekel..
The members were of the opinion that there is a relatively low probability of a prolonged decline of inflation to below the lower bound of the target.
The data point to a moderation in the rate of decline in activity.
Although the CPI excluding energy, food, and fruit and vegetables rose by only 1.4 percent over the last year, in July that index rose by 0.9 percent.
Retail sales in October surged, with an increase of 1.4 percent from the previous month, compared with a forecast of 0.7 percent.
Since April, inflation––even excluding the one-off effects resulting from government decisions––has accelerated.
Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread went down a little from 20 basis points at the time of the last interest rate decision to 18 basis points currently.
The debt crisis continued to worsen this month as well: in Greece, CDS spreads indicated a growing probability of default in the near future; in the past week S&P cut its credit rating for Italy, with a negative outlook; there was growing concern of the European debt crisis spreading to the banking system, and amid that, credit ratings on large banks in the US, France, and Italy were cut.
That said, manufacturing production has not yet been affected, and (till May) has shown growth.
In the international forex market, the dollar is generally expected to weaken against the euro in the coming year and to approach an exchange rate of $1.30 to the euro.
The Bank of Israel will use the instruments available to it to achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, including keeping a close watch on developments in the assets market, and especially in the housing market.
The low deficit in November reflects expenditures lower than the path.
Interest rates on indexed mortgage tracks declined by unchanged.
The increase in March reflects, among other things, a 0.9 percent increase in manufacturing production in February, a 1.4 percent decline in trade and services revenue in February, and a 6.6 percent increase in services exports in March.
The crisis in Greece, against the background of high budget deficits and public debt in several European countries, made it an urgent necessity to find a solution for Greece and dominated the difficult problems facing the eurozone.
In the discussion ahead of the decision on the interest rate for June 2012, five Committee members were in favor of keeping the interest rate unchanged at 2.5 percent, and one Committee member recommended reducing the interest rate by 25 basis points.
Since January 2006 the interest-rate differential between the Bank of Israel rate and the Federal Reserve rate has stood at a quarter of a percentage point.
US growth, including some of the most recent data in the reviewed period, moderated, but data related to consumption continue to indicate strong activity.
Yields on some countries’ bonds, especially Greece, Ireland and Portugal soared to record levels, and CDS spreads continued to widen.
The government has tools to increase the supply of homes for residence which can act to moderate the increase in home prices without negatively impacting on the level of activity in the industry.
Growth in the eurozone in the first quarter of 2008 was 0.7 percent, annual rate, due mainly to strong economic performance in Germany and France.
The Fed continues with its quantitative easing measures.
The deficit from the beginning of the year is about NIS 2.4 billion greater than the seasonal path consistent with the Ministry of Finance deficit forecast of 3.4 percent of GDP, but based on forecast growth, revenues over the remainder of the year are expected to be slightly above the seasonal path.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed bonds declined in February to an average of 1.8 percent (reaching as low as 1.4 percent on 17 February), from an average of 2.3 percent in January.
The Committee members discussed the fiscal situation, the measures that the future government may take to deal with the expected deficit, and their possible effects on economic activity and on the inflation path.
The investment houses expect, on average, a rise in interest in the third quarter and further interest rises of up to about 50 basis points by the end of the year, with a probability of 80 percent.
Since the beginning of the year the annual rate of inflation based on the seasonally adjusted CPI and excluding the effect of government actions (i.e., the effects of the increase in VAT, the increase in taxes on cigarettes and fuel, and the surcharge on water) was 2 percent, the midpoint of the target range.
There were declines in most inflation expectations this month.
The cost of the steps taken would amount to about NIS 1.1 billion a year.
Year over year inflation in the fourth quarter of 2024 is expected to be 2.4 percent, and the interest rate is expected to be 3.75 percent or 4 percent.
The price of gold started the period at $1,828 an ounce, and increased to $1,900 at the beginning of September, but fell back to its same level as at the start of the period.
Private forecasters expected the Bank of Israel interest rate to be around 4.5 percent at the end of 2007.
It also announced that it would hold on to the securities it had purchased.
Accordingly, investment houses revised their advanced and developing economies indicate a slowdown in the pace of economic activity.
Against this backdrop, the major indices continued their positive trend this month as well.
Reports from participating companies are reminiscent of reports during the period of economic slowdown from 2001 to the middle of 2003.
The Fed expects inflation to moderate in the next quarters, in line with its expectation of some easing of energy and commodity prices and of demand pressures.
The ECB increased its growth forecasts to between 1.4 percent and houses expect a significant slowdown in growth later this year, with growth of 1.5 percent (annual rate) in the third quarter and 1.1 percent in the fourth.
Participants in the discussion related to scenarios tested by the various econometric models according to which it was reasonable to assume that, even after a cut in the interest rate for November of 25 basis points, the inflation environment would enable a further reduction in the interest rate.
These developments help bolster foreign investors’ faith in Israel’s economy, which is reflected by the extent of foreign investments in Israel.
The Purchasing Managers Index declined in May by 2.2 points, but for the second consecutive month the index was above 50 points, the boundary between growth and contraction.
The composite state-of-the-economy indices indicate that economic growth continued, and in the last two months of 2010 at an even faster pace.
The Committee discussed the exceptional uncertainty regarding the healthrelated and economic scenarios expected in Israel and abroad, and the uncertainty regarding the fiscal policy expected to be adopted in a case of the crisis being extended.
Against this background, the European Commission and the ECB recently revised their eurozone growth forecasts for 2013 downward, with neither entity forecasting positive growth until 2014.
The two participants who recommended reducing the interest rate for November by 25 basis points stressed the following: inflation in Israel was expected to fall and return to within the target range around the middle of 2009; the slowdown in growth in Israel; and the high level of financial uncertainty at this time.
The slope of the makam yield curve indicates that the capital market expects the Bank of Israel interest rate one year hence to be about 2.6 percent.
The fall in demand likely to result from the fighting in the north––principally through a decline in private consumption and investment––will moderate the rise in prices.
Pressure mounted for a change in budgetary policy in countries with large public debts and/or large budget deficits.
The Committee members expressed their commitment to meeting the price stability target defined by the Bank of Israel Law.
Inflation (measured over the previous twelve months) in the coming months is expected to be within the target range but close to its upper limit, and to decline thereafter.
This seasonal decline (which contributed about -0.18 basis points to the index) was offset this month primarily by an increase in prices of energy and fruit and vegetables, the contribution of which to the CPI was months was 1.7 percent, below the midpoint of the inflation target range.
Therefore, the monetary policy will have to remain accommodative in order to support economic recovery.
In the three months November 2009 to January 2010 the number increased by 2.9 percent compared with the previous three months The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 1.3 percent in January compared with the December level.
Four members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and one member supported the proposal to increase it to 0.5 percent.
China and India are leading the growth in the emerging market economies.
The figure for GDP growth in 2010 was revised upwards to 4.6 percent, and the estimate for the fourth quarter was revised marginally downwards to an annual rate of 7.7 percent.
In five of the past six months, the actual CPI reading was lower than the average of the forecasters’ projections.
After accounting for the effects of legislative changes and nonrecurring income, tax revenues in January were 4 percent higher than those in January The Consumer Price Index (CPI) remained unchanged in January, in line with the average of forecasters’ earlier estimates, but slightly above the seasonal path consistent with the midpoint of the inflation range.
The expected short-term real interest rate has been on a rising trend since February the Bank of Israel interest rate.
At the same time the ECB published its Financial Stability Review in which it stressed the problems associated with the exposure of European banks to real estate risks and to East European countries, so that Europe's financial problems are far from over.
In the US the Fed started taking steps to reduce monetary expansion, and investment houses, on average, expect that the Fed interest rate will remain at its current low level (0–0.25 percent) beyond the beginning of 2010.
The Committee noted that the rapid pace of inoculations in Israel increases optimism regarding a rapid return of the economy to a path of growth in the coming year.
It seems that a trend change is taking place in the housing market.
World prices of food, commodities and energy continued rising last month, and the risks of global inflation increased.
Total income from taxes (discounting for legislative changes and one-time revenues) grew in real terms in the second quarter by almost 8 percent (compared to the parallel quarter of last year).
However in the long term, inflation is expected to move to a positive trend against a background of an output gap that remains positive.
The Tel Aviv 25 Index fell by 14 percent, a move similar to that of US stock market indices.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for August increased by 1 percent, above the range of forecasts, which averaged 0.6 percent, and above the seasonal path consistent with achieving the inflation target.
The yield to maturity on one-year makam remained unchanged in June at about 2.1 percent, similar to its May level.
The CBS survey of vacancies showed a fall of 2.1 percent in December compared with November.
The rate of growth of the Japanese economy slowed down in the first quarter of 2007, though the economy is expected to continue growing moderately, mainly driven by company sector activity and continued export growth.
However, it was noted that the exchange rate impacts exports with a lag, and therefore it is possible that the cumulative appreciation of the shekel will have a negative effect on exports going forward.
The shekel appreciated against the background of a surplus in the balance-ofpayments current account that is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and foreign investment in Israel.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/20-05-19.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
This occurred against the background of a slump in exports, a sharp reduction in private consumption, a decline in investments, and a large drop in inventories.
Home prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are not included in the CPI, increased in November–December by 1 percent, after increasing by 1.1 percent in October–November.
The baseline scenario of the quarterly DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model––which places great weight on expectations and which uses a Bank of Israel reaction function based in part on the smoothing of the interest rate path––gives an increase to about 1.2 percent in the average rate of interest in the first quarter of 2010 and a level of 2.3 percent in the last quarter of 2010.
Despite being only in the early stages of the year, developments already point to the annual budget deficit being significantly lower than the ceiling the government set for the year 2007––2.9 percent of GDP.
They assess that inflation in 2008 will come to 3.6 percent, and that in 2009 it will fall to 0.7 percent.
With that, there is growing concern over slower US economic growth and the worsening risks of debt problems in Europe and their implications for Israel's economy.
Employment Service data for July indicate that the number of vacancies rose in July in the Jerusalem region and in the south, did not change in the central region, and declined in the north.
The scope of transactions increased in January compared with the corresponding period of the previous year, and in March mortgage volume was high compared to preceding months.
The balance of credit to households decreased by 0.4 percent in December, and in the whole of 2010 it increased by 8.9 percent.
In accordance with the revised growth forecast, the deficit in 2012 is projected to be about 3.7 percent of GDP—above the seasonal path consistent with the Ministry of Finance's revised deficit forecast of 3.4 percent of GDP—primarily due to tax receipts below the path expected for January–May.
From January to November 2010 this credit grew by 2.5 percent.
The return of inflation and inflation expectations to the target range is an essential element in the support of sustainable growth.
It is assessed that the current-account surplus could reach 6 percent of GDP in 2007.
Another issue discussed was the global environment and the risks posed by it to the Israeli economy.
Employment data also indicate expansion, although wage increases have been moderate.
The April IMF growth forecast for 2010 for the eurozone was 1 percent, similar to its previous forecast in January.
Based on the equation, the CPI housing component (i.e., rentals) is expected to rise faster than was estimated previously.
Inflation in Israel over the past 12 months is 2.3 percent, and according to the various forecasts, the inflation rate is expected to moderate going forward.
The gap between the yield on unindexed ten-year shekel government bonds and that on ten-year US government bonds narrowed from 142 basis points on 25 January to 116 basis points on 19 February.
More and more countries announced rescue plans and a switch to expansionary fiscal policy, in attempts to support aggregate demand in the near future.
The slope of the makam[1] curve indicates market expectations of some reduction in the interest rate for March, yet later in the year it is expected to start rising, and to reach 1.4 percent one year from now.
The figure of GDP growth in the second quarter was increased to 3.5 percent, (compared with the previous estimate of annual terms).
The unemployment rate remains at 4.5 percent, and at the same time both the number of employed and the level of wages increased.
In the same period the shekel weakened by about 1.5 percent against the euro, from NIS 5.44 to the euro to NIS 5.52.
Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread increased steeply this month from around 32 basis points to 55 basis points, its highest level since the outbreak of the global credit crisis.
It also extended the unemployment benefit entitlement period by fourteen weeks (and by twenty weeks in highunemployment states).
Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, increased this month from about 52 basis points to about 63 basis points.
After adjusting for the effects of changes in tax rates and non-recurring revenues, tax revenues dropped by about 15 percent in real terms in January–May compared with their level in January–May 2008, The budget proposal for 2009 and 2010 submitted by the government to the Knesset raises the deficit ceiling from 1 percent of GDP to 6 percent in 2009, and 5.5 percent in 2010.
Inflation continued to decline in September for the fourth month in a row, against the background of the reductions in energy prices and the increase in the rate of unemployment to 9.6 percent, its highest level in ten years.
The Research Department's index based on Google searches, which serves as an indicator of demand in the economy in the coming months indicates a high probability of acceleration in trade and services revenue in June.
They added, however, that a significant part of the deviation from the target was the result of nonrecurring factors (the increase in the VAT rate, the tax on cigarettes, and the water surcharge), but even excluding those factors, the rate of inflation in the last few months was close to the upper limit of the range.
The markets are not pricing in an increase in the interest rate in the coming year in any of the central banks of the large advanced economies.
The volatility in the markets is expected to remain high as a result of the multiple risk loci and the high level of liquidity.
These developments were against the background of global trends.
Some of the lost activity in manufacturing and trade and services is expected to be recouped by the end of 2006.
The point was emphasized that forecasters’ predictions were currently at the upper limit of the target inflation range, and those derived from the capital market were even higher.
The members noted that the various indicators point to a level of activity that is close to potential and that the impact of the pandemic on the economy has decreased notably.
Macro data in the United States continue to be encouraging, the most salient being the rate of growth and the unemployment.
The growth rate for 2013 is projected to be during the second quarter of 2013, as planned; the growth rate is estimated to be 2.8 percent excluding the production of natural gas.
The makam yield curve remained unchanged in June after rising by 0.1-0.2 percentage points in May.
Recently published macroeconomic data support the ECB's estimate that the rate of growth in Europe in the first quarter of the year will rise.
National Accounts data show in the first quarter of 2007 there was a further rapid increase in exports, a sharp rise in investments in the principal industries, and further expansion in private consumption.
Moreover, the Committee members agreed that if necessary, the Committee will take additional steps to make monetary policy even more accommodative.
On average, the investment houses expect positive growth of 1 percent (annual rate) in the next two quarters.
Regarding budgetary policy, the Committee’s assessment was that the economy’s operation under an interim budget is leading to a tighter fiscal policy.
The nominal yield on 10-year unindexed government bonds dipped by 0.1 percentage points over the past month, and in November averaged 5.6 percent.
Forecasters' inflation predictions for the next twelve CPI readings average 2.2 percent, compared with 2.3 percent last month.
Against this background the Bank of Japan decided to leave its interest rate unchanged, at the low rate of 0.5 percent.
Japan's economy continues to report positive data pointing to a recovery trend, and it seems that the economy, which had lagged behind the other Asian economies, has started closing the gap in the last few months.
Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, increased in the month to the current discussions from 1.4 percent to about 1.7 percent.
In the discussion, the following points were raised in favor of leaving the interest rate unchanged: - Assuming that the exchange rate were to remain around its level at the time of the discussion, inflation would be likely to stay within its target range, even without an increase in the interest rate.
- Several central banks reduced interest rates this month.
The Israeli forecasters predict on average that the Bank of Israel interest rate will be reduced by 45 basis points for March, and that at the end of 2009 the interest rate will be about 0.9 percent.
The trends in mutual funds continued—net new investments in money market funds, and withdrawals from corporate bond mutual funds.
As house prices fell, the rate of delinquencies, defaults and foreclosures rose, and the stock of houses for sale increased.
It should be borne in mind that even when the monthly indices in 2008 become consistent with inflation of about 2 percent, inflation measured over the previous twelve months will return to the target range only in the second half of the year.
Inflation expectations and forecasts for the coming year are around the upper bound of the target range.
The investment houses expect that inflation will drop to 1.3 percent at the end of 2010.
Economic activity was at a high level, despite moderation in the growth rate in the preceding months, and the labor market was tight, at a full employment environment, with a very low unemployment rate.
The Fed forecasts that inflation will remain high in the coming months, but that it will moderate in 2009, in light of the expected economic slowdown and the fact that households’ medium- and long- term inflation expectations have stayed moderate till now.
Expansionary monetary policy, together with significant budgetary expansion in most countries, continues to support the recovery of the global economy.
In their discussion on the global economy, the Committee members said that the data continue to be positive, although it appears that the growth is losing momentum, particularly in Europe and Japan.
Contrariwise, the revised forecast regarding house prices that predicts a slightly faster rate of increase than the previous month's forecast is expected to act to increase expected inflation slightly.
The IMF warned that if Greece does not reach an agreement, it would not receive the next tranche in the rescue program, and thus would not be able to make the repayment of €14 billion due in March.
It was also noted that US legislators are increasing the pressure to impose regulation on Internet companies that use users’ Reserve increased the federal funds rate by 25 basis points in its most recent decision, and is expected to increase the rate twice more in 2018.
National Insurance data show a 1 percent decline in employment in May–July compared with the previous three months.
In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following points for increasing the interest rate for February 2011: - Inflation in the last twelve months was within the target range.
The NIS/$ interest spread stands at 0.25 percentage point.
The ECB adopted various expansionary measures as well, and there are expectations for additional significant measures by the EU at the end of the month.
The Committee members discussed the assessments by international institutions and investment houses regarding the decline in global output and in the scope of world trade.
During the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the shekel strengthened against the dollar by 3.9 percent, from NIS 3.46 to the dollar on 28 April to NIS 3.33 on 23 May.
Outstanding household debt increased by about NIS 5.8 billion (1.3 percent) in May to about NIS 442 billion, of which outstanding housing debt increased by about NIS 2.5 billion (0.8 percent) to NIS New mortgage volume continued to increase, reaching NIS 7 billion in June.
Nonetheless, some leading central banks are continuing to reduce their use of special instruments of monetary accommodation, and some central banks have started to increase their interest rates..
As for the composition of GDP, the Committee members examined the trends that arise from National Accounts data—the continued contraction in investment, the moderate increase in private consumption, and the weakness in goods exports—and discussed the question of whether they indicate supply constraints that derive from the proximity to full employment; they assessed that at the current time it is difficult to determine that such is the case.
The composite indices for the previous two months were revised downwards––the November index from a rise of 1.1 percent to one of 0.7 percent, and the December index from a rise of 1.2 percent to one of 0.4 percent.
The Committee members said that investment in residential construction declined in response to moderation of demand.
The level of activity in the economy is still lower than what prevailed just before the war, and supply constraints are weighing on the convergence of economic activity to the trend that characterized the economy before the war.
According to the Bank of Japan's assessments, inflation will remain around percent, as expected, this month, in the absence of inflationary pressures and modest growth data.
The current forecast was influenced not only by the deterioration of the economy in Europe, but also by domestic data for the first half.
The Bank of Israel Research Department quarterly staff forecast, which was compiled in March, was not revised, as there were no extraordinary developments regarding the projection.
The Israeli forecasters predict on average that the Bank of Israel interest rate will be reduced by 15 basis points for April to a level of 0.6 percent, and that at the end of The slope of the _makam[1] curve indicates market expectations of a reduction of_ about 20 basis points in the Bank of Israel interest rate for March, yet later in the year it is expected to start rising, and to reach 1.8 percent one year from now.
The rise in the index in April was due mainly to the rise in the indices of manufacturing production and trade and services revenue, with goods exports moderating the increase.
The global slowdown, the uncertainty regarding financial markets and regarding the ramifications of the trade war between the US and China, as well as the slowing pace of monetary policy normalization in advanced economies are liable to adversely impact demand for domestic output, also because they can lead to renewed appreciation pressures on the shekel.
The investment houses on average expect a slowdown in the growth rate to an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the second quarter, followed by faster growth of Inflation in Japan remains low.
There were signs of a slowdown in the rate of growth in the emerging markets.
Rapid recovery of activity in the US, however, would bring forward increases in the interest rate there, would narrow the interest rate differential, and enable the interest rate in Israel to increase more rapidly.
There were 43,648 building starts in the twelve months to November, compared with 43,537 in the twelve months to October, and the number of completions was 33,917 compared with the previous month's figure of 34,775.
However, the slowdown in growth in emerging markets is liable to make it difficult to redirect exports to them, in response to the slowdown in activity in developed markets.
Against this background, inflation slowed this month, and fell back to less than 3 percent.
The nominal wage increased by 0.8 percent in July– September compared with the previous three months, and the real wage increased by the effect of legislative changes).
These members of the committee stated that they attribute great weight to the expected effect of the global slowdown on the Israeli economy.
The expectation was that the leading central banks in the world would keep their interest rates unchanged, and in some countries they would cut the rate.
The slowdown in global growth intensified, against the background of the sharp fall in demand.
The forecast for the primary variables was revised downward, though only slightly so.
Despite the surprisingly good growth figures, the US economy is still faced with two major threats: the crisis in the labor market and the increase in government debt.
Inflation in nontradable goods’ prices (an approximation of the domestic component of inflation) remains above 2 percent, and inflation in tradable goods’ prices continued to increase in May and is not negative.
The ECB is concerned over the risks of inflation deriving from the rise in commodity prices rolling over into wage rises.
The trend data indicate that imports remained steady, with imports of raw materials and consumer goods rising and those of capital goods falling, following two years of acceleration in imports of inputs (from the second quarter of The latest data on the labor market show a continuation of the upward trend in employment in January (an increase of 2.9 percent from January 2005).
Most data on the emerging market economies published this month were better than those of the previous month, but they still show a slowdown in the rate of growth.
Concern over global growth intensified also due to the assessment that the set of tools available for economic policy was depleted, relative to that in 2008.
The results of both models are sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.
Makam yields declined along most of the curve by up to 8 basis points, with one-year yields declining to 1.62 percent during the period.
The Manufacturers' Association survey shows that growth in manufacturing output continued, and even accelerated somewhat in the third quarter.
The Committee emphasized that the continued withdrawal from the accommodative policy is contingent on economic indicators, and that the decisions in the future will continue to be made in accordance with developments in inflation, the real economy, financial markets and the global economy, with the goal of attaining the monetary policy targets.
The yield on one-year makam increased to an average of about 1.1 percent, from about 0.9 percent in April.
On 4 December the Bank of England cut its rate from 3 percent to 2 percent, and on 19 December the Bank of Japan reduced its rate by 0.2 percentage points to 0.1 percent.
At the time of the discussion the Fed was expected to make another reduction in the interest rate in its scheduled meeting on 30 January, with further cuts to follow in the course of 2008.
The rate of participation by nonresident investors in foreign currency trading was 26 percent in October, compared with 32 percent in September, while the average for the year to date in 2011 is 34 percent.
The various models showed that a reduction of the interest rate to 4.5 percent in the first quarter of 2007 would lead to the convergence of the inflation rate to within the target range in the last quarter of 2007.
In the last few weeks concern has been growing that the debt crisis in Greece will spread into other European countries, with Spain currently being an additional focus of concern.
- House prices increased at a slower rate last month, while the housing component of the CPI declined in the last two months, partly due to the measures introduced by the Bank of Israel and the government to cool the real estate market.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for February remained unchanged, in line with forecasts.
The Fed Chairman's adherence to the expression promising "exceptionally low levels of interest for a long time" led to a delay in the timing of the expected path of increases in the interest rate in the US.
The recovery of global growth is continuing, and the global economic recovery is expected to persist in 2010.
The labor market continues to demonstrate strength as unemployment dropped to 4.7 percent, a level quite near the estimated fullemployment rate.
The interest rates on CPI indexed and unindexed floating rate mortgages continued to increase in July, while the interest rates on variable rate unindexed mortgages declined.
According to the Bank of Israel assessment published in April, GDP will increase by exports.
The Committee emphasized the importance of the rapid handling of unemployment and labor market problems.
In the US, economic data continue to indicate an improvement in the economic situation.
Likewise, the Committee members discussed expectations from the various sources indicating the entry of the inflation rate to within the target range in the first quarter of 2024.
Goods imports (excluding ships and aircraft and diamonds) increased in May by about 1 percent.
- Interest rates in the major economies are low, and the markets are not pricing in an increase in the interest rate in the coming year in any of the central banks of the large advanced economies.
On 9 December the World Bank published its updated economic assessments, according to which world growth will be 2.8 percent in 2008, and 0.9 percent in 2009.
The Committee assessed that the monetary tightening processes in Israel and abroad, and the moderation of demand, are working to moderate inflation.
Purchasing managers indices for advanced and developing economies increased, with the index for developing economies in an environment indicating economic expansion, but in advanced economies the index still indicates slowing in the pace of activity.
At the time of the discussion the assessment was that the budget deficit for 2006 would be less than 2 percent of GDP.
In the same period the Dow Jones index rose by 0.8 percent.
In addition to depreciation, supply-side constraints due to the war can impact on prices.
The UK also announced deep budget cuts that incorporated reduced expenditure, increased taxes and surcharges on banks, in an attempt to reduce the large budget deficit.
In this context it was observed that given the uncertainty about developments in the global economy and their possible implications for Israel’s economy, it is of even greater importance that the budget be passed in accordance with the guidelines set, so as to increase the chances of maintaining the growth trend in 2008 and beyond.
Home prices continued to increase at a rapid pace in recent months, alongside growth in mortgage volume.
The greater uncertainty resulted from the outbreak of the debt crisis in Greece and fears that it would spread to other countries in Europe.
Most of the forecasters who updated their reports to the Bank of Israel after the publication of the August CPI expected the Bank to increase the interest rate for October by 25 basis points.
The rate of increase of the (M1) money supply over the previous twelve months was cash element by 7.1 percent.
Excluding the financial sector, corporate bond issues increased from NIS 1.5 billion in February to NIS 2.3 billion in March.
The level of employment in the euro area fell by less than did GDP in the last year.
Prices of commodities, particularly oil, declined sharply—a continuation of their declines in the previous two months.
The improvement in financial conditions was maintained.
Participants in this discussion include the members of the Monetary Committee, senior representatives from the various departments of the Bank, and economists from the economic departments (Research and Market Operations), who prepare and present the material for discussion.
The strengthening of the euro acts as a brake on the economic recovery.
The Tel-Bond 20 Index increased by 0.7 percent, and the Tel-Bond 40 Index increased by 0.45 percent.
In the discussions of the interest rate for November, one of the participating members of management recommended that the Governor increase the interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point, and the other three recommended that the Governor leave the rate unchanged.
In the discussion it was noted that a rise in the inflation environment was evident— inflation in the previous twelve months was 4.2 percent, above the upper limit of the inflation target range, and the rate of price increases in the last six months in annual terms (seasonally adjusted) was even higher.
Based on the median path seen by Federal Open Market Committee members, three additional increases are expected in 2017; based on market assessments, the pace will be slightly more moderate but still higher than expected previously.
The notice of the interest rate decision for August stated that the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged is consistent with the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy which is intended to entrench the inflation rate within the price stability target of 1–3 percent over the next twelve months, and to support growth while maintaining financial stability.
- The annual rate of increase in house prices continues to be high––in the twelve months to May house prices increased by 13.7 percent, slightly below the rate in the twelve months to April.
Direct tax revenues were 6 percent lower in November, in real terms, than in November 2010, while indirect tax revenues were 6 percent higher, in real terms, than in November 2010.
In contrast, the housing price index, which is based mainly on renewed rental contracts and which is included in the CPI, continued to increase, rising by 1.3 percent in July, bringing the increase in the last twelve months to 5.2 percent.
Services exports increased by 1.4 percent in August.
Nonetheless, Israel’s sovereign risk premium, as measured in the 5-year CDS market, remained steady.
Inflation over the previous twelve months in July was a negative 0.7 percent.
The Central Bureau of Statistics monthly survey of business trends and its consumer confidence indicator continued to be negative in January as well, though with some improvement.
The strengthening of the NIS acts as a counterbalancing force against inflationary pressures.
In the same period the Dow Jones index rose by 3.4 percent.
The interest rate is forecast to begin increasing in the middle of 2013, under the assumption of a recovery in the global economy.
Supply side factors–taxes, and prices of oil and other commodities–influenced the August index and are also expected to be reflected in high CPI readings in the next few months as well.
The Monetary Committee discussed the domestic capital market, in which equity indices declined, and yields on long-term government bonds increased notably.
The Research Department forecasts that following the current interest rate reduction, the interest rate will remain unchanged until at least the end of 2013, while the previous forecast projected that the interest rate would begin to increase toward the end of 2013.
The continued increase in the number of building starts, the delayed effect of the increase in the interest rate, measures introduced by the Bank of Israel affecting mortgages, and steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in real estate taxation are all expected to continue to moderate home prices during the coming year.
They assessed that continuation of the appreciation will weigh on the return of inflation toward the midpoint of the target range.
Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread declined during the period from 121 basis points to 100 basis points, but increased again this month to 116 basis points.
In the meantime, the transfer of the sixth aid installment to Greece (about €8 billion) was delayed until November, since the Greeks have not fulfilled the conditions attached to it (already this year, the deficit/GDP targets have been revised a number of times and as of now Greece has not met the conditions for 2012 either).
The IMF also adjusted its forecast of US growth downward, to a negative 1.6 percent in At the same time, inflation is declining, in light of the intensification of the recession, the decline in the labor market, and falling commodity and oil prices.
From the previous monetary policy discussion held on March 25, 2012, through April underperformance since the beginning of the year, a continuation of the positive trend of the previous month, and in contrast to the general global trend.
Different commentators saw the crisis either as posing a threat of the break-up of the eurozone or as the opportunity to create fiscal uniformity.
The rise in the index reflects increases in all its components, and in particular a 2.1 percent increase in the index of manufacturing production in the index of trade and services revenue.
The results of the models are sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.
The disappointing GDP figure for the first quarter, the reduced demand expected from Europe, together with the strengthening of the yen, all these are expected to have a negative impact on Japan's production and exports, and were among the factors that led to the Bank of Japan's announcement on the urgent need to broaden the basis of growth.
Until the Knesset approves the budget for 2006, government spending follows the law on the absence of an approved budget, whereby monthly expenditure is limited to one twelfth of the previous year's budget.
The Committee referred to the inflation environment which remains low.
Most Committee members agreed that the initial indicators of activity in the first quarter—including the Business Tendency Survey and the Composite State of the Economy Index—support the assessment that the economy continues to grow strongly.
This month the IMF reduced its global growth forecast for moderate in emerging market economies.
In Brazil the central bank cut the interest rate by 50 b.p.
The annual inflation rate remains above the lower bound, and the members' assessment was that in the coming months inflation will hover near it.
The Committee members also discussed the anomalous volatility in the exchange rate during March, against the background of the liquidity distress in the foreign exchange market in view of the sharp declines in global equity markets.
However, in contrast, the trend of depreciation in the shekel, which in the Committee’s assessment also reflects some increase in the economy’s risk premium, contributed to an increase in the inflation rate.
Finance Division, Research Department Dr Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of Information and International Affairs Division Most of the economic data published in June (up to the date of this interest rate decision) were better than expected.
In the twelve months ending in February, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand deposits) increased by 12.9 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 6.9 percent.
CDS spreads for most emerging economies declined at similar rates.
The stock of new homes available for sale continued to increase, and in May–July was on average 6.4 percent higher than the three preceding months.
Four Committee members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and one Committee member supported the proposal to reduce it to 0.1 percent.
In contrast, the increase in commodity and energy prices is expected to have an effect on the inflation rate in the near term and draw it near the center of the target range.
However, last month there were signs of a recovery, including in exports and manufacturing production.
China also appears to be showing signs of a slowdown this month (relative to its terms of growth) with a drop in industrial production, in consumer sales, and its purchasing managers' index in the manufacturing sector.
- The rate of increase in home prices continues to rise, and in the 12 months ending in December, home prices increased by 6.7 percent, compared with 5.8 percent in the 12 months to November.
In addition, the revision by the US Commerce Department of figures for the prior three years shows that GDP is currently only $13.5 trillion (not $14.3 trillion) and in effect is still lower than the level on the eve of the crisis in 2008.
The past few months have seen a decrease in the average loan-to-value ratio (LTV).
The number of employee posts, seasonally adjusted, increased by 0.6 percent in the three months March–May compared with the previous three months.
In May there was a surplus of NIS 1.2 billion in the general government budget in the domestic budget and a deficit of NIS 0.7 billion in government activities abroad.
The Committee held a broad discussion of the change that has taken place in the inflation environment.
Most of the slowdown in activity derives from Operation Protective Edge.
The strong growth rate is supported principally by a sharp rise in private consumption and in business-sector investment.
From the monetary policy discussion on June 21, 2015, through July 24, 2015, the shekel strengthened by about 0.25 percent against the dollar, and by about 3.5 percent against the euro.
Atypically, the decline in exports encompasses a large number of industries.
Stock market prices rose this month against the background of the easing of the debt crisis in Europe––due to the fiscal policy measures introduced in countries with refinancing problems––and positive financial statements in the second quarter.
The index of manufacturing production (seasonally adjusted) fell in March by rose sharply in March, by about 4 percent, after declining by 0.6 percent in February The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 0.1 percent in February compared with its January level.
However, after several weeks of war, it appears that the economy is in a process of economic recovery in some components of activity.
In particular an increase in manufacturing activity was evident, partly explained by recovery in the motor industry and in exports.
Eurozone inflation is expected to be 2.7 percent in 2011, and 2 percent in 2012.
- Although some of the change in the exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar was indeed affected by local factors, another part stemmed from the weakening of the dollar worldwide, and these trends could change.
Yields on Portuguese 10-year government bonds reached a record level of 7.4 percent, and gave rise to concern in the markets that the probability that Portugal would have to ask for aid was increasing, against the background of the fact that Greece and Ireland had requested aid after the yields on their bonds exceeded the 7 percent level.
In contrast, core inflation remains stable.
- During the past month, the expansionary policies of major central banks continued, and interest rates in those economies remained near zero.
The CDS spread of most emerging market countries also widened somewhat in this period.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](http://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Documents/April%2016%202018%20interest%20rate%20decision.docx) Bank of Israel—Minutes of interest rate discussion on April 15–16, 2018 Page 1 of 4 The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest for the economy.
In the eurozone too the central bank changed its approach, and tended towards a tighter policy.
On 19 December the Bank of Japan announced a 20-basis-point reduction in its interest rate to 0.1 percent, and several other steps intended to ease corporate financing and to increase liquidity in the financial markets.
The June composite state-of-the-economy index showed a drop of 0.3 percent, and the adjusted index for May a drop of 0.1 percent.
The expansionary policy of central banks in major advanced economies is expected to continue, according to their announcements, later into the year as well.
The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 1.2 percent in February compared with the January level.
Seven of the ten forecasters who updated their reports to the Bank of Israel after the publication of the June CPI expected the Bank to increase the interest rate for August, while the others expected an increase in September.
The various scenarios of the models yield contradictory results, making it difficult to analyze the relevant factors.
There were net withdrawals from corporate bond mutual funds and general bond mutual funds totaling about NIS 3.2 billion in June.
The medium term risks include recession in Europe, fiscal crisis in Japan, and slower than expected growth in developing economies.
After rises in the indices on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange in April and the beginning of May, the exchange registered falling share prices in the second half of May and the first half of June.
In addition, the Monetary Committee announced a targeted plan intended to assist the orderly granting of credit to small and micro businesses that were adversely impacted by the war.
Inflation expectations for two years and longer range between 2.3 percent and 2.4 percent, compared with a range of 2.4–2.5 percent in the previous quarter.
Inflation is expected to moderate in light of the drop in commodity and oil prices, the marked fall in share price indices, and the slowdown in global growth.
The consumer confidence index and the University of Michigan confidence index for December both rose more than expected.
In the discussions on the interest rate for January, one of the participating members of management recommended that the Governor leave the rate unchanged, and the other three recommended that he increase it by a quarter of a percentage point.
Government bond yields remained low, and it appears that the Bank of Israel’s intervention in the corporate bond market, which began in July, contributed to a marked decline in spreads on the main Tel Bond indices.
The monthly unemployment rate according to trend data was 6.9 percent in April small sample, so that the figures should be treated with caution.
In announcing the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following points that led to the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged at 2.5 percent for March 2012: - Inflation expectations from various sources, for the next twelve months and for longer terms, are within the inflation target range.
Total mortgages granted in July were 10 percent below the extent of mortgages granted in June, but still higher than in the previous months.
As a result, we are seeing disruptions in economic activity, which are accompanied by increases in energy prices and by delays in various production and supply chains—delays that it is reasonable to presume are transitory.
Domestic government expenditure in January–October was NIS 4.4 billion (2.3 percent) lower than the seasonal path consistent with full budget expenditure.
The Committee was presented with an analysis of the effect of the crisis by industry, which showed that the total negative impact to GDP, given Ministry of Health guidelines, is about 37 percent.
Germany’s trade surplus dropped sharply in September, emphasizing the weakness in the eurozone’s main engine of growth.
Inflation expectations for the coming 12 months, from all sources, were higher in June than in May, but the developments during the period were uneven: inflation expectations derived from the capital market declined, while professional forecaster’s projections increased slightly after the CPI was published.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/23-8-21.aspx) ' THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
However, it was noted that in the past week, the shekel's appreciation has been halted.
Despite all these, it was noted that the relatively strong state of Israel's economy at this time would allow it to absorb these shocks with relatively moderate damage.
Total mortgages granted in the twelve months ending in April were 2 percent lower than those advanced in the twelve months to March, continuing the decline from the peak level in May 2011.
They said that the inflation rate is expected to decline in the coming period, in accordance with the seasonal path and due to government-initiated price reductions; however, to the extent that the shekel deprecation will persist, it—and with it, the increase in wages—is expected to support a rise in inflation.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 0.1 percent in October, slightly above forecasters’ predictions prior to its publication, and below the seasonal path consistent with the inflation target.
One-year-forward inflation expectations derived from the capital market ("break-even inflation") remained relatively stable from the last interest rate decision on August 23 to the first week of September, at around 2.7 percent, and in the next two weeks (up to September 24) they increased slightly, to above 2.8 percent.
During the last month the members of the Federal Reserve emphasized that preventing inflation was now the focal objective currently facing the US economy, rather than concern over an economic slowdown.
Last month credit rating companies made further cuts in the rating of European countries, and warned of the credit rating outlook of other countries and of banks around the world.
The Committee members emphasized that they will expand the use of existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will be able to operate additional tools, to the extent that the crisis lengthens and it is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and to moderate the negative economic impact resulting from the crisis.
During the period from August 22 to September 24, the shekel appreciated by about to the appreciation of the shekel against the dollar by about 2.7 percent, and depreciation against the euro by about 2.1 percent.
Uncertainty in the financial markets remained at a high level, and the situation in the banking sector deteriorated.
Exports of goods and services increased by 5.6 percent—after declines of 10 percent and 5 percent, respectively, in the previous two quarters— bringing the figure back to the level it was at in the first quarter of 2011.
Compared with September, nominal wages increased in October by 1.2 percent, and real wages increased by 0.5 percent, based on seasonally adjusted data.
Regarding budgetary pressures, it was also noted that adhering to the budget framework––and with it, the deficit––would help the economy remain stable and strengthen foreign and local investors' confidence in the economy.
Macro figures indicate continued deterioration in the state of the global economy, including in the major emerging economies.
The Governor decided to leave the interest rate for July unchanged at 3.5 percent.
Four Committee members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and two Committee members supported increasing the interest rate to 0.25 percent.
The discussion centered on two major issues.
Similar to the previous forecasts, the forecast is based on the assumption that the war will be focused mainly on the Southern front.
Labor force survey data indicate a slight increase in unemployment during the fourth quarter of 2012, to 6.9 percent, accompanied by a decline in the participation rate of 0.4 percentage points.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel weakened by 1.1 percent against the dollar, and strengthened by 0.6 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate and by 2.2 percent against the euro.
The domestic deficit (excluding credit) in 2010 was NIS 30.2 billion, 3.7 percent of GDP.
The latest economic data indicate that the slowdown in US economic growth has deepened, specifically in light of the deterioration in the housing market and the weakening of the labor market.
The June CPI excluding fruit and vegetables rose by 0.6 percent, higher than the path consistent with the inflation target.
Based on the latest economic data, the international economic organizations assess that the probability of a renewed slowdown in the global economy has increased recently.
Global macroeconomic data presented a mixed picture this month.
Since the beginning of the year, the shekel has strengthened by about 4.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
Director of the Research Department Finance Division, Research Department A downward revision of US growth figures for the past three years, a cut in the credit rating of the US, stagnation in core economies in Europe, and concerns of an expansion of the debt crisis to Italy and Spain (which led to European Central Bank recession and led to an unsettled market.
Against the background of indicators for a gradual recovery in the labor market and in demand (with variance among the principal industries) and in contrast, the supply limitations in some industries—the Committee assessed that there are several main risks to a possible acceleration of inflation: the development of the war and its impact on economic activity, depreciation of the shekel, limitations on construction industry activity, fiscal developments, and global oil prices.
In this scenario the average exchange rate in 2010 would be NIS 3.79 to the dollar.
The total number of business sector employee posts increased by 3.4 percent in June– August, compared with the same period in 2009.
The makam yield for one year declined last month from 4.4 percent to 4.1 percent.
However since then data became available that support the assessment that inflation is stabilizing in the lower part of the target range, and in their evaluation, the probability of a prolonged decrease to below the lower bound is relatively low.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for January declined by 0.7 percent, a greater fall than that expected by the Bank of Israel and greater than the fall predicted by private forecasters of between 0.3 percent and 0.5 percent.
The inflation estimates and expectations to twelve months ahead are lower than the midpoint of the target range.
The modest rise in the index in the last few months supports the assessment that the rate of recovery of economic activity has slowed.
They emphasized that the worldwide easing of inflationary pressures, the global economic slowdown and the global financial crisis had led to expectations that the main central banks would continue to reduce their interest rates in the next few months, which supports a substantial interest rate reduction in Israel too, and in their opinion enables the rate for November to be cut by half a percentage point.
Prior to the interest rate decision for May, the _makam curve reflected_ expectations in the financial markets that the Bank of Israel interest rate will decline moderately during the next year.
The slowdown in activity is reflected especially in declines of goods exports and goods imports in April, continuing their decline in previous months.
The Fed Chair repeated the assessment that the Federal Reserve is likely to increase the interest rate this year.
The yield on one-year _makam went up from an_ average of 4.4 percent in October to an average of 4.5 percent in November.
The probability of the realization of the current geopolitical risks is unknown.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed bonds fell in March to an average of 1.2 percent, compared with 1.5 percent in March.
Though the CPI over the past twelve months fell by 0.3 percent, over the seven months since the beginning of the year the CPI has risen by a total 2.1 percent.
Nevertheless, there is evidence that the effects of the developments in the global economic environment are starting to filter through.
Tax revenues since the beginning of the year are some NIS 11 billion ahead of the seasonal budget path.
These forecasts are based on expectations that the interest rate will be increased.
Against the background of these developments, the ECB made a surprise cut in the interest rate this month, and the markets are pricing in interest rate cuts in other economies.
In addition, the Committee discussed the updated macroeconomic forecast compiled by the Research Department.
The average rate of unemployment is expected to drop to 7 percent (compared with 7.1 percent in the January forecast).
Their assessment was that if the crisis does not persist or spill over into additional countries, and particularly if significant preventative measures are not required in Israel, no significant impact is expected on macroeconomic activity in Israel.
The Fed and the ECB kept the interest rate unchanged and emphasized in their forward guidance that the interest rate is expected to remain at a high level for a longer period of time, with markets not pricing in additional interest rate increases by them, and only pricing in an interest rate decrease during the second quarter of 2024.
The Bank’s assessment is that inflation, measured over the previous twelve months, will return to within the range in mid2009.
The balance of outstanding housing credit to households increased by 0.5 percent in the twelve months to November to NIS 257 billion.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/08-10-18.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest for the economy.
As expected, the Bank of Japan left the interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent.
Responsible fiscal policy is important for strengthening markets’ trust, and in addition is likely to help entrench inflation within its target.
The Employers Survey and the Business Tendency Survey indicate expectations of continued growth in employment, though at a more moderate pace than in the past.
The Committee also discussed the updated macroeconomic forecast compiled by the Research Department.
Other forecasts also indicate a recession in the eurozone and the UK.
Negative indicators include October data on foreign trade, and third-quarter data from the Manufacturers Association survey of expectations (see below).
These tax increases are likely to be reflected in one-off price increases in the next few months.
The risk premium in most emerging markets increased significantly this month, in light of the global financial crisis.
Although the ECB left its interest rate unchanged at 4 percent at its last meeting, the President of the Bank hinted in the accompanying notification, and even more clearly in the press conference following the meeting, that a rise in the interest rate was to be expected as early as at the next meeting.
In the middle of January the CBS published its updated estimates of the National Accounts for the third quarter of 2010, showing an increase of 4.4 percent in GDP and of 5.1 percent in business sector product (annual rates, seasonally adjusted).
It can be assumed that upcoming elections are likely to continue the "paralysis" of the leadership there in its ability to deal with the crisis.
In total, companies that responded expect activity to continue to grow in the third quarter as a result of an increase in orders from the domestic market.
The expected level of activity remains robust and is around the economy’s potential growth.
It is worth mentioning that some European macroeconomic data exceeded expectations: unemployment in Germany declined slightly to 6.8 percent in December, from 6.9 percent in November.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was published on July 8, 2024, and in the data file that accompanied the notice.
There is a high likelihood that the Federal Reserve will raise its rate by 0.25 percentage points at its next meeting on Regarding yield gaps, nominal yields in the US stand in June at about 5.1 percent both for one-year and 10-year terms, so that the nominal yield gap between Israel and the US ranges from 0.7 percentage points for one year to 1.4 percent in the long term.
Macroeconomic data in the US which were published this month continue to be encouraging, particularly employment figures, sales and production indices, and credit figures.
The number of employees joining the labor market each month (non-farm payrolls) averaged more than 200 thousand in the past six months, the most significant rise since 2006.
The main risk to the forecast is the materialization of the scenario in which legislative and institutional changes will be accompanied by an increase in the State’s risk premium and continued depreciation of the shekel, with an adverse impact on exports, and a decline in domestic investments and demand for private consumption.
Inflation expectations for two years and longer increased, and currently range from 2.5 percent for shorter terms to 2.9 percent for longer terms.
Most of the slowdown in growth derives from the weakness of exports, against the background of the weakness in the global economy; a moderation in domestic demand is also evident.
Based on the Telbor market (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offer Rate), the Bank of Israel interest rate in a year’s time is expected to be 4.2 percent, and forecasters’ predictions on average are that it will be 4.3 percent.
Taking into consideration the slowdown in the global economy and its expected negative effect on Israel's economy already in the second quarter, the differential between the interest rate in Israel and those in the major economies, and the moderation of actual and expected inflation, three members of management recommended that the Governor leave the rate of interest unchanged for July.
Nonetheless, some leading central banks are continuing to reduce their use of special instruments of monetary accommodation.
In that connection, it was stated that in the event of a scenario with a negative impact on the Israeli economy, the Monetary Committee will be prepared to reach necessary decisions, even during the intermeeting period.
The data that became available since the previous monetary rate decisions will be made by the Committee.
The data on real activity indicate that output recovered swiftly from the shock caused by the fighting.
Against the background of continued growth in this balance and the absence of appropriate growth in allowances for doubtful debts in respect of housing credit, the Supervisor of Banks published a draft directive increasing the required risk weighting and provisioning on housing loans, and reducing the required capital allocation for guarantees in respect of homes already delivered to residents.
China is showing the results of the government's efforts to cool the economy.
The IMF created a rescue plan for Greece that supported a reduction of the budget deficits (from 13.6 percent of GDP in 2009 to less than 3 percent in 2014).
Thus, in the above period Russia’s fiveyear CDS spread increased from 246 basis points to 1,071 basis points, the Czech Republic’s went from 45 to 216, Turkey’s from 291 to 838, and Poland’s from 60 to In the wake of the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers investment bank in midSeptember, there was increased concern over the stability of various financial institutions, and the global financial crisis worsened.
Exchange rates were characterized by high volatility, and since the previous policy decision, the shekel weakened by 1 percent against the dollar, by 2 percent against the euro, and by 1.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
After considering all the above points, the Governor decided to raise the interest rate for June by 25 basis points, to 3.5 percent.
Participants in the discussion noted that as a result of concern over the debt crises in several European countries, the increases in interest rates that were expected to take place in the next few months in Europe and most advanced economies will be delayed, and the ECB is not expected to increase its interest rate in the next half year.
The housing market also yielded some encouraging signs of stabilization, although the data are still mixed.
In contrast, inflation expectations for the various ranges increased over the course of the period to around the upper bound of the target range, and they incorporate assessments for expected tax increases.
The marked decline in short-term yields was an indication of calm and the return of investors' confidence in those countries' ability to repay debts.
Prior to the current decision on the interest rate, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 2 percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate, and 0.25 percentage points lower than the ECB rate.
The official reason for the announcement was the impression created of the difficulty of leaders of the eurozone and the EU to make decisions, which indicates an inherent weakness in the decision making process.
The Latin American central banks adopted a more aggressive policy, whereas some of the Asian central banks tended to an expansionary monetary policy.
Nevertheless, the withdrawal of fiscal support and the continuing process of reducing leverage by banks are likely to hold demand down and thus represent a downside risk to the forecast recovery.
In contrast, private consumption contributed to growth during the recent period.
In the US, economic activity remained at a high level, with slight moderation in the most recent data.
Director of the Research Department Finance Division, Research Department Most macroeconomic data published during the month continued to indicate a slowdown in the rate of recovery of the global economy.
The main factors supporting real appreciation of the shekel are the expected further current account surplus in the balance of payments and the flow of foreign investment into the economy.
The Committee members who supported keeping the interest rate unchanged noted that indicators of expected real activity, particularly the improvement in expectations of activity compared to previous months, alongside the turnaround in imports, may point toward an end to the slowdown.
The Knesset approved the budget framework for 2007 determined by the government.
Trend data from the monthly indicators also continue to show that economic growth has continued and become more firmly established.
It was emphasized that in view of the crisis, there is a methodological difficulty in calculating the CPI and in analyzing the meaning of the measured change in prices.
There were 39,794 building starts in the 12 months ending in December, and this is expected to continue to support a high level of stock of homes.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed government bonds increased from 1 June to 18 June to an average of about 2.1 percent, compared with an average of about 1.7 percent in May.
They noted that the latest data indicated a slowdown in the rate of economic deterioration and that there were signs that the situation was stabilizing.
The sharp decline in exports of goods and services was also mentioned, as well as the moderate growth of private consumption.
Since the beginning of the year, the seasonally adjusted CPI has increased by 1.9 percent, consistent with an annual rate of inflation of 2.1 percent.
Labor Force Survey data indicate that despite a slight decline in November, the prime working ages (25– with 80.1 percent in October) and employment rate (76.6 percent, compared with 76.9 percent), and a low unemployment rate (3.9 percent, unchanged from October), while the job vacancy rate remains high, at 3.8 percent (seasonally adjusted).
The main argument in favor of cutting the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points was based on the combination of risks from the global arena.
The yield gap between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term declined to 127 basis points from 173 basis points in mid-September.
The price of an ounce of gold jumped during the month to a record $1,897, though in recent days it fell back significantly to only $1,750.
In assessing the state of the global economy, Committee members indicated positive and negative developments that accumulated over the previous month.
The inflation rate as measured by the change in the CPI over the past 12 months was -0.4 percent, while the change was -0.7 percent over the 12 months ending in August, and there has been a marked upward trend in the annual inflation rate since April.
Taking into consideration the points made in the discussion, the Governor decided to keep the interest rate for September unchanged at 1.75 percent.
The Bank of Israel announced that it will continue to act to achieve its price-stability objective, and will monitor Israeli and worldwide economic developments, and will use the instruments available to it to encourage employment and growth, and to support the stability of the financial system.
In September they rose by 0.3 percent, after falling by 0.8 percent in August.
On 16 February the Bank of Israel announced that from the following day it would employ an additional instrument of monetary policy, by starting to purchase government bonds on the secondary market, with the intention of strengthening the Bank's influence on interest rates for longer terms.
For the first time in four quarters, the Employers Survey of the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Labor shows a marked improvement in the balance of employment, the result of both an increase in the number of posts filled, and a reduction in the number of terminations of employment.
One member stated that he was not concerned about a continued rise in home prices, but just the opposite, a too rapid drop in their prices.
The decline in the average LTV ratio and in the proportion of mortgages for investment purposes apparently indicate the increasing influence of constraints imposed by the Banking Supervision Department.
The most recent data on economic activity in the first months of 2008 indicate a slowdown in growth in the services sector in Europe, which constitutes the major sector in the economy, to its lowest rate in four years, and a fall in consumer and business confidence indices.
Even after the security situation improves, recovery of incoming presented in the appendix.
It was expected that the recovery would be a slow one, and that it would be accompanied by a slow process of interest rate increases.
In the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the signs of moderation in the negative trend in economic activity firmed.
At that time the yield on one-year makam declined from 4.5 percent to 4.3 percent, while that on 3-month Prior to the current decision on the interest rate, the Bank of Israel interest rate was points lower than the ECB rate.
The Committee members noted that investment in residential construction declined in the past three quarters, and it is possible that this decline indicates a moderation in supply of homes as well.
Spreads in the corporate bond market narrowed, primarily for debt issued by companies with lower ratings.
A discussion developed regarding the forces acting to weaken the shekel, including the continued rise in the US interest rate, a process that worked, among other things, to reduce hedging activities among institutional investors, and the forces acting to strengthen it, including growth in exports.
The average real wage per employee post increased by 3.3 percent in October compared with September, and the nominal wage by 3.7 percent (both seasonally adjusted), and in May–October compared with the same months in 2009 they increased by 1.4 percent and 3.8 percent respectively.
In the second half of 2006, after four years of increases, the upward trend in labor productivity appears to have come to a halt and as a result, unit labor costs appear to be rising.
The Composite State of the Economy Index increased 0.2 percent in December Labor market data indicate a high level of employment and a low unemployment rate.
This, despite a 0.9 percent fall in manufacturing production from September to October.
The persistent rising trend of government tax revenue is expected to bring the budget deficit for 2007 to between 1 percent and 1.5 percent of GDP.
The Committee also discussed the marked uncertainty in the fiscal situation.
In the last three months, about NIS 10 billion were withdrawn.
It was also decided to narrow the interest rate corridor in the credit window and the commercial banks' deposit window from The Bank stressed the following points supporting the reduction in the interest rate for March: - The marked effects of the global crisis and the fall in domestic demand on economic activity in Israel; - The Bank’s assessment that inflation is on a steep downward path, and is likely to be below the target range in the second half of 2009; - The low interest rates set by the major central banks around the world, and the additional policy instruments used by them to bring about monetary expansion.
The World Bank expects China's economy to recover from the crisis in the second half of 2009, thus helping to stabilize the whole Asian economy.
Given recent government commitments, and particularly in light of the expected growth rate of 2.8 percent in 2012, which is lower than the 4 percent growth forecast underlying the budget, the Ministry of Finance expects the deficit in 2012 to be 3.4 percent of GDP, compared with the deficit ceiling of 2 percent set at the end of 2010.
Total outstanding credit to households increased in March by 1 percent compared with February, to NIS 389 billion.
Excluding the effects of changes in legislation, total tax revenues in January higher, and indirect taxes 22 percent.
- Economic indicators published this month show that activity expanded at a faster pace, led by domestic demand.
In addition, in light of the increase of only 1.2 percent in the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) index for May (which although higher than had been expected, is still not high), the Chairman of the Fed claims that the price increases (and their severe adverse effects on the purchasing power of US consumers) are temporary, and he therefore continues to feel more concerned over deflation.
At the same time, the rate of growth of government expenditures derived from the automatic pilot needs to decline in order to meet the expenditure rule.
In this regard, the Committee members noted the tight labor market and the employment rate among the prime working ages currently being at a record.
In 12-months hence, they expect, on average, that the interest rate will reach 6.25 percent compared to their previous forecast of 5.75 percent.
- Factors acting to push up inflation in recent months are expected to bring inflation back to within its target range during 2007, and to raise it close to the upper boundary of the range in 2008.
The investment houses expect that deflation will continue into next year.
The fact that the shekel weakened against both the dollar and the euro indicates that its weakening was essentially caused by domestic factors.
Short-term inflation expectations from various sources are around the lower bound of the target range.
However, the forecast for world trade growth was revised downward, to 2.9 percent from 3.2 percent, and the institution noted the concern of increased barriers to world trade.
Positive developments include the interest rate reduction by the ECB, extensive loans offered by the ECB, at easy terms, to commercial banks in the eurozone, and the move to reduce the interest rate on their dollar swap lines.
The Committee noted that, looking forward, there are a number of forces that will be able support an increase in inflation: continued growth in private consumption, which is supported by the strength of the labor market; stability in commodity prices; and a continued increase in labor cost per output unit.
In contrast, they noted the high level of uncertainty surrounding the forecast.
On average, they forecast inflation of 0.7 percent in 2007, and 2.1 percent in 2008.
while transport and communications and construction saw more modest growth.
These participants thought that it was important to reduce the interest rate by a larger amount this month so that the rate of price increases would be more likely to become consistent with the target inflation rate sooner rather than later.
In addition, the inflation rate over the past 6 months and even more so over the past 3 months (in annual terms, seasonally adjusted) is lower than the annual rate, in prices of tradable goods and nontradable goods.
In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations underlying the decision to keep the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent: - The inflation environment reflected in increased actual prices and expectations for one year ahead remains stable.
Most indicators published in the last month (in the period between the decision on the interest rate on August 23 and the current decision on September 27), showed that economic activity continued to increase at a buoyant rate in the third quarter, so that the output gap contracted further.
At the time of the meeting the 12-month inflation rate stood at 3.5 percent, above the upper limit of the target inflation range of 1-3 percent a year.
Expectations regarding interest rates around the world derived from the conduct of financial market traders are that the increases in interest rates by the central banks in most advanced economies will start later than expected last month.
In the last twelve months the CPI rose by 3.6 percent, and the wholesale price index by 7.6 percent, the latter reflecting price increases in most of the principal industries.
These include, among other things, the rising wages in the economy, the vigorous private consumption, inflation abroad and the expansionary fiscal policy.
The composite index fell in September to a six-year low, and capital investments fell for the fifth consecutive quarter.