The recent increases in the Bank of Israel interest rate, together with the increase in building starts (compared with the equivalent period a year ago) are likely to help moderate the rise in house prices.
World financial markets exhibited a positive trend.
The Committee discussed the moderating inflation environment and expectations for inflation for the coming year, which are slightly below the midpoint of the inflation target range.
In the month between the last interest rate decision and the current one there was a marked deterioration in the global financial crisis.
After an extended discussion, three Committee members were of the opinion that the interest rate should be kept at its current level.
Orders for durable goods also fell relatively sharply.
With regard to the decision on the interest rate for March, with the intention of reducing the cost of credit and strengthening the economy's ability to handle the effects of the decline in demand, and given the assessments that a cut in the interest rate was consistent with the rapid reduction in inflation and that inflation was likely to drop below the target range in 2009, the Governor decided to reduce the interest rate for March by 25 basis points to 0.75 percent.
Most of the increase was in the public sector.
In addition, the failure to approve the Administration’s new assistance plan in the amount of $450 billion, which includes tax benefits for problematic sectors, is liable to reduce GDP by up to about 2 percent, particularly since the previous programs are coming to an end.
This is the first time that in the course of the discussions on the interest rate, the Research Department presented a quarterly forecast that combines various indicators derived from models for forecasting inflation and real developments with discretionary assessments incorporated in an expanded DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model that brings together the information to obtain a consistent forecast.
The interest on 10-year CPI-indexed bonds rose from an average of 3.4 percent in October to 3.5 percent in November.
The forecast was lowered due to the slowdown reflected in published data on Israel's economy, mainly National Accounts figures for the third quarter, and to the expectation of a global slowdown, against the background of the debt crises in Europe and their implications, and the forecast slowdown in major emerging markets.
Outstanding housing credit increased in the twelve months to end-April by 14.1 percent, to NIS 243 billion.
The government's focused plans to ease credit terms for real estate and improve employment, and a QE3 which will focus on mortgages are likely to contribute to noticeable improvement in these two markets which depend on each other and which have been floundering since the beginning of the crisis.
The US economy grew by 3 percent in the fourth quarter, the highest rate of increase since the second quarter of consumer confidence, retail sales, and manufacturing data in the US all indicate expansion.
As expected, the Fed left the interest rate unchanged, and repeated that it expected the near-zero rate to remain until mid-2013 at least, but it did not announce another quantitative easing program (QE3).
In addition, liquidity and credit problems are becoming increasingly serious and there is deepening concern over the further weakening of financial institutions.
On average, they predicted that inflation one year hence would be 2.3 percent (compared with forecasts of 2.7 percent the previous month).
House prices––which are presented in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of house prices but are not included in the CPI––rose in February–March at a monthly rate of 1 percent, following their increase of 1.4 percent a month in January–February.
The significant decline in the last year in the share of new rental contracts linked to the dollar was noted––these dropped from about 85 percent of all contracts in January 2007 to about 68 percent in October.
The nominal wage per employee-post in the business sector increased by 4.6 percent in June–August, from its level in June–August 2009, and the real wage by 2.6 percent.
One of the factors contributing to growth in these markets is the increase in inter-zone trade and the increase in domestic demand.
The balance of housing debt was NIS 272 billion at the end of August, an increase of 6.9 percent since August of remained essentially unchanged, while interest rates in the unindexed variable rate segment again increased by about 0.1 percentage points, following a similar increase in August.
In addition, despite the fact that the Purchasing Managers Index in industry rose in April, and the fact that most components of the index – including manufacturing capacity, export demand, and employment – are in an expansionary trend, the index is still below the level of 50 points, and so it points to contraction in activities.
In the twelve months up to and including July 2010 the monetary base measured by the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand deposits) increased by 9.5 percent, reflecting a marked slowdown in the rate of increase of this aggregate, against the background of the increase in the rate of interest.
Expectations for the Bank of Israel interest rate in the coming months are stable.
New mortgages granted in January declined by 14.5 percent, after rising by 9 percent in December.
It was also noted that even at the current level of the interest rate, monetary policy is expansionary, after the reductions in recent months in response to global developments and a slowdown in growth in Israel.
Committee members discussed developments in the exchange rate.
From the previous monetary policy discussion held on December 23, 2012, through January 25, 2013, the Tel Aviv 25 Index declined by about 0.6 percent.
This figure is the result of a decline in receipts of taxes on the capital market, and an increase in receipts of indirect taxes.
The European Central Bank (ECB) assesses that eurozone growth will be and predict negative growth of 0.7 percent in 2012, and global growth of 2.9 percent, compared with the previous forecast of 3.2 percent.
Finance Division, Research Department Dr Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of Information and International Affairs Division The latest real economic data on the US economy indicate considerable weakness: GDP declined by a half a percent (annual rate) in the third quarter of 2008––a continuation of the significant and widespread fall in economic activity.
The Committee discussed a number of alternatives regarding monetary steps that can be implemented at this time in view of the situation in the economy.
The main risk to the global growth forecast is that the ongoing crisis in the financial markets will continue to affect domestic demand in the advanced economies and will cause more serious harm to the emerging markets too.
In the light of developments since the previous interest rate decision on 23 July 2007, the discussion focused on participants’ assessments of the high rates of inflation in recent months, the economy’s rapid growth and its effect on inflation, an analysis of the factors affecting the shekel exchange rate, and the implications for Israel’s economy and financial markets of the shocks felt in the previous month in the international financial markets All the department directors participating in the discussion recommended raising the interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.0 percent.
The Bank will use the tools available to it to achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard will continue to keep a close watch on developments in the asset markets, including the housing market.
The moderation in the rate on increase of home prices in recent months comes against the background of the continued increase in the number of building starts, the lagged effect of the increase in the interest rate, measures introduced by the Bank of Israel affecting mortgages, and steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in real estate taxation.
At that time Israel’s financial markets remained relatively stable, and the NIS behaved similarly to the currencies of the advanced economies.
Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.0–1.25 percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate, and 0.25 percentage points higher than the ECB rate.
With that, against the background of the concern of the debt crisis in Europe and the dovish speech of ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet in his announcement about leaving the interest rate unchanged (despite a rise in the level of inflation to 2.7 percent in March) and the sharp drop in commodity prices, the dollar strengthened 2.1 percent against the euro since the last monetary policy meeting.
Within this framework, it appears that growth rates in several countries around the world, even those outside Europe, declined.
Committee members also discussed the extent to which the recent months' increase in geopolitical risk in the region affected the underperformance of Israel's stock market relative to world stock markets, the depreciation of the shekel against the dollar, and the exit of capital from Israel.
Since the beginning of the year short-term real interest has risen by one percentage point.
The Committee members noted that the growth in imports also supports the assessment that the slowing rate of growth reflects a supply constraint, as the increase in domestic demand is satisfied by imports and less so by domestic production.
The easing of the debt crisis in Europe, the continuing improvement in the United States, and particularly the LTRO tenders, continue to be the major factors supporting the positive sentiment in capital markets worldwide.
There is an apparent slight easing in the labor shortage constraint as reported by employers in a number of industries, and the job vacancy rate remains high but is declining moderately.
Committee members discussed developments in fiscal policy as well.
The impact on home prices of the LTV ratio limitations, which were imposed by the Supervisor of Banks and went into effect at the beginning of November, was not reflected in December mortgage data, but is expected to be seen beginning in January.
The major harm on real activity will be felt through tourism.
It also announced its intention of ending its program of purchases of mortgage backed securities (MBS) at the end of March, as planned, but left itself the freedom to renew its intervention in the market if necessary.
Over the past 12 months, prices of tradable goods in the CPI declined by 2.2 percent, and the prices of nontradable items increased by 0.5 percent.
Several weak spots still persist: the marked divergence between the acceleration in global production and the sluggishness in the services sector; the continued severity of bank credit terms; and the weakness of the US labor market.
Tax revenues in the three months August–October, seasonally adjusted and allowing for changes in tax legislation and nonrecurring receipts, were 2.5 percent higher than in May–July.
That member explained that the rate of inflation for the past 12 months had been above the path consistent with price stability and that expectations of inflation as derived from the capital market for the coming year, as well as the assessments of forecasters, are above the center of the target range.
With that, after publication of the October CPI, expectations rose slightly to 1.9 percent.
Committee members discussed the vigorous activity in the housing market and the elevated volume of new mortgages extended to home buyers.
In the three months December to February the nominal wage per employee post increased by 6.4 percent compared with the average in the previous three months, and the real wage increased by 3.3 percent (seasonally adjusted, in annual terms).
The Committee also discussed the uncertainty at the current time in view of the cyclicality of waves of morbidity, and the political uncertainty in Israel. '
Forecasters' one-year inflation expectations stood at 2.2 percent in March and April, with the range of their forecasts narrowing in April to between capital market and those of forecasters have been close to the midpoint of the target range for more than a year.
They noted that the inflation registered in the local component (of the consumer price index) indicated the force of demand in the economy acting on inflation, and though these forces were currently being offset by the strengthening of the shekel, they are still in the pipeline.
The ECB interest rate is still 1 percent, and is expected to remain at that level until the first quarter of 2011 at least.
The composite state-of-the-economy index for March showed another decline, of 0.9 percent, following the declines (month-on-month) of 1.2 percent in February, 1.4 percent in January and 1.1 percent in December.
The seasonally adjusted monthly rise in the index in the last three months, particularly the index excluding owner-occupied housing, was significantly slower than that in the previous six months.
After taking all the above into consideration, the Governor decided to raise the interest rate for August by 25 basis points to 4 percent, in order to support the return of inflation and inflation expectations to around the middle of the target range.
In the current discussions on the interest rate for March, three members of management participated in the discussion, and all three recommended that the Governor increase the interest rate by 0.25 of a percentage point, to 2.5 percent.
Their assessment was that these factors do not reflect a weakness of demand.
The Bank of Israel Research Department's most recent macroeconomic forecast was formulated in June.
Of the total housing credit advanced in December, 47 percent was unindexed at floating interest rates, compared with the monthly average of 50.4 percent in the whole of 2010.
The financial markets reacted with stability to the events in the north.
Germany and France actually recorded positive growth of 0.3 percent.
Since the beginning of the year this index has climbed by 13 percent.
About half of the forecasters expected the interest rate for June to rise, and the other half expected no change in the rate.
As such, market assessments are that the US Federal Reserve is expected to begin raising the interest rate already in March, and that the ECB is also expected to raise the interest rate this year.
In addition, the Committee members noted that despite the increase in inflation in recent months, it remains relatively low, so that it is at the bottom of the distribution among OECD countries.
GDP is changing consistently with these developments, with increases in capital utilization and labor productivity.
In May, the stock of vacant homes available for sale remained stable at 21,000, after a trend of increase in the past year.
The investment houses expect, on average, growth in Europe to reach 2.6 percent in 2007.
In the second quarter the index rose by 0.7 percent, compared with an increase of 1.4 percent in the first quarter.
Nevertheless, they noted that activity was still at a low level, that the output gap was expected to continue widening, and that unemployment was expected to increase in the next few months.
The extent of uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the fighting is high, and this has an effect on the extent of adverse impact on activity as well.
The Committee members assessed that the effects of the depreciation have not been fully expressed, and that it is expected to continue to support exports and growth, and will continue to contribute to returning inflation to the price stability target range.
As noted, there was a significant dampening of the risk-off atmosphere (risk aversion), which was also reflected in the decline of the VIX index to 31 points from about 41 points last month.
In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel stressed the following conditions that led to the above decision: - Inflation in the last twelve months was close to the midpoint of the target inflation range, but inflation expectations calculated from the capital market for one year ahead and those of the private forecasters remain in the area of the upper limit of the target inflation range.
In June, the nonfinancial business sector issued bonds totaling NIS 3.6 billion, higher than the average over the past 12 months (NIS 2.8 billion), and foreign companies continued to issue bonds at a relatively high pace.
The CPIindexed bonds yield curve became steeper: long-term yields increased by between 12 b.p.
Among the contributing factors to the decline in consumer prices were the continued decline in the food and fruit and vegetables components, and the moderation in the increase in the housing component, with the latter remaining unchanged this month.
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.4 percent in February, which indicates that economic activity continued to expand, though at a slower pace than in the previous few months.
In the last twelve months the CPI rose by 3.6 percent, 0.5 percentage points of which were attributable to government actions (mainly changes in the VAT rate and the water surcharge).
These cuts, against the background of the relatively stable inflation expectations for one year forward, had reduced the short term real interest rate to a low level, thus encouraging economic activity.
The banking sector around the world, specifically in Europe, is under pressure due to its exposure to bonds of countries in difficulty.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/28-8-19.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
Despite a downward adjustment to the figure for GDP in the fourth quarter of 2009 from 1.1 percent to 0.9 percent, that is still a good figure for growth in Japan, as it is based also on consumption and not only on exports.
The Bank's assessment of growth in the third quarter of 2009 was about 2.1 percent (annual rate, compared with the previous quarter, seasonally adjusted), compared with growth of 1 percent in the second quarter of the year, and a negative 3.3 percent in the first.
Under the assumption that the state’s income from the sale of Iscar, totaling NIS 4.5 billion, will be received in the course of 2006, total government revenue is likely to exceed the budget forecast significantly.
It should be mentioned that the contractionary measures taken in some economies (raising of the interest rate and regulatory measures), which were meant to prevent overheating, together with signs of a slowdown in the developed economies, the high level of volatility in the financial markets and the outflow of capital, have increased fears of a more significant slowdown in growth in these markets.
The yield on one-year _makam increased to about 2.2 percent in April, from about 2.0 percent in_ March.
In the US, economic activity remained at a high level, and above the trend, and the labor market remained tight.
Goods exports excluding ships, airplanes and diamonds dropped by 5.7 percent in August, after falling 2.8 percent in July.
The risk of default of some European countries as reflected by the high yields on their bonds and by their CDS spreads were expressed this month in the downgrading of the sovereign credit rating of major European economies.
The World Bank slightly raised its 2010 growth forecast for the Far Eastern economies, from 8.7 percent to 8.9 percent.
The Committee members noted that the year over year inflation rate remained low, below the lower bound of the target range, but that 1-year expectations remained stable near the lower bound of the target range.
Forecasts of growth in Europe were revised downwards, and according to the Eurostat forecast, growth in the eurozone in 2009 is expected to be between minus one percent and zero, and in 2010, between 0.5 percent and 1.5 percent.
Second, the decline in goods exports from Israel was affected by temporary labor disruptions in the chemicals industry.
Tel-Bond yield gaps vis-à-vis government bonds narrowed this month.
The impact on inflation of these developments is expected to continue to be felt in the future.
The Tel-Bond indices showed only small movement: the Tel-Bond 20 index dropped by 0.2 percent, and the Tel-Bond 40 by government bonds widened just a little, by about 2 b.p, as yields on government bonds also increased.
The most important data regarding the severity of the crisis and how long it will last relate––the housing market––continue to present a bleak picture, but activity declined at a slightly slower pace.
The cumulative extent of the crisis is beginning to be felt in the labor market and is reflected in an increase in the number of people laid off due to businesses being closed.
They were of the opinion that this low interest rate level supports the recovery of economic activity and the gradual return of the inflation rate to within the target range, and in particular in view of the fact that the government bond purchase program continues and that the Committee decided on the 3 new steps.
The number of salaried posts in the economy rose in the last quarter of 2007 by 4.9 percent relative to the same period in 2006.
The surplus on balance-of-payments current account continued to grow in the first half of 2006, and reached $3.6 billion (almost 5.5 percent of mid-year GDP).
On average, the Israeli forecasters assess that the CPI for April, May and June will rise by a total 0.6 percent, and that inflation viewed retrospectively over twelve months is expected to be below the target range for most of 2007.
The UK, despite positive GDP growth in the last quarter of 2009 and a rise in the consumers' confidence index, also faces the risk of a debt crisis.
The Tel-Bond 20 Index and the Tel-Bond 40 Index increased by 1.4 percent and 1.5 percent, respectively.
Nonetheless, the disappointing figures on wages in the last two months threaten the continuation of this trend.
Eurozone inflation accelerated in February to 0.4 percent, an annual rate of 2.4 percent, the highest rate since October 2008, and the third consecutive month with inflation higher than the 2 percent ECB target.
At a more fundamental level, the prevailing estimate was that long-term players were continuing to bring considerable amounts of long-term capital into the economy.
Home prices, which are presented in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are not included in the CPI, increased at a monthly rate of 0.4 percent in June–July, after rising 0.2 percent in May–June (an estimate that was revised down this month).
The Committee members were of the opinion that this step will strengthen the program’s support of liquidity and of the orderly functioning of the Israeli bond markets.
Thereafter, in light of concern over a possible increase in the interest rate in China, there was a sharp correction to commodity prices.
In the discussion on the global environment, the Committee members said that most central banks worldwide continue to adopt very accommodative monetary policy, while in the US, the Federal Reserve increased the federal funds rate and the expected path of the interest rate rose as well.
Furthermore, in his opinion the current rate of interest is lower than that appropriate to equilibrium in the domestic asset markets in light of the persistent increase in house prices and the continued increase in outstanding mortgages.
During the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the shekel strengthened against the dollar, from about NIS 3.58 to the dollar (on February 25[th]) to NIS 3.52 (on March 24[th]), i.e., an appreciation of about 1.7 percent.
The shekel strengthened by about 2.2 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
Outstanding credit to households declined by 0.2 percent, to NIS 360 billion.
The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor worldwide economic developments and the situation in Israel closely, and will act to encourage employment and growth, to support the stability of the financial system, and to achieve price stability.
In this context it was noted that activity had actually accelerated in the last few months, as reflected in the recent rises in the composite state-of-the-economy indices.
The government's support programs and the reviving private sector continue to constitute the main engines of growth.
The Composite State of the Economy Index increased by job vacancy rate, but declines in goods exports and in industrial production were notably negative components.
They added that they did not expect the rise in commodity prices to continue to act as a major inflationary element in 2008.
The Committee discussed the impacts of the war on financial markets and the foreign exchange market.
According to data form the US Department of Transportation, the stock of vehicles held by households is approaching unprecedentedly low levels, so that the US economy may enjoy the benefit of support from a continued increase in vehicle production.
Rates of interest on indexed fixed- and floating-interest-rate mortgages continued to decline, and those on unindexed floating-rate mortgages remained stable in the last few months.
The marked decline in the unemployment rate in the second quarter, reflecting the continued narrowing of the output gap, was discussed.
As a result of the cut in the Bank of Israel interest rate for February and the rise in inflation expectations, the expected real interest rate for one year forward fell in February from a level of 3.6 percent to about 2.9 percent, its lowest level in the last year.
Though share prices fell and the NIS depreciated, these changes occurred within the first few days of fighting.
Such purchases of medium- and long-term bonds on the secondary market directly supports the lowering of interest in the economy also for longer terms, thereby helping to support economic activity.
Against this background, there were sharp declines in equity markets around the world, and yield spreads widened between distressed debt countries and the US, and between distressed debt countries and Germany.
In contrast, the Committee member who recommended leaving the interest rate unchanged felt that despite the risks to growth seen from developments abroad, growth is still stable, while there are marked risks to the stability of growth stemming from fiscal policy.
However, even under such a scenario, some harm is possible to some industries such as the construction and tourism industries.
They argued that a cut of this magnitude reflected a balance between opposing forces.
Data published since the previous interest rate discussions indicate that the expansion in real economic activity in Israel is continuing, with increased uncertainty regarding the continuation of the rapid rate of growth.
The war has significant economic ramifications, both on real activity and on the financial markets.
The rise in food and energy prices contributed to this acceleration.
Nonetheless, central banks in several countries that are already growing relatively rapidly continued with the process of increasing their interest rates last month, and are expected to continue to do so in the near future.
However, data on exports going forward remain mixed: there is a positive decline in the percentage of companies reporting a severe constraint of a shortage of export orders (based on the Business Tendency Survey), while at the same a slowing in goods exports is seen in April (based on foreign trade data).
Taking all the above points into consideration, the Governor decided to leave the interest rate for August unchanged at 3.25 percent.
The purchasing managers index rose for the tenth month in succession, and reached exports by France and Germany to Asia.
The surplus in the current account of the balance of payments totaled $2.1 billion in the second quarter of 2009, following a similar surplus ($2.3 billion) in the first quarter.
These reflect the contraction of economic activity in the last few months, with the rate of decline moderating.
The weak European growth figures in the fourth quarter of 2009 support the assessment that the recovery has lost some momentum, with the main disappointment being caused by Germany, the major eurozone engine of growth, which had zero growth in that quarter.
Domestic uses declined by 2 percent in the second quarter (annual rate, change from previous quarter).
Labor market data for the third quarter of 2010 show a continuation of the positive trend: although the rate of unemployment rose slightly in the third quarter compared with the second, this was due to a higher rate of participation on the labor market with a concurrent increase in the employment rate.
Israeli forecasters’ assessment of one-year inflation dropped in the month since the last interest rate decision to 1.5 percent, on average, below the midpoint of the target range.
In addition, the Committee discussed developments in the global economy, particularly the effects of the war in eastern Europe on oil and other commodity prices and the transmission to domestic inflation, as well as the rapid growth in advanced economies alongside high inflation and the beginning of a contractionary monetary policy process that followed it.
That would have the effect of moderating the rate of inflation in the course of 2010.
The Committee has therefore decided that conditions allow for the start of a gradual process of increasing the interest rate.
Nonetheless, the implications for the supply of energy resources are likely to be significant and long term, and are likely to impact on future growth.
The Committee members noted that certain factors can delay the return of inflation to the target at this time, including (1) the decline in oil prices—in recent days there was a decline, and if it continues it is likely to slow inflation, and (2) increased competition—competition has been enhanced, among other reasons, because online purchases of consumer goods have expanded markedly in the past decade.
In the month between the previous interest rate discussions and the current ones, concern mounted over the budget deficits and debts of several European countries, leading to sharp changes in financial markets.
The yield to maturity on unindexed government bonds increased along almost the entire curve, by up to 29 basis points The yield to maturity on one-year _makam increased over the period by 18 b.p., to_ about 2.41 percent.
Political pressures to increase budget spending both to improve defense preparedness disengagement spending will be lower in 2007 than it was in 2006. and to tackle welfare-related issues increased uncertainty about the government’s budget decision before it was approved in September.
In March the IMF published a forecast of negative world growth in 2009 of between 0.5 percent and 1 percent (annual rate), compared with its previous forecast in October 2008 of The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios.
Against this background, the ECB left the interest rate unchanged at one percent.
Nevertheless, the forecasters and the Fed continue with their assessment that at least part of the recent slowdown is due to temporary factors, including the severe winter weather that adversely impacted on the construction industry, the damage to the supply chain caused by the earthquake in Japan, and the increase in commodity (in particular fuel) prices to levels that affect consumption and growth, and they therefore hope that the US market will improve in the second half of the year.
There was an examination of Israel’s inflation environment, which despite the April CPI data remains low compared to most advanced economies worldwide.
Committee members are of the opinion that important factors in the increase in home prices at this time are a slowing of planning processes and the decline in the rate of marketing properties.
Mortgage volume continued to be high.
The three participants who recommended reducing the interest rate by one percentage point for January were of the opinion that the larger cut in the rate would increase the effectiveness of the policy of supporting growth, and that the risks associated with a one-percentage-point reduction in the interest rate were not high.
Manufacturing production came as a positive surprise with the sharpest increase for seven years, and various confidence indices continue to indicate expansion.
The Committee discussed the potential for declines in financial markets and the lack of stability seen in them in recent weeks to impact on the domestic economy.
The Committee members discussed the moderation of global economic activity, the downward revision of global growth forecasts, and the change in expectations regarding the path of global interest rates and monetary policy.
While the relatively high growth rate in the fourth quarter was impacted by volatility in vehicle imports, growth was still 3.7 percent in the second half of the year as a whole.
The members assessed that the slowdown in the second and third quarters apparently derived partly from the growth rate declining from the high rate of recent years, to its potential environment, and partly from transitory factors— the volatility in vehicle imports.
At the same time, inflation expectations from various sources for the next 12 months show stability after the increase they registered last month.
Taking into consideration the high degree of uncertainty regarding the debt crises in the US and in Europe; the slowdown in the global economy and its expected negative effect of Israel's growth already in the second quarter; the interest rate differentials between Israel and the major economies; the moderation of actual inflation, the stable inflation expectations and inflation forecasts; the assessment that the interest rate increases and the measures introduced in the real estate sector will soon start to have an effect, three members of the narrow forum recommended leaving the interest rate unchanged for August.
Although the markets have been calm in the past few days with the fall in share prices moderating, it is not clear if the rise in risk aversion will continue or if it is only temporary.
In contrast, public services[1] registered a drop of 3.1 percent in number of people employed In contrast to the preceding quarter, the expansion in total employment in this quarter was entirely – and more – due to a rise in full-time jobs.
Reports from companies participating in the Bank of Israel’s Companies Survey for the third quarter of 2008 (preliminary results based on reports from about half of the participating companies) indicate that the rate of expansion of business activity was slower than in the previous quarter.
In the last twelve months the housing price index increased by 6.5 percent, compared with increases of 5.9 percent in January and 4.5 percent in December.
Alongside that, the Committee members noted that several other indicators could point to expected moderation in the market: the number of home purchase transactions continues to decline and new mortgage volume in November is approaching the preCOVID-19-crisis average level.
The data presented on real activity indicated that the economy was recovering rapidly from the impact of the fighting in the north.
According to one of the Bank of Israel’s econometric models, the inflation rate of the domestic component of the CPI was 4 percent (2007:Q1 compared with 2006:Q1), while the component of the CPI directly affected by the exchange rate fell by 4.6 percent in the same period.
[3] This was due mainly to the appreciation of the shekel against the euro by about 2.8 percent, and by about 1.7 percent against the dollar.
They also emphasized that the Committee has a variety of tools to expand monetary accommodation if necessary.
The very modest increase in exports (excluding diamonds) was also noted.
In contrast, there has been an increase in new mortgage volume and in borrowers’ LTV ratios while the mortgage interest rate has remained stable.
The output gap and the ending in due course of the effects of the non-recurring price increases that resulted from government actions - The continued gradual recovery in economic activity suggests that the current environment is one of recovery from the recession but there is uncertainty regarding the strength of the recovery in Israel, in part because of the uncertainty about the recovery in the global economy.
The average rate of unemployment is expected to be 6.1 percent in 2008.
That would be consistent with the gradual return to a normal interest rate environment in light of the cumulative increases since the beginning of the year, and is also consistent with the efforts to gradually attain the inflation target, taking into account the other considerations described above.
In this context it should be noted that the transmission between a reduction in the Bank of Israel interest rate and a reduction in the interest changed to borrower by banks is weakened at such low rates of interest.
The December Consumer Price Index (CPI) was unchanged, lower than the Bank of Israel's assessment that it would rise by about 0.4 percent, and the average of that of the private forecasters, of a rise of about 0.3 percent.
However, the (continued) decline in goods exports and in industrial production were notably negative aspects among the components.
The path of the interest rate in the future depends on developments in the inflation environment, growth in Israel and in the global economy, the monetary policies of major central banks, and developments in the exchange rate of the shekel.
It seems that the markets brought forward by a few months their forecast of the timing of an increase in the interest rate in the US.
The forecasters predict that twelve months hence the interest rate will be 2.8 percent.
The nominal yield on unindexed 5-year government bonds rose during the last month by about 0.2 percentage points to an average of 5.4 percent.
National Accounts data indicated high growth and that the level of GDP moved closer to around the level that would have been expected if not for the COVID-19 crisis.
Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread increased slightly this month to 150 basis points, in contrast to CDS spread declines in most countries.
The gap between the yields on unindexed shekel bonds and US 10-year bonds widened during the last month from 77 basis points on July 23 to 139 basis points on August 26.
of Israel Annual Report for 2006, pp.
Economy activity has gained momentum in the last few months, and the economy is expected to recover in the second quarter, although growth is still expected to be below its potential, assessed at about 3 percent.
In addition, the Committee members noted that the upward trend in mortgage interest rates is continuing and in parallel there appears to be some slowdown in mortgage volumes.
Likewise, the job vacancy rate declined moderately in most of the previous months, but is still very high.
The participants discussed several issues, primarily: an assessment of real economic activity; global developments, and the risks to the Israeli economy deriving from those developments; the housing market; and fiscal policy and the budget deficit.
The point was also made that according to the Research Department forecast, inflation is expected to decline to within the target range in the next twelve months, assuming that the interest rate rises gradually to 4.2 percent.
Indicators published in the last month (in the period from the decision on the January interest rate on December 27, 2010 till the current decision on January 24, 2011), showed that activity continued to increase in most sectors of the economy.
The index of manufacturing production (seasonally adjusted) rose in December by 0.7 percent, after falling by 0.6 percent in November.
The investment houses on average expect that the Fed will lower the interest rate by contracts on the Fed interest rate reflect a 100 percent probability of a cut of 25 basis points in the rate for the same period.
Some of the participants noted that there were forces acting to moderate the rate of increase in housing prices.
In the three months September–November the nominal wage dropped by 1.1 percent and the real wage dropped by 4.3 percent, compared with the level in June–August (seasonally adjusted, annual rate).
The Committee members noted the high infection coefficient and the sharp increase in the rate of morbidity in Israel.
Based on revenues and expenditure till now, the domestic deficit in 2008 excluding credit is expected to be below the ceiling of 1.6 percent of GDP set by the government.
Over the past twelve months the CPI has fallen by 1.3 percent, significantly below the inflation target.
This contrasts with the usual trend of an increase in mortgages in the summer months.
The Department assesses the balance of risks with regard to the growth forecast to the downside, while with regard to inflation and the deficit the balance of risks tends to the upside.
They noted, among other things, the low level of investment in residential construction (despite the increase in building starts in the second quarter).
From the previous monetary policy discussion held on February 26, 2012, through March 23, 2012, the Tel Aviv 25 Index increased by 4 percent, against the background of the announcement by the Supervisor of Banks about the upward path of core capital ratios in the banking system over the next few years, a less steep path than the market had expected.
On the other hand, the rapid growth in 2007 and the attendant contraction of the output gap creates upward pressure on prices.
In contrast, the Composite State of the Economy Index, which increased by 0.2 percent in June, indicates that the economy continues to expand, with stabilization of the growth rate in the second quarter at a similar pace to that of the first quarter of the year.
Financial market traders became more risk averse, and bond and CDS spreads widened in several countries in Europe.
In the month prior to the interest rate decision, short-term real interest rates rose by about 0.2 of a percentage point to a level of 4 percent (up to 4 years) while long-term real interest rates reached a level of 3.8 percent (10 years).
The index of consumer sentiment rose to 107.8 points in February, and expectations of manufacturing and services industries in February indicate optimism.
Goods and services exports fell by 9.6 percent in the third quarter, the first decline after four quarters of rapid growth.
Other participants in the discussion are the Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, and economists from various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion.
ON 7 OCTOBER 2008 In the narrow-forum discussion, five members of the management made recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate of interest.
In the light of the above considerations, the department directors each recommended that the Governor raise the interest rate for May by 25 basis points.
There was increased concern this month regarding a significant slowdown in the US economy and in world growth.
The US Consumer Price Index rose by 4.1 percent in 2007.
Since the beginning of the year, the domestic deficit (excluding credit) has totaled NIS 12.9 billion, 1.6 percent of GDP.
Based on forecasters’ projections, inflation is expected to continue to increase in the coming months but to return to the within the target range during 2023.
Several issues were discussed, including the expected path of inflation and inflation expectations, an assessment of the environment of real economic activity including reference to developments around the world, and geopolitical risks.
Makam yields declined by about 25–35 basis points along the entire curve, with one year yields at only 1.96 percent during the period.
Inflation expectations for two years and longer increased slightly and currently range between 2.3 percent and 2.4 percent.
There was another very small increase in commodity prices this month, partly related to the developments regarding a boycott of Iran.
As was stated in the report of the previous interest rate discussions, the Bank of Israel's policy is to continue with the gradual process of bringing the interest rate back to a more "normal" level that reflects the recovery in economic activity, and that is required to place inflation firmly in the target inflation range.
There was a decline in new mortgages granted in June, and as a result, for the first time since July 2009, total mortgages extended in the previous twelve months declined, by 1.4 percent.
They said that in recent years, Israel’s services exports have been growing rapidly relative to the world, while goods exports were weak relative to the world.
However, it was emphasized that there is a very high level of variation among industries.
However, foreign direct investment in the emerging markets, which have hitherto been unaffected, may suffer from the consequences of the increased severity of financial conditions in the advanced economies.
The rate of reduction in unit labor costs has moderated, however.
Nonetheless, China continued to publish very buoyant economic data, most of which exceeded expectations: growth at an annual rate of 9.5 percent in the first quarter of 2011 (compared with the forecast of 9.3 percent), an improved surplus in the trade balance, an increase in retail sales, an increase in housing loans, an increase in manufacturing production, and rises in house prices––all these increases were greater than the forecasts.
recent stabilization, continue to pose risks to a global economic recovery.
The appreciation of the shekel is expected to moderate the forecast slightly.
Looking one year ahead, inflation is expected to be around the midpoint of the target range, with the interest rate increasing during level of the interest rate.
The contrasting developments of the domestic price component and the import price component in shekels stress the high contribution of the shekel's appreciation to the low inflation rate.
In light of the indications of a slowdown in the growth rate of the Israeli economy, led by a decline in exports against the background of greater uncertainty about world growth, and in light of the macroprudential measures introduced by the Bank of Israel and their implications for inflation, the Governor decided to keep the rate of interest unchanged for December, at 2 percent.
Real activity continues to expand, but some indicators suggest that it is doing so at a somewhat slower pace.
The forecasters expect, on average, that in the three months January to March 2010 the CPI will rise by a total of between –0.3 percent and +0.2 percent.
The growth rate of the money supply (M1) over the previous twelve months has been slowing since the beginning of the year and in October it stood at 5.6 percent, down from 11.5 percent in September.
With that, the members assessed that the risks have grown: the growth rate of world trade is moderating against the background of the developing trade war and apparently also against the background of a change in the structure of China’s economy.
The amount of nonresidents’ activity in the makam market declined this month.
The main factors which stood out this month were the declines in the transport and communication component and in energy prices, and the more moderate than expected increase in the housing component and in seasonal components—clothing and footwear and fruit and vegetables.
In the last twelve months the CPI has increased by 2.5 percent, within the target inflation range.
Inflation expectations to one year ahead derived from the capital market––break-even inflation––rose moderately from October to November, by 0.1 of a percentage point, to 1.5 percent.
The recession in the eurozone continues—in the final quarter of 2012, all 4 of the major economies in the eurozone, as well as the overall eurozone economy itself, contracted at a sharper than expected rate.
Goods exports (excluding diamonds) increased by about 6.5 percent in December from their November level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted).
The Federal Reserve has said that the fed funds rate is expected to remain at its near zero level until at least the middle of - The rate of increase in home prices over the twelve months which ended in August remains relatively stable at a high level of over 12 percent, though low compared with the 20 percent levels of the previous 12 months.
The main feature of the corporate bond market, especially in holding companies, was the continued rise in yields on bonds of several companies.
The Committee assessed that the economy continues to grow by around its potential rate, and that data for the first quarter of 2019, net of increased vehicle imports, indicates growth slightly lower than 3 percent (based on the Research Department’s assessment).
Goods exports, and in particular manufactured goods exports, remained essentially unchanged in June (the first declining by 0.1 percent and the second increasing by 0.1 percent), following their decreases in April and May.
At the time of these discussions of the interest rate for October, the slope of the interest rate in the next twelve months.
As economic activity increased, so did the number of employees in most of the principal industries.
Nevertheless, the Bank of Israel notes that the slowdown in growth in the advanced economies, particularly the US, is expected to affect Israel’s economy.
In the narrow forum, which consists of the Monetary Committee and the Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, the latter two present their recommendations regarding the interest rate.
This could be learned this month from indicators of economic activity, foreign trade figures and labor market data.
However, home prices increased by 0.6 percent in the past month, and by 2.9 percent over the past 6 months.
The slowdown in growth of Israel's economy is seen in exports and in domestic demand, against the background of weakness in the global economy and the significant uncertainty existing in the global environment, primarily around Europe.
The outstanding debt of the business sector increased in February by 0.6 percent, to NIS 771 billion.
As stated the QE2 program ended this month.
However, in the short term, there is expected to be some difficulty in measuring inflation, which is reflected in particular in the 27 percent of CPI components where activity was near zero in March.
The Committee was of the view that the solution to home price increases is expanding supply and providing certainty that the scope of construction will be high for a prolonged time.
Most of them expect a further similar reduction in December.
The September index of trade and services revenue fell by 0.7 percent, after rising a bit in August.
Monetary policy at the major central banks continues to be very accommodative.
Japan continues to exhibit impressive recovery in economic activity: GDP grew by private consumption which was itself supported by the government, although in the previous quarters exports to the West and to China were the main engine of growth.
Actual budget expenditure figures indicate a domestic deficit, excluding net credit granted in the year to date through July, of NIS 9.3 billion, compared with a deficit of NIS 3.6 billion in the corresponding period of 2011.
In January–April, there was a slowdown in the rate of growth of employee posts, reflecting a slowdown in a wide range of industries.
However, there has recently been some decrease in the risks of a marked slowdown deriving from a deterioration in the “trade war” between the US and China and from a “hard Brexit”.
The data also indicate a rise in demand for workers with low earning capacity.
Japan’s economy is showing signs of slowing: industrial production contracted in May and retail sales grew moderately.
The Committee members said that on a seasonally adjusted basis, the recent CPI readings were relatively high, but they noted that certain factors continue to delay the return of inflation at this time, including the government’s activities to reduce the cost of living and to enhance competition, and online purchases of consumer goods having expanded markedly in the past decade.
The main increase occurred in CPI-indexed, fixed interest mortgages, although unindexed floating interest mortgages still constitute the major part of the mortgage market.
This is reflected in the CDS, which increased by about 30 points to a record of 165 points during the reviewed period, and in the spread that continues to widen between 10-year Israeli government (dollar) bonds and 10-year US Treasuries.
The reduction of Spain's debt rating by Fitch from AAA to AA+ and the announcement of the nationalization of a small regional bank in Spain while four regional banks had to merge caused concern that the crisis in Spain's banking system was becoming more severe, and led to apprehension of contagion affecting other European countries.
The Committee noted that the fast pace of the inoculation process in Israel increases the optimism regarding a rapid return of the economy to a path of growth in the coming year.
During the month between the previous and the current interest rate discussions (22 June to 27 July), the shekel weakened against the dollar, from NIS 3.35 to NIS 3.49 to the dollar, a drop of about 4 percent.
The Monetary Committee discussed the domestic capital market, in which equity indices rose, and the yield on long-term government bonds and corporate bond spreads remained essentially unchanged, with a decline in the balance of tradable debt.
Inflation expectations for terms of 2 years and longer (monthly averages) range from 2.3 percent to 2.5 percent.
The recovery in the global economy continued this month, although some slowing in its rate was evident, and the level of optimism regarding the global economy, and in particular the US and European economies, declined.
- Most indicators, including initial findings from the Bank of Israel Companies Survey for the first quarter of 2010, suggest that real activity continued to expand in that quarter.
A further sharp decrease was recorded this month in the bond yields of the problematic economies, a fall of around 100 basis points on average, for most time periods.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](http://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/26-2-18.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest for the economy.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was published on July 10, and in the data file that accompanied the notice.
From the previous interest rate decision through March 17, the shekel weakened by 11 percent in terms of the effective exchange rate, but after the Bank of Israel instituted dollar/shekel swap transactions, the volatility declined and the weakening of the shekel moderated to 3.4 percent since the previous interest rate decision.
With that, assessments are that in the longer term the debt crisis will continue to present a major risk.
The nominal yield gaps between Israel and the US for five and ten years widened in August by 0.2 and 0.1 of a percentage point respectively, due to a greater drop in yields in the US than in Israel.
The Bank of Israel's composite state-of-the-economy index for October rose by 0.5 percent (compared with the previous month), following an increase at the same rate in the September index and 0.6 percent in the August index.
The statement by the Chinese Premier that the government will refine its monetary policy to deal with the slowdown in 2012 and that the economy is entering a difficult period strengthen the above assessment.
The rate of unemployment, however, suggests a positive trend, with a second consecutive steep reduction, from 9.4 percent to 9 percent.
Interest rates on new fixed rate, CPI-indexed mortgages declined in April, while the interest rate on variable rate mortgages remained stable.
The forecast also gave a derived gradual increase in the Bank of Israel interest rate to an average of 2.8 percent in a year's time (the average in the third quarter of 2011).
Despite this, the risk of a sharp correction in the markets remains high, against the backdrop of the high volatility in the various investment channels, and the sensitivity to economic developments worldwide, particularly Europe.
In contrast, following the decline in prices of the imported components of the index over the past year, the fall continued in the first quarter of of the domestic component of the CPI was 4 percent (2007:Q1 compared with Inflation expectations for one year ahead derived from the capital market––breakeven inflation––declined by 0.8 percentage points to 0.5 percent, significantly below than the lower limit of the target range.
In contrast, agricultural commodity prices increased by 5 percent this month.
In the last twelve months the CPI increased by 2.5 percent, and the index excluding housing went up by only 1.4 percent.
Real economic data around the world continue to indicate weakness.
During the past month, the expectation has strengthened that the slowdown in economic growth in the US will continue into 2009, which will affect other economies worldwide.
Health tax receipts in June, which provide an indication of wage payments in that month, were 7.6 percent higher, in nominal terms, than in June 2010 (excluding the effect of legislative changes).
He added that the countries with prevailing low inflation took drastic measures to extract themselves from it.
Four committee members supported the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged, while one member supported increasing it to 0.5 percent.
The discussions also noted the centrality of the construction industry and of exports as potential sources of growth.
The participants in the discussion stated that a decision not to change the interest rate this month would be consistent with the achievement of the inflation target.
This was despite a marked exit by nonresident investors at the beginning of the month following the redemption of a bond series and a decline in market expectations regarding additional interest rate reductions by the Bank of Israel.
Moreover, in Israel and around the world questions arise regarding the functioning of the financial system when interest paid to depositors is close to zero.
Against this background it is more probable that the upward trend of interest rates will continue in many central banks throughout the world.
In contrast, in Europe there is an increase in morbidity that has led the major countries in the eurozone to announce a renewal of the lockdown policy.
The figures published in the US during the month showed a continued slowdown in growth, and in the second quarter the rate (in annual terms) was only 1 percent, significantly lower than the expected rate of 1.8 percent, and the figure for the first quarter was adjusted sharply downwards, from 1.9 percent to only 0.4 percent.
The number of employee posts rose by 4.2 percent last year (September to November post increased by 2 percent over the same period, and the gross real wage per employee post declined by 0.1 percent.
The Chinese government is persisting in its efforts to cool the economy, raising the commercial banks’ liquidity requirements to 17.5 percent, and making declarations about possible intervention in the money markets and about appreciation of the yen.
With regard to home prices, the members said that in recent months stability is apparent.
In the US, the investment houses expect (on average) that the Fed interest rate will remain at its current low level of 0 percent to 0.25 percent into 2010.
Home prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are not included in the CPI, increased in February–March by 0.3 percent, after an increase of 0.1 percent in January–February.
In contrast, prices of the imported components of the index which had fallen over the past year, continued to fall in the first quarter of 2007.
The data on real activity indicated that the economy was recovering rapidly from the impact of the war in the north in the third quarter.
Goods imports (excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) increased by 5.8 percent in July from their June level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted), after remaining level in the second quarter.
The four participants recommending no change stressed the fact that inflation, currently 5 percent measured over the previous twelve months, was significantly above the target range.
For example, preliminary data from the Companies Survey indicate that the second quarter growth rate is around the potential rate.
Based on developments to date and on the assumption of almost complete expenditure of the budget, and assuming the upward trend in tax revenues will persist until the end of the year, the total deficit (excluding credit) in 2010 is expected to amount to less than 4 percent of GDP (compared with the ceiling of 5.5 percent of GDP).
Inflation expectations for the next year as derived from the capital market––breakeven inflation––have been close to the midpoint of the inflation target range for the past three months, and stood at 1.8 percent in August.
The Committee will expand the use of the existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will operate additional ones, to the extent that it assesses that it is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and to moderate the adverse economic impact resulting from the crisis.
Analysis of the responses of all the participating companies shows that in most industries, the increase in activity is expected to continue in the fourth quarter, the exceptions being in the hotel and commerce sectors.
According to the survey of business trends, and the forecast derived from the data for the number of employees, a recovery in employee recruitment is expected in the coming months.
Fixed investment continued to increase, and in the fourth quarter it rose at a rate of 15.9 percent.
With that, Committee members assessed that there is a strong commitment to finding a solution to the crisis, an assessment reflected as well in the positive returns in financial markets around the world during the recent period.
Inflation expectations twelve months forward and beyond, as derived from the capital market, are in the upper part of the target inflation range, despite the expected increase in the interest rate.
Nevertheless, a decline in the private sector leverage ratio and an increase in the saving rate to levels that do not justify a further increase may indicate a chance that a recovery in consumption lies ahead.
Macroeconomic figures published this month in the US were relatively favorable, and were generally better than expected.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/25-2-19.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
Employment data show that the number of employees fell by about 530,000 in November, and the data for previous months were revised sharply downwards.
The positive sentiment in this market was affected by, among other things, the Supervisor of Banks directive which was announced this month, expectations for continued increase in yields in government bonds, a number of sales of Israeli companies in the period reviewed, and from a marked contraction of spreads of US and European corporate bonds against the background of the quantitative easing.
The investment houses expect, on average, that the Bank will keep the interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent till the end of the first quarter of 2009.
With that, the continued decline in investment in residential construction, and the decline in goods and services exports in the second quarter were noted.
- Interest rates of the central banks of the major advanced economies are at very low levels, and in light of recent developments are expected to remain so for some considerable time.
The Central Bureau of Statistics Survey of Business Trends indicates a decline in activity and in new orders in the industry.
Strong global growth, the rise in inflationary pressures and the more hawkish tone from the Federal Reserve, have increased expectations that the central banks will raise their interest rates by more than had been factored into the markets up to now.
National Accounts figures for the second quarter indicated rapid GDP growth at an annual rate of 4.7 percent (seasonally adjusted), with a 15.8 percent increase in exports.
Civilian imports excluding diamonds, ships and airplanes rose by only a modest 2.7 percent.
In the first quarter of 2010 GDP increased at an annual rate of 3.2 percent, compared with expectations of 3.3 percent.
The agencies’ rating reductions emphasize the impact of the geopolitical reality, but also reflect the impact of fiscal policy management with an emphasis on the importance of the future policy framework.
The Chinese New Year may account for part of the decline, but it appears that the contractionary policy also played a part.
This is an indication that the recession in the housing market evident for a long time has started to spread to other economic spheres.
Some of the forecasters even expect that the first increase will not be before some time in 2012.
Nonetheless, initial findings from the Bank of Israel's Companies Survey for the first quarter of 2010 show further expansion of economic activity and expectations that this would continue in the next quarter.
In November, the agreed-upon framework was expanded to communities in the North as well.
The share of unindexed floating rate mortgages granted in December was 26.9 percent.
In April– May, home prices declined by 0.4 percent, and in the 12 months ending in May, they increased by 3.2 percent, compared with 4.0 percent in the 12 months ending in the previous month.
Three Committee members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and two Committee members supported the proposal to reduce it to 0.1 percent.
Assessments and expectations of future inflation rates are also close to the mid-point of the target range.
At the time of this discussion, the Fed was expected to reduce the interest rate at the end of October from its current level of 2 percent.
After the CPI data for August were released, the forecasters lowered their estimates of inflation for the next twelve months from 1.9 percent to 1.7 percent.
Activity returned to its long term trend in most industries, but is below trend in the vulnerable proximity industries, particularly incoming tourism, hospitality, and culture.
The growth forecast for China was reduced by 0.1 percentage points, to improvement there expected to be slow, as it continues to suffer from restraining budgetary policy and from a low supply of bank credit.
This level of underspending reflects abnormally low expenditure in the first quarter of the year.
Housing prices (rental rates), which are included in the CPI, declined by 0.1 percent in December.
The Composite State of the Economy Index for August increased by 0.1 percent, reflecting continued expansion at a moderate pace.
Europe Growth in the EU accelerated to 4.1 percent (annual rate) in the second quarter of markedly, an increase in companies' expenditure, and a recovery in private consumption.
The gap between the yields on unindexed shekel bonds and US 10-year bonds widened during the last month from 50 to 60 basis points.
The rate of inflation, seasonally adjusted, over the past seven months has been around the lower limit of the inflation target range.
In addition, the nontradable components also moderated.
the low June CPI and the reductions in commodity and energy prices in the last few weeks; the CPI excluding energy, food, and fruit and vegetables in the last twelve months rose by 1.9 percent, i.e., close to the midpoint of the target range; inflation expectations derived from the capital market fell sharply following the publication of the June price index; those members of the committee thought there was a good probability that inflation would return to the target range in the first half of 2009 without raising the interest rate for August; the probability of a rise in the interest rate of the Fed, the ECB or the Bank of England had declined; and the worsening of the global financial crisis in July had increased both the level of uncertainty in the financial markets and concern over a more serious and longer slowdown than expected previously.
A continuation of this trend will delay the return of inflation to the target range.
Others were of the view that interest rate considerations were not the dominant factor in capital flows in the last few months, and they did not expect them to become dominant in the current interest rate environment, even if there was another rate increase.
This month, the expectation that the economic slowdown in the US would continue into 2009 strengthened.
Home prices increased in the past 12 months by 17.9 percent, a markedly high rate compared to the pace of recent years.
The Committee members reiterated that the monetary accommodation will be maintained as long as necessary in order to entrench the inflation environment within the target range.
Three of the participants recommended cutting the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points.
The budget for 2009 and 2010 increased the legal limit for the deficit from 1 percent of GDP to 6 percent in 2009 and 5.5 percent in 2010.
The nominal effective exchange rate of the shekel, calculated as the average shekel exchange rate against 24 currencies (representing 33 countries) weighted according to the volume of Israel's trade with those countries, showed a shekel appreciation of about 0.5 percent in the period from February 23 to March 19.
No significant slowdown was seen, despite a sharp decline in the volume of transactions.
The nominal wage per employee post rose in the business sector fell by 1.3 percent in July, and that in the public sector by 0.7 percent.
Despite these developments, the basic forces acting in support of the shekel––deriving from the current account surplus and nonresidents’ investments in the economy––are still evident.
Despite this, the Committee members emphasized that the average wage in the economy has not increased at a pace that is in line with the strong demand for employees.
Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.25– points higher than the ECB rate.
This step is in line with the drive to gradually return inflation to within the target range, taking into account the other issues noted.
With that, the relatively strong position of Israel's economy currently will allow it to absorb these shocks with a relatively moderate impact.
In light of the background conditions presented, all the members of management supported an increase in the interest rate, and the discussion focused on the amount of the increase, and whether it should be accompanied by a macro-prudential step relating to mortgages.
He was of the opinion that an interest rate lower than 0.1 percent is more appropriate due to the magnitude of the crisis and the adverse impact, anomalous in its magnitude, on the employment level.
The average real wage per employee post increased by 0.4 percent in the third quarter compared with the second, and the nominal wage by 0.7 percent (both seasonally adjusted).
The CBS revised its forecast of growth in 2006 to about 4.5 percent, and the Bank of Israel’s forecast of growth in 2007 is about 4 percent.
The Israeli forecasters expect, on average, that inflation one year ahead will be about 1.2 percent, compared with their forecasts of about 0.5 percent at the time of the interest rate discussions last month.
Makam yields increased by 10–20 basis points along the entire curve, with one year yields increasing slightly to about 2.56 percent, so that the market essentially does not project an interest rate reduction in the coming year.
Direct-tax revenues in January–April (adjusted for legislative amendments and nonrecurring income) rose by 15 percent in real terms from their level in January–April The April CPI went up by 0.9 percent, within the range of economists' forecasts, and in line with the seasonal path consistent with the inflation target.
- The effect of the low rate of interest combined with the other instruments that the Bank is using is evident in the easing of the cost of credit, and this policy helps to encourage economic activity.
Some participants noted that after a 25 basis point reduction in the interest rate for February, they thought it likely that the process of interest rate reductions would be coming to a close.
Completions in the twelve months to April totaled 33,941, a 7.9 percent increase compared with the number in the twelve months to April 2010.
Despite the improvement in the labor market, most of those joining the labor force are earning low salaries, so that salaries increased at a moderate pace and continue to weigh on a recovery in personal consumption.
Although the overall index was in line with expectations, this was the net result of surprising changes in the individual components of the index: the housing index declined by 1.1 percent, while the index excluding housing "compensated" by an increase of 0.7 percent.
Inflation in most of the Asian countries was led primarily by food and energy prices and is continuing to rise.
Furthermore, the weakness of the euro against the shekel makes Israel's exports to Europe less profitable and has an adverse impact on exporters' competitiveness vis-àvis European competitors.
They claimed that the low level of the interest rate supports the continued recovery of economic activity.
Macroeconomic data published during the month present a mixed picture.
Finance Division, Research Department Dr Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of Information and International Affairs Division The US economy contracted by 6.1 percent in the first quarter of 2009 (annual rate, compared with the previous quarter), following its 6.3 percent contraction in the last quarter of 2008.
The Bank of Japan is not expected to change its interest rate before the end of the year.
The interest rate differential between the Bank of Israel rate and the Federal Reserve rate narrowed with the raising of the Fed rate, and is currently 0.25 of a percentage point.
Germany led the field, with 2.2 percent quarterly growth, contributing about 60 percent of the growth of the whole eurozone.
New home sales increased slightly in August, to about 2,320 (seasonally adjusted), and the stock of new homes available for sale resumed its increase, reaching a record of about 28,900 homes in August.
The Bank of Israel's composite state-of-the-economy index for September published in October rose by 1.2 percent (compared with the previous month), following increases of 1.1 percent in the August index and 0.9 percent in the July index.
In Spain and Portugal fiscal measures were introduced to reduce budget deficits.
Nonresidents' activity was mixed, with foreign exchange sales in the beginning of the period and purchases later on.
They recommend the NIS and NIS assets as relatively low-risk, including at times of increasing overall risk in the international financial markets.
It was also noted that an increase in the interest rate was necessary in order to prevent the price rises from spreading and affecting prices throughout the economy.
Although most of this drop can be ascribed to a decline in the rate of participation, the Bureau of Labor Statistics survey of new posts shows that these increased, as did the recruitment of new workers, while the number of dismissals declined.
In September households' total debt increased by 0.3 percent, with outstanding mortgages increasing by 0.7 percent.
A Bloomberg survey shows that most investors believe that China will face a banking crisis within the next five years.
Participants noted that inflation over the previous 12 months is below the center of the target range of 1–3 percent per year, and that the surprise in the CPI for May led to a relatively sharp decline in expectations for inflation in the coming 12 months.
Members expressed their concern about a negative impact on fiscal credibility as a result of not meeting deficit targets in the coming two years.
Acting Head of the Monetary and Finance Division, Research Department Ms Irit Mendelson, Assistant Director of the Market Operations Department Mr Rony Hizkiyahu, the Supervisor of Banks International Affairs Division In the month since the previous interest rate discussions the data on the US economy continued to be positive.
At the same time, it appeared that the anticipated global slowdown in growth in At the time of the current discussions on the interest rate for July, in light of the change in emphasis in the Fed's approach to the interest rate, the markets imply a probability of a quarter of a percentage point rise in the Fed rate by August, and a further rise of the same amount in the September interest rate meeting.
During the period that preceded the current interest rate decision, the US Federal Reserve updated its 2011 growth forecast from a range of 3.43-3.9 percent that had been published in January, to a range of only 3.1-3.3 percent, against the background of weak growth figures for the first quarter, as well as its forecast of the unemployment rate from 8.9 percent to 8.5 percent, while noting that it expects slow development of any sort of lowering of the unemployment rate.
The rise in the economy's risk premium tends to reduce the pressures for the appreciation of the NIS, thereby putting pressure on prices.
At the end of the discussion, the Governor decided to leave the interest rate unchanged for May, at 0.5 percent, and to persist with the other policy tools, with the intention of continuing to encourage economic activity.
The yield gap between local currency unindexed ten-year bonds and ten-year US Treasury bonds contracted from 163 b.p.
At this stage the Bank of Israel does not have a precise estimate of the timing and extent of this effect, but the probability has increased that the slower expansion of world trade and the reduction in the growth rate of global demand are likely to reduce Israel’s growth rate to below the level of the last few years.
Consumer confidence indices indicate weakness, due mainly to the decline in the real wage.
The rise in the index in March was due mainly to the increase in services exports and goods imports and exports.
Expectations are that the Fed will keep its interest rate unchanged in the coming months, but will cut the rate in the first half of 2007.
They noted that so far, worldwide, there have only been interest rate increases in countries in which there was a marked deviation from the inflation target, while in Israel the expectations derived from the capital market are within the target range, and according to the Bank of Israel Research Department forecast and private forecasters, the inflation rate is expected to be lower in another 12 months.
The implied volatility of Maof (Tel Aviv 25) options dropped considerably in December and January to 17–18 percent, from a level of more than 20 percent in the preceding months.
Thus, even after the upward revision of the forecasts, the expected rate of recovery remains slow, with some concern over deflation (the Core PCE index for September was 0 percent, and the PPI for October was minus 0.6 percent).
The Bank of Israel staff forecast is that inflation in 2011 will be 2.6 percent, with a gradual increase in the interest rate to about 3.3 percent in the last quarter of the year.
The inflation environment in numerous countries moderated, but in most of them it remains above central bank targets, in view of the inflation rate in services, which remained sticky and weighs on the convergence of inflation to the target range.
The Committee assessed that the slowing in economic activity this year reflects a combination of transitory factors and supply constraints, and looking forward it appears that the economy is converging to its potential growth rate.
The Committee discussed the data on economic activity, which indicate a continued robust rate of activity, with a slight decline in the most recent data.
According to the forecast by the Research Department—which this time presented only one scenario—GDP is expected to grow by 6.3 percent in 2021 and by 5 percent in a large extent the output gap created at the GDP level due to the contraction in 2020.
They also raised their forecasts of inflation during the next 12 months to assessment of inflation in 2009 is 2.3 percent, close to the midpoint of the target range.
The Fed, however, which focuses on the core index, assessed that this was a temporary development, and that inflation would decline again and would not be reflected in the core index.
If the vote is tied, the Chairperson (the Governor) has an additional vote.
Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 0.5 to points lower than the ECB rate.
Excluding the effect of direct government interventions that affected prices (i.e., the increase in VAT, the increase on taxes on cigarettes and fuel, and the water surcharge), the index rose by 2.8 percent, in the upper part of the inflation target range.
This month, 1-year inflation expectations (seasonally adjusted) derived from the capital market declined sharply to 0.6 percent, and expectations for two years also declined, to 1.0 percent.
The nominal yield on unindexed 10-year _Shahar_ bonds declined by 0.2 percentage points in the past month to 4.8 percent.
Europe, Japan and the developing countries, particularly the BRIC economies (Brazil, Russia, India and China) are growing at an accelerated rate with the US more recently registering a slower rate of growth.
In December 2011, the rate of increase in employee posts, on an annual basis, was below 1.5 percent, compared with more than 4 percent in the beginning of 2011.
Since the date of the last interest rate decision (29 October) until 22 November, a few days before the current decision, the shekel appreciated against the dollar, from NIS 3.99 to the dollar to NIS 3.89, a 2.6 percent change.
Forecasters project the interest rate in 1 year to be 0.29 percent, on average.
leading index of world trade.
Risk indices in credit to medium sized, small and micro businesses increased slightly.
Against this background, the Fed is expected to leave the interest rate at a low level at least till the beginning of next year.
Market assessments are that Greece cannot allow itself to actually separate from the euro bloc, and in effect is trying to pressure the major countries in Europe to accept easings in aid – since Greece's abandonment of the euro bloc would hurt not only it but the entire bloc.
From past experience, in such circumstances foreign tourism is generally affected fastest and more sharply and recovers slowly after an improvement in the security situation.
The inflation environment in Israel remains low compared to most advanced economies worldwide, but these gaps have narrowed due to the decline in inflation in many countries.
Business services exports following a prolonged decline in recent months, while the tourism industry continues to recover very slowly—the number of tourist arrivals in the second quarter (seasonally adjusted) was just 2 percent higher than in the first quarter.
In contrast, a slight improvement was recorded in US economic activity this month.
- Data published this month indicate that growth in Israel continues to become more firmly established.
The nominal wage per employee post in the last three months was the same as in the equivalent period in 2008, but due to inflation this year, the real wage dropped.
The tightening of credit terms itself had the effect of slowing economic activity.
Household expenditure contracted by 6 percent in January compared with the December level.
The average of forecasters' inflation expectations for the next twelve monthly CPIs increased from 3 percent to 3.1 percent, slightly above the upper limit of the target inflation range.
In this regard, the renewed trend of appreciation of the shekel was noted.
The ECB noted the threat to price stability in the medium term in the light of a further rise in manufacturing capacity utilization, an improvement in the labor market, the probability of upward pressures on wages, and the rise in oil prices.
- The greater global financial instability and its effects on the economy, together with the slowdown in Israel’s economic growth, serve to counter the arguments for raising the interest rate.
The Committee members emphasized that the trust of the markets and the international economic institutions is essential to the stability of the Israeli economy, and in order to ensure this trust it is important that the government act to deal with the issues raised in the reports.
In terms of the nominal effective exchange rate, the shekel weakened by 2.8 percent.
In addition, Committee members considered the fact that the steep increase in inflation expectations derived from the capital markets (an increase of 0.3 percentage points from the previous month) derives partly from an upward bias in the estimation, and that it is likely that actual rates are lower than those estimated from the capital markets.
Against this background, the Research Department's Nowcasting estimate for GDP growth in the second quarter, based on current economic data, is for 2.8 percent, a pace of growth which is similar to that of recent months.
The dollar value of these exports dropped by a steep 29 percent in the three months November–January compared with that in the previous three months (annual rate, seasonally adjusted).
In March–June, the rate of increase in the CPI has been consistent with achieving the inflation target, but inflation measured over the preceding decline in energy prices that resumed in the past month, and the appreciation of the shekel, are liable to defer the return of the inflation rate to within the target range.
Since that forecast was prepared, there have been several developments that are likely to have a bearing on it.
At the same time yields on government bonds dropped, particularly in Germany and the US, reflecting an increase in risk aversion and investors switch to assets considered a “safe haven.” Commodity prices continued upwards, with a further steep increase this month.
This is a long term process, rooted in the social protests of 2011, that is supported by government policy to reduce the price of imports and enhance competition, and benefits from a tailwind from low inflation in Europe, and the relative appreciation of the shekel against European currencies.
According to the Monetary Department's model, some depreciation of the shekel would return inflation to within the range.
The financial crisis occurred against the background of the very rapid expansion of sales of structured products and derivatives, from $ 80 trillion gross in 1998 to almost $ 600 trillion in 2007.
In India the interest rate was increased (the sixth rise since the beginning of the year), and also in South Korea and Chile, against the background of increased indications of faster inflation.
Inflation expectations fell steeply this month, in light of the expected slowdown in economic activity and the fall in commodity prices.
The financial markets reflect expectations that the ECB will raise its interest rate by about half a percentage point by the end of 2008, with similar expectations regarding the Bank of England.
The rapid increase in M1 in the last year was partly due to the public's switching from term deposits to current accounts in light of the low level of interest on the term deposits.
The average of the forecasters’ expectations is a rise of 0.6 of a percentage point in the Bank of Israel policy rate in the course of the next twelve months.
The forecast was based on the assumption that the war’s direct economic impact reached its peak in the fourth quarter of 2023, and that the war will continue until the end of 2024, but at a decreasing magnitude.
As stated in previous announcements of interest rate decisions, the Bank of Israel is implementing a policy consistent with the process of gradually restoring a more normal interest rate environment—a process aimed at stabilizing inflation within the target range, and supporting further growth of economic activity while maintaining financial stability.
The shekel appreciated by 1.9 percent against the euro.
The Committee members noted that the shekel continues to remain relatively stable against major currencies, despite an appreciation of approximately 2 percent in effective exchange rate terms.
In light of the range of factors, the Monetary Committee decided to keep the interest rate for June unchanged at 2.5 percent.
The financial crisis, which began as a result of the collapse of the lower end of the mortgage market, continued to spread.
Most of the major currencies strengthened against the dollar at a rate of up to 7.1 percent, while the Chinese yuan weakened against the dollar by 4.1 percent.
The deficit in 2012 is projected to be between 3.5–4 percent of GDP, primarily due to lower than expected revenues for the first half of the year.
Most monthly indicators point to continued growth at a moderate rate—the Composite State of the Economy Index for May increased by 0.2 percent, and the indices for the previous two months were revised upward; the climate indices for May, based on the Central Bureau of Statistics Business Tendency Survey, indicate stability in the growth rate of the business sector; and the Consumer Confidence Indicator calculated by the Central Bureau of Statistics increased moderately in May, following its moderate increase in April.
They stressed the acceleration in inflation in the last few months.
This would be a continuance of the interest rises in the past few months and takes account of the time lag between implementation and effect.
The shekel strengthened against the euro by about 1 percent in the last month, from NIS 5.58 to the euro on 26 March to NIS 5.52 on 18 April.
The large deficit reflects the steep drop in tax revenues resulting from the economic slowdown.
The budget deficit in 2007 is expected to be below the ceiling set by the government of 2.9 percent of GDP.
Israel's economy is expected to return to growth around the end of the year.
The growth rate of business credit in recent months has been lower than in the period prior to the war, and the most recent figures business sector declined slightly.
Investment houses' predict global inflation of 2.6 percent in 2010.
They were of the opinion that the current interest rate is in line with state of the economy, particularly in view of the appreciation of the shekel and the marked uncertainty in the global economy and in fiscal policy.
In the eurozone, macro data continued to be weak and indicated continued recession.
Since the publication of the March CPI, nominal yields on short-term instruments have risen by about 0.4 percentage points.
[1] The Tel Aviv 25 share price index on 24 June was about 2.6 percent lower than on 24 May.
Over the last year (May–July 2008 compared with May–July 2007) the index of manufacturing production has risen by 10.6 percent.
In the Committee’s discussions, it was noted that the plan to purchase $30 billion in 2021 was a special program for a very special situation, which supported the economy’s dealing with the economic ramifications of the COVID-19 crisis.
The nominal wage per employee post rose by 3.1 percent in that period.
The Committee agreed that the current rate of increase in prices does not indicate a renewed trend of price increases, but the risk inherent in a future renewal of such a trend cannot be ignored.
These indicators include the modest rise in the composite state-of-the-economy index (details below), the standstill in exports and the drop in export orders as reflected in the Bank of Israel's Companies Survey, the decline in the Purchasing Managers Index and in consumer confidence indices, and the slowdown in tax revenues.
In addition, the Committee members noted that the labor market remains tight: the most recent data indicate a decline in unemployment, even if with a decline in the participation and employment rates.
Following that, the investment houses raised their forecasts for the Fed rate and they now expect on average, with high probability, an interest rate of 5.25 percent at the end of the second quarter and a rate of 5.5 percent at the end of the year.
The Committee decided to leave the other policy measures previously decided upon in place.
Although consumer confidence indices are maintaining their relatively high levels, it seems that global economic developments and geopolitical developments in Israel are having a negative effect on some of the components of expectations in these indices.
The lowering of the global interest rate environment, and in particular the sharp cut in the Fed rate last month and the expectation of further reductions––in reaction to the slowdown in US growth and intended to achieve financial stability––serve to strengthen the shekel and to moderate inflationary pressures.
The Purchasing Managers Index continued to fall, and reached 33.3 points, the fourth month in succession below the 50-point mark that indicates deteriorating conditions and a slowdown.
In the last twelve months the M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed term deposits of up to one year) increased by 13 percent, and in December it rose by only switching from term deposits to demand deposits in light of the low level of the interest rate on term deposits.
The slowdown in the growth of the local economy was primarily a result of moderation in global demand and its impact on exports, but some weakness also began to be evident in domestic demand.
In the three months May–July the index rose at annual rate of 4.4 percent (compared with the previous three months, seasonally adjusted).
In November and December, there was a recovery in the scope of credit card purchases, with total purchases returning to a level similar to that in routine times, except for the tourism industry.
According to the latest Federal Reserve's Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions (the "Beige Book"), the sharp decline in the US economy moderated in the spring, and in some areas there were improved expectations regarding the future, although no significant upturn in activity is expected before the end of the year.
The monetary policy at major central banks continues to be very accommodative despite the increase in inflation, while in contrast, in emerging markets interest rates continue to be raised, against the background of higher inflation.
These participants noted that as yet there were no evident signs of inflationary pressures on the price indices, not even on the indices of domestic prices (such as GDP prices) published by the Central Bureau of Statistics.
Economic data from other regions of the world show limited reaction to the expected US slowdown.
The inflation rate over the preceding August.
The Central Bureau of Statistics trends survey reflects positive expectations of activity in the principal industries in the next few months.
The dollar continues to strengthen vis-à-vis the basket of major currencies (DXY), which may also weigh on the recovery of the US economy.
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose in October by 0.6 percent.
The CDS spread also increased in other emerging market economies.
The Committee noted that there was an increase in the inflation environment in recent months.
The yield to maturity on CPI-indexed five-year government bonds declined in November (to the 19th of the month) from their October level of about 1.1 percent to an average of about 1 percent.
Share price indices fell, and credit risk premiums rose.
The number of building starts in the twelve months to June 2010 was about 37,000, compared with about 33,000 in the equivalent period a year earlier––an increase of about 12 percent.
Following the publication of the CPI for April, inflation over the previous twelve months is expected to enter the inflation target range (an annual rate of 1–3 percent), and the annual rate for the whole of 2010 is expected to be slightly below the midpoint of the range.
Share markets around the world showed a mixed trend, with share price indices in the advanced economies rising, and declines of the indices in the emerging market economies.
The gradual nature of the process is expressed by the fact that the Bank is not changing the interest rate every month, but only in accordance with the inflation environment, the firm entrenchment of growth in the global economy, and the interest rates of the major central banks, while taking into consideration the exchange rate of the shekel..
The members were of the opinion that there is a relatively low probability of a prolonged decline of inflation to below the lower bound of the target.
The data point to a moderation in the rate of decline in activity.
Although the CPI excluding energy, food, and fruit and vegetables rose by only 1.4 percent over the last year, in July that index rose by 0.9 percent.
Retail sales in October surged, with an increase of 1.4 percent from the previous month, compared with a forecast of 0.7 percent.
Since April, inflation––even excluding the one-off effects resulting from government decisions––has accelerated.
Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread went down a little from 20 basis points at the time of the last interest rate decision to 18 basis points currently.
The debt crisis continued to worsen this month as well: in Greece, CDS spreads indicated a growing probability of default in the near future; in the past week S&P cut its credit rating for Italy, with a negative outlook; there was growing concern of the European debt crisis spreading to the banking system, and amid that, credit ratings on large banks in the US, France, and Italy were cut.
That said, manufacturing production has not yet been affected, and (till May) has shown growth.
In the international forex market, the dollar is generally expected to weaken against the euro in the coming year and to approach an exchange rate of $1.30 to the euro.
The Bank of Israel will use the instruments available to it to achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, including keeping a close watch on developments in the assets market, and especially in the housing market.
The low deficit in November reflects expenditures lower than the path.
Interest rates on indexed mortgage tracks declined by unchanged.
The increase in March reflects, among other things, a 0.9 percent increase in manufacturing production in February, a 1.4 percent decline in trade and services revenue in February, and a 6.6 percent increase in services exports in March.
The crisis in Greece, against the background of high budget deficits and public debt in several European countries, made it an urgent necessity to find a solution for Greece and dominated the difficult problems facing the eurozone.
In the discussion ahead of the decision on the interest rate for June 2012, five Committee members were in favor of keeping the interest rate unchanged at 2.5 percent, and one Committee member recommended reducing the interest rate by 25 basis points.
Since January 2006 the interest-rate differential between the Bank of Israel rate and the Federal Reserve rate has stood at a quarter of a percentage point.
US growth, including some of the most recent data in the reviewed period, moderated, but data related to consumption continue to indicate strong activity.
Yields on some countries’ bonds, especially Greece, Ireland and Portugal soared to record levels, and CDS spreads continued to widen.
The government has tools to increase the supply of homes for residence which can act to moderate the increase in home prices without negatively impacting on the level of activity in the industry.
Growth in the eurozone in the first quarter of 2008 was 0.7 percent, annual rate, due mainly to strong economic performance in Germany and France.
The Fed continues with its quantitative easing measures.
The deficit from the beginning of the year is about NIS 2.4 billion greater than the seasonal path consistent with the Ministry of Finance deficit forecast of 3.4 percent of GDP, but based on forecast growth, revenues over the remainder of the year are expected to be slightly above the seasonal path.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed bonds declined in February to an average of 1.8 percent (reaching as low as 1.4 percent on 17 February), from an average of 2.3 percent in January.
The Committee members discussed the fiscal situation, the measures that the future government may take to deal with the expected deficit, and their possible effects on economic activity and on the inflation path.
The investment houses expect, on average, a rise in interest in the third quarter and further interest rises of up to about 50 basis points by the end of the year, with a probability of 80 percent.
Since the beginning of the year the annual rate of inflation based on the seasonally adjusted CPI and excluding the effect of government actions (i.e., the effects of the increase in VAT, the increase in taxes on cigarettes and fuel, and the surcharge on water) was 2 percent, the midpoint of the target range.
There were declines in most inflation expectations this month.
The cost of the steps taken would amount to about NIS 1.1 billion a year.
Year over year inflation in the fourth quarter of 2024 is expected to be 2.4 percent, and the interest rate is expected to be 3.75 percent or 4 percent.
The price of gold started the period at $1,828 an ounce, and increased to $1,900 at the beginning of September, but fell back to its same level as at the start of the period.
Private forecasters expected the Bank of Israel interest rate to be around 4.5 percent at the end of 2007.
It also announced that it would hold on to the securities it had purchased.
Accordingly, investment houses revised their advanced and developing economies indicate a slowdown in the pace of economic activity.
Against this backdrop, the major indices continued their positive trend this month as well.
Reports from participating companies are reminiscent of reports during the period of economic slowdown from 2001 to the middle of 2003.
The Fed expects inflation to moderate in the next quarters, in line with its expectation of some easing of energy and commodity prices and of demand pressures.
The ECB increased its growth forecasts to between 1.4 percent and houses expect a significant slowdown in growth later this year, with growth of 1.5 percent (annual rate) in the third quarter and 1.1 percent in the fourth.
Participants in the discussion related to scenarios tested by the various econometric models according to which it was reasonable to assume that, even after a cut in the interest rate for November of 25 basis points, the inflation environment would enable a further reduction in the interest rate.
These developments help bolster foreign investors’ faith in Israel’s economy, which is reflected by the extent of foreign investments in Israel.
The Purchasing Managers Index declined in May by 2.2 points, but for the second consecutive month the index was above 50 points, the boundary between growth and contraction.
The composite state-of-the-economy indices indicate that economic growth continued, and in the last two months of 2010 at an even faster pace.
The Committee discussed the exceptional uncertainty regarding the healthrelated and economic scenarios expected in Israel and abroad, and the uncertainty regarding the fiscal policy expected to be adopted in a case of the crisis being extended.
Against this background, the European Commission and the ECB recently revised their eurozone growth forecasts for 2013 downward, with neither entity forecasting positive growth until 2014.
The two participants who recommended reducing the interest rate for November by 25 basis points stressed the following: inflation in Israel was expected to fall and return to within the target range around the middle of 2009; the slowdown in growth in Israel; and the high level of financial uncertainty at this time.
The slope of the makam yield curve indicates that the capital market expects the Bank of Israel interest rate one year hence to be about 2.6 percent.
The fall in demand likely to result from the fighting in the north––principally through a decline in private consumption and investment––will moderate the rise in prices.
Pressure mounted for a change in budgetary policy in countries with large public debts and/or large budget deficits.
The Committee members expressed their commitment to meeting the price stability target defined by the Bank of Israel Law.
Inflation (measured over the previous twelve months) in the coming months is expected to be within the target range but close to its upper limit, and to decline thereafter.
This seasonal decline (which contributed about -0.18 basis points to the index) was offset this month primarily by an increase in prices of energy and fruit and vegetables, the contribution of which to the CPI was months was 1.7 percent, below the midpoint of the inflation target range.
Therefore, the monetary policy will have to remain accommodative in order to support economic recovery.
In the three months November 2009 to January 2010 the number increased by 2.9 percent compared with the previous three months The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 1.3 percent in January compared with the December level.
Four members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and one member supported the proposal to increase it to 0.5 percent.
China and India are leading the growth in the emerging market economies.
The figure for GDP growth in 2010 was revised upwards to 4.6 percent, and the estimate for the fourth quarter was revised marginally downwards to an annual rate of 7.7 percent.
In five of the past six months, the actual CPI reading was lower than the average of the forecasters’ projections.
After accounting for the effects of legislative changes and nonrecurring income, tax revenues in January were 4 percent higher than those in January The Consumer Price Index (CPI) remained unchanged in January, in line with the average of forecasters’ earlier estimates, but slightly above the seasonal path consistent with the midpoint of the inflation range.
The expected short-term real interest rate has been on a rising trend since February the Bank of Israel interest rate.
At the same time the ECB published its Financial Stability Review in which it stressed the problems associated with the exposure of European banks to real estate risks and to East European countries, so that Europe's financial problems are far from over.
In the US the Fed started taking steps to reduce monetary expansion, and investment houses, on average, expect that the Fed interest rate will remain at its current low level (0–0.25 percent) beyond the beginning of 2010.
The Committee noted that the rapid pace of inoculations in Israel increases optimism regarding a rapid return of the economy to a path of growth in the coming year.
It seems that a trend change is taking place in the housing market.
World prices of food, commodities and energy continued rising last month, and the risks of global inflation increased.
Total income from taxes (discounting for legislative changes and one-time revenues) grew in real terms in the second quarter by almost 8 percent (compared to the parallel quarter of last year).
However in the long term, inflation is expected to move to a positive trend against a background of an output gap that remains positive.
The Tel Aviv 25 Index fell by 14 percent, a move similar to that of US stock market indices.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for August increased by 1 percent, above the range of forecasts, which averaged 0.6 percent, and above the seasonal path consistent with achieving the inflation target.
The yield to maturity on one-year makam remained unchanged in June at about 2.1 percent, similar to its May level.
The CBS survey of vacancies showed a fall of 2.1 percent in December compared with November.
The rate of growth of the Japanese economy slowed down in the first quarter of 2007, though the economy is expected to continue growing moderately, mainly driven by company sector activity and continued export growth.
However, it was noted that the exchange rate impacts exports with a lag, and therefore it is possible that the cumulative appreciation of the shekel will have a negative effect on exports going forward.
The shekel appreciated against the background of a surplus in the balance-ofpayments current account that is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and foreign investment in Israel.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/20-05-19.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
This occurred against the background of a slump in exports, a sharp reduction in private consumption, a decline in investments, and a large drop in inventories.
Home prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are not included in the CPI, increased in November–December by 1 percent, after increasing by 1.1 percent in October–November.
The baseline scenario of the quarterly DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model––which places great weight on expectations and which uses a Bank of Israel reaction function based in part on the smoothing of the interest rate path––gives an increase to about 1.2 percent in the average rate of interest in the first quarter of 2010 and a level of 2.3 percent in the last quarter of 2010.
Despite being only in the early stages of the year, developments already point to the annual budget deficit being significantly lower than the ceiling the government set for the year 2007––2.9 percent of GDP.
They assess that inflation in 2008 will come to 3.6 percent, and that in 2009 it will fall to 0.7 percent.
With that, there is growing concern over slower US economic growth and the worsening risks of debt problems in Europe and their implications for Israel's economy.
Employment Service data for July indicate that the number of vacancies rose in July in the Jerusalem region and in the south, did not change in the central region, and declined in the north.
The scope of transactions increased in January compared with the corresponding period of the previous year, and in March mortgage volume was high compared to preceding months.
The balance of credit to households decreased by 0.4 percent in December, and in the whole of 2010 it increased by 8.9 percent.
In accordance with the revised growth forecast, the deficit in 2012 is projected to be about 3.7 percent of GDP—above the seasonal path consistent with the Ministry of Finance's revised deficit forecast of 3.4 percent of GDP—primarily due to tax receipts below the path expected for January–May.
From January to November 2010 this credit grew by 2.5 percent.
The return of inflation and inflation expectations to the target range is an essential element in the support of sustainable growth.
It is assessed that the current-account surplus could reach 6 percent of GDP in 2007.
Another issue discussed was the global environment and the risks posed by it to the Israeli economy.
Employment data also indicate expansion, although wage increases have been moderate.
The April IMF growth forecast for 2010 for the eurozone was 1 percent, similar to its previous forecast in January.
Based on the equation, the CPI housing component (i.e., rentals) is expected to rise faster than was estimated previously.
Inflation in Israel over the past 12 months is 2.3 percent, and according to the various forecasts, the inflation rate is expected to moderate going forward.
The gap between the yield on unindexed ten-year shekel government bonds and that on ten-year US government bonds narrowed from 142 basis points on 25 January to 116 basis points on 19 February.
More and more countries announced rescue plans and a switch to expansionary fiscal policy, in attempts to support aggregate demand in the near future.
The slope of the makam[1] curve indicates market expectations of some reduction in the interest rate for March, yet later in the year it is expected to start rising, and to reach 1.4 percent one year from now.
The figure of GDP growth in the second quarter was increased to 3.5 percent, (compared with the previous estimate of annual terms).
The unemployment rate remains at 4.5 percent, and at the same time both the number of employed and the level of wages increased.
In the same period the shekel weakened by about 1.5 percent against the euro, from NIS 5.44 to the euro to NIS 5.52.
Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread increased steeply this month from around 32 basis points to 55 basis points, its highest level since the outbreak of the global credit crisis.
It also extended the unemployment benefit entitlement period by fourteen weeks (and by twenty weeks in highunemployment states).
Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, increased this month from about 52 basis points to about 63 basis points.
After adjusting for the effects of changes in tax rates and non-recurring revenues, tax revenues dropped by about 15 percent in real terms in January–May compared with their level in January–May 2008, The budget proposal for 2009 and 2010 submitted by the government to the Knesset raises the deficit ceiling from 1 percent of GDP to 6 percent in 2009, and 5.5 percent in 2010.
Inflation continued to decline in September for the fourth month in a row, against the background of the reductions in energy prices and the increase in the rate of unemployment to 9.6 percent, its highest level in ten years.
The Research Department's index based on Google searches, which serves as an indicator of demand in the economy in the coming months indicates a high probability of acceleration in trade and services revenue in June.
They added, however, that a significant part of the deviation from the target was the result of nonrecurring factors (the increase in the VAT rate, the tax on cigarettes, and the water surcharge), but even excluding those factors, the rate of inflation in the last few months was close to the upper limit of the range.
The markets are not pricing in an increase in the interest rate in the coming year in any of the central banks of the large advanced economies.
The volatility in the markets is expected to remain high as a result of the multiple risk loci and the high level of liquidity.
These developments were against the background of global trends.
Some of the lost activity in manufacturing and trade and services is expected to be recouped by the end of 2006.
The point was emphasized that forecasters’ predictions were currently at the upper limit of the target inflation range, and those derived from the capital market were even higher.
The members noted that the various indicators point to a level of activity that is close to potential and that the impact of the pandemic on the economy has decreased notably.
Macro data in the United States continue to be encouraging, the most salient being the rate of growth and the unemployment.
The growth rate for 2013 is projected to be during the second quarter of 2013, as planned; the growth rate is estimated to be 2.8 percent excluding the production of natural gas.
The makam yield curve remained unchanged in June after rising by 0.1-0.2 percentage points in May.
Recently published macroeconomic data support the ECB's estimate that the rate of growth in Europe in the first quarter of the year will rise.
National Accounts data show in the first quarter of 2007 there was a further rapid increase in exports, a sharp rise in investments in the principal industries, and further expansion in private consumption.
Moreover, the Committee members agreed that if necessary, the Committee will take additional steps to make monetary policy even more accommodative.
On average, the investment houses expect positive growth of 1 percent (annual rate) in the next two quarters.
Regarding budgetary policy, the Committee’s assessment was that the economy’s operation under an interim budget is leading to a tighter fiscal policy.
The nominal yield on 10-year unindexed government bonds dipped by 0.1 percentage points over the past month, and in November averaged 5.6 percent.
Forecasters' inflation predictions for the next twelve CPI readings average 2.2 percent, compared with 2.3 percent last month.
Against this background the Bank of Japan decided to leave its interest rate unchanged, at the low rate of 0.5 percent.
Japan's economy continues to report positive data pointing to a recovery trend, and it seems that the economy, which had lagged behind the other Asian economies, has started closing the gap in the last few months.
Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, increased in the month to the current discussions from 1.4 percent to about 1.7 percent.
In the discussion, the following points were raised in favor of leaving the interest rate unchanged: - Assuming that the exchange rate were to remain around its level at the time of the discussion, inflation would be likely to stay within its target range, even without an increase in the interest rate.
- Several central banks reduced interest rates this month.
The Israeli forecasters predict on average that the Bank of Israel interest rate will be reduced by 45 basis points for March, and that at the end of 2009 the interest rate will be about 0.9 percent.
The trends in mutual funds continued—net new investments in money market funds, and withdrawals from corporate bond mutual funds.
As house prices fell, the rate of delinquencies, defaults and foreclosures rose, and the stock of houses for sale increased.
It should be borne in mind that even when the monthly indices in 2008 become consistent with inflation of about 2 percent, inflation measured over the previous twelve months will return to the target range only in the second half of the year.
Inflation expectations and forecasts for the coming year are around the upper bound of the target range.
The investment houses expect that inflation will drop to 1.3 percent at the end of 2010.
Economic activity was at a high level, despite moderation in the growth rate in the preceding months, and the labor market was tight, at a full employment environment, with a very low unemployment rate.
The Fed forecasts that inflation will remain high in the coming months, but that it will moderate in 2009, in light of the expected economic slowdown and the fact that households’ medium- and long- term inflation expectations have stayed moderate till now.
Expansionary monetary policy, together with significant budgetary expansion in most countries, continues to support the recovery of the global economy.
In their discussion on the global economy, the Committee members said that the data continue to be positive, although it appears that the growth is losing momentum, particularly in Europe and Japan.
Contrariwise, the revised forecast regarding house prices that predicts a slightly faster rate of increase than the previous month's forecast is expected to act to increase expected inflation slightly.
The IMF warned that if Greece does not reach an agreement, it would not receive the next tranche in the rescue program, and thus would not be able to make the repayment of €14 billion due in March.
It was also noted that US legislators are increasing the pressure to impose regulation on Internet companies that use users’ Reserve increased the federal funds rate by 25 basis points in its most recent decision, and is expected to increase the rate twice more in 2018.
National Insurance data show a 1 percent decline in employment in May–July compared with the previous three months.
In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following points for increasing the interest rate for February 2011: - Inflation in the last twelve months was within the target range.
The NIS/$ interest spread stands at 0.25 percentage point.
The ECB adopted various expansionary measures as well, and there are expectations for additional significant measures by the EU at the end of the month.
The Committee members discussed the assessments by international institutions and investment houses regarding the decline in global output and in the scope of world trade.
During the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the shekel strengthened against the dollar by 3.9 percent, from NIS 3.46 to the dollar on 28 April to NIS 3.33 on 23 May.
Outstanding household debt increased by about NIS 5.8 billion (1.3 percent) in May to about NIS 442 billion, of which outstanding housing debt increased by about NIS 2.5 billion (0.8 percent) to NIS New mortgage volume continued to increase, reaching NIS 7 billion in June.
Nonetheless, some leading central banks are continuing to reduce their use of special instruments of monetary accommodation, and some central banks have started to increase their interest rates..
As for the composition of GDP, the Committee members examined the trends that arise from National Accounts data—the continued contraction in investment, the moderate increase in private consumption, and the weakness in goods exports—and discussed the question of whether they indicate supply constraints that derive from the proximity to full employment; they assessed that at the current time it is difficult to determine that such is the case.
The composite indices for the previous two months were revised downwards––the November index from a rise of 1.1 percent to one of 0.7 percent, and the December index from a rise of 1.2 percent to one of 0.4 percent.
The Committee members said that investment in residential construction declined in response to moderation of demand.
The level of activity in the economy is still lower than what prevailed just before the war, and supply constraints are weighing on the convergence of economic activity to the trend that characterized the economy before the war.
According to the Bank of Japan's assessments, inflation will remain around percent, as expected, this month, in the absence of inflationary pressures and modest growth data.
The current forecast was influenced not only by the deterioration of the economy in Europe, but also by domestic data for the first half.
The Bank of Israel Research Department quarterly staff forecast, which was compiled in March, was not revised, as there were no extraordinary developments regarding the projection.
The Israeli forecasters predict on average that the Bank of Israel interest rate will be reduced by 15 basis points for April to a level of 0.6 percent, and that at the end of The slope of the _makam[1] curve indicates market expectations of a reduction of_ about 20 basis points in the Bank of Israel interest rate for March, yet later in the year it is expected to start rising, and to reach 1.8 percent one year from now.
The rise in the index in April was due mainly to the rise in the indices of manufacturing production and trade and services revenue, with goods exports moderating the increase.
The global slowdown, the uncertainty regarding financial markets and regarding the ramifications of the trade war between the US and China, as well as the slowing pace of monetary policy normalization in advanced economies are liable to adversely impact demand for domestic output, also because they can lead to renewed appreciation pressures on the shekel.
The investment houses on average expect a slowdown in the growth rate to an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the second quarter, followed by faster growth of Inflation in Japan remains low.
There were signs of a slowdown in the rate of growth in the emerging markets.
Rapid recovery of activity in the US, however, would bring forward increases in the interest rate there, would narrow the interest rate differential, and enable the interest rate in Israel to increase more rapidly.
There were 43,648 building starts in the twelve months to November, compared with 43,537 in the twelve months to October, and the number of completions was 33,917 compared with the previous month's figure of 34,775.
However, the slowdown in growth in emerging markets is liable to make it difficult to redirect exports to them, in response to the slowdown in activity in developed markets.
Against this background, inflation slowed this month, and fell back to less than 3 percent.
The nominal wage increased by 0.8 percent in July– September compared with the previous three months, and the real wage increased by the effect of legislative changes).
These members of the committee stated that they attribute great weight to the expected effect of the global slowdown on the Israeli economy.
The expectation was that the leading central banks in the world would keep their interest rates unchanged, and in some countries they would cut the rate.
The slowdown in global growth intensified, against the background of the sharp fall in demand.
The forecast for the primary variables was revised downward, though only slightly so.
Despite the surprisingly good growth figures, the US economy is still faced with two major threats: the crisis in the labor market and the increase in government debt.
Inflation in nontradable goods’ prices (an approximation of the domestic component of inflation) remains above 2 percent, and inflation in tradable goods’ prices continued to increase in May and is not negative.
The ECB is concerned over the risks of inflation deriving from the rise in commodity prices rolling over into wage rises.
The trend data indicate that imports remained steady, with imports of raw materials and consumer goods rising and those of capital goods falling, following two years of acceleration in imports of inputs (from the second quarter of The latest data on the labor market show a continuation of the upward trend in employment in January (an increase of 2.9 percent from January 2005).
Most data on the emerging market economies published this month were better than those of the previous month, but they still show a slowdown in the rate of growth.
Concern over global growth intensified also due to the assessment that the set of tools available for economic policy was depleted, relative to that in 2008.
The results of both models are sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.
Makam yields declined along most of the curve by up to 8 basis points, with one-year yields declining to 1.62 percent during the period.
The Manufacturers' Association survey shows that growth in manufacturing output continued, and even accelerated somewhat in the third quarter.
The Committee emphasized that the continued withdrawal from the accommodative policy is contingent on economic indicators, and that the decisions in the future will continue to be made in accordance with developments in inflation, the real economy, financial markets and the global economy, with the goal of attaining the monetary policy targets.
The yield on one-year makam increased to an average of about 1.1 percent, from about 0.9 percent in April.
On 4 December the Bank of England cut its rate from 3 percent to 2 percent, and on 19 December the Bank of Japan reduced its rate by 0.2 percentage points to 0.1 percent.
At the time of the discussion the Fed was expected to make another reduction in the interest rate in its scheduled meeting on 30 January, with further cuts to follow in the course of 2008.
The rate of participation by nonresident investors in foreign currency trading was 26 percent in October, compared with 32 percent in September, while the average for the year to date in 2011 is 34 percent.
The various models showed that a reduction of the interest rate to 4.5 percent in the first quarter of 2007 would lead to the convergence of the inflation rate to within the target range in the last quarter of 2007.
In the last few weeks concern has been growing that the debt crisis in Greece will spread into other European countries, with Spain currently being an additional focus of concern.
- House prices increased at a slower rate last month, while the housing component of the CPI declined in the last two months, partly due to the measures introduced by the Bank of Israel and the government to cool the real estate market.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for February remained unchanged, in line with forecasts.
The Fed Chairman's adherence to the expression promising "exceptionally low levels of interest for a long time" led to a delay in the timing of the expected path of increases in the interest rate in the US.
The recovery of global growth is continuing, and the global economic recovery is expected to persist in 2010.
The labor market continues to demonstrate strength as unemployment dropped to 4.7 percent, a level quite near the estimated fullemployment rate.
The interest rates on CPI indexed and unindexed floating rate mortgages continued to increase in July, while the interest rates on variable rate unindexed mortgages declined.
According to the Bank of Israel assessment published in April, GDP will increase by exports.
The Committee emphasized the importance of the rapid handling of unemployment and labor market problems.
In the US, economic data continue to indicate an improvement in the economic situation.
Likewise, the Committee members discussed expectations from the various sources indicating the entry of the inflation rate to within the target range in the first quarter of 2024.
Goods imports (excluding ships and aircraft and diamonds) increased in May by about 1 percent.
- Interest rates in the major economies are low, and the markets are not pricing in an increase in the interest rate in the coming year in any of the central banks of the large advanced economies.
On 9 December the World Bank published its updated economic assessments, according to which world growth will be 2.8 percent in 2008, and 0.9 percent in 2009.
The Committee assessed that the monetary tightening processes in Israel and abroad, and the moderation of demand, are working to moderate inflation.
Purchasing managers indices for advanced and developing economies increased, with the index for developing economies in an environment indicating economic expansion, but in advanced economies the index still indicates slowing in the pace of activity.
At the time of the discussion the assessment was that the budget deficit for 2006 would be less than 2 percent of GDP.
In the same period the Dow Jones index rose by 0.8 percent.
In addition to depreciation, supply-side constraints due to the war can impact on prices.
The UK also announced deep budget cuts that incorporated reduced expenditure, increased taxes and surcharges on banks, in an attempt to reduce the large budget deficit.
In this context it was observed that given the uncertainty about developments in the global economy and their possible implications for Israel’s economy, it is of even greater importance that the budget be passed in accordance with the guidelines set, so as to increase the chances of maintaining the growth trend in 2008 and beyond.
Home prices continued to increase at a rapid pace in recent months, alongside growth in mortgage volume.
The greater uncertainty resulted from the outbreak of the debt crisis in Greece and fears that it would spread to other countries in Europe.
Most of the forecasters who updated their reports to the Bank of Israel after the publication of the August CPI expected the Bank to increase the interest rate for October by 25 basis points.
The rate of increase of the (M1) money supply over the previous twelve months was cash element by 7.1 percent.
Excluding the financial sector, corporate bond issues increased from NIS 1.5 billion in February to NIS 2.3 billion in March.
The level of employment in the euro area fell by less than did GDP in the last year.
Prices of commodities, particularly oil, declined sharply—a continuation of their declines in the previous two months.
The improvement in financial conditions was maintained.
Participants in this discussion include the members of the Monetary Committee, senior representatives from the various departments of the Bank, and economists from the economic departments (Research and Market Operations), who prepare and present the material for discussion.
The strengthening of the euro acts as a brake on the economic recovery.
The Tel-Bond 20 Index increased by 0.7 percent, and the Tel-Bond 40 Index increased by 0.45 percent.
In the discussions of the interest rate for November, one of the participating members of management recommended that the Governor increase the interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point, and the other three recommended that the Governor leave the rate unchanged.
In the discussion it was noted that a rise in the inflation environment was evident— inflation in the previous twelve months was 4.2 percent, above the upper limit of the inflation target range, and the rate of price increases in the last six months in annual terms (seasonally adjusted) was even higher.
Based on the median path seen by Federal Open Market Committee members, three additional increases are expected in 2017; based on market assessments, the pace will be slightly more moderate but still higher than expected previously.
The notice of the interest rate decision for August stated that the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged is consistent with the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy which is intended to entrench the inflation rate within the price stability target of 1–3 percent over the next twelve months, and to support growth while maintaining financial stability.
- The annual rate of increase in house prices continues to be high––in the twelve months to May house prices increased by 13.7 percent, slightly below the rate in the twelve months to April.
Direct tax revenues were 6 percent lower in November, in real terms, than in November 2010, while indirect tax revenues were 6 percent higher, in real terms, than in November 2010.
In contrast, the housing price index, which is based mainly on renewed rental contracts and which is included in the CPI, continued to increase, rising by 1.3 percent in July, bringing the increase in the last twelve months to 5.2 percent.
Services exports increased by 1.4 percent in August.
Nonetheless, Israel’s sovereign risk premium, as measured in the 5-year CDS market, remained steady.
Inflation over the previous twelve months in July was a negative 0.7 percent.
The Central Bureau of Statistics monthly survey of business trends and its consumer confidence indicator continued to be negative in January as well, though with some improvement.
The strengthening of the NIS acts as a counterbalancing force against inflationary pressures.
In the same period the Dow Jones index rose by 3.4 percent.
The interest rate is forecast to begin increasing in the middle of 2013, under the assumption of a recovery in the global economy.
Supply side factors–taxes, and prices of oil and other commodities–influenced the August index and are also expected to be reflected in high CPI readings in the next few months as well.
The Monetary Committee discussed the domestic capital market, in which equity indices declined, and yields on long-term government bonds increased notably.
The Research Department forecasts that following the current interest rate reduction, the interest rate will remain unchanged until at least the end of 2013, while the previous forecast projected that the interest rate would begin to increase toward the end of 2013.
The continued increase in the number of building starts, the delayed effect of the increase in the interest rate, measures introduced by the Bank of Israel affecting mortgages, and steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in real estate taxation are all expected to continue to moderate home prices during the coming year.
They assessed that continuation of the appreciation will weigh on the return of inflation toward the midpoint of the target range.
Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread declined during the period from 121 basis points to 100 basis points, but increased again this month to 116 basis points.
In the meantime, the transfer of the sixth aid installment to Greece (about €8 billion) was delayed until November, since the Greeks have not fulfilled the conditions attached to it (already this year, the deficit/GDP targets have been revised a number of times and as of now Greece has not met the conditions for 2012 either).
The IMF also adjusted its forecast of US growth downward, to a negative 1.6 percent in At the same time, inflation is declining, in light of the intensification of the recession, the decline in the labor market, and falling commodity and oil prices.
From the previous monetary policy discussion held on March 25, 2012, through April underperformance since the beginning of the year, a continuation of the positive trend of the previous month, and in contrast to the general global trend.
Different commentators saw the crisis either as posing a threat of the break-up of the eurozone or as the opportunity to create fiscal uniformity.
The rise in the index reflects increases in all its components, and in particular a 2.1 percent increase in the index of manufacturing production in the index of trade and services revenue.
The results of the models are sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.
The disappointing GDP figure for the first quarter, the reduced demand expected from Europe, together with the strengthening of the yen, all these are expected to have a negative impact on Japan's production and exports, and were among the factors that led to the Bank of Japan's announcement on the urgent need to broaden the basis of growth.
Until the Knesset approves the budget for 2006, government spending follows the law on the absence of an approved budget, whereby monthly expenditure is limited to one twelfth of the previous year's budget.
The Committee referred to the inflation environment which remains low.
Most Committee members agreed that the initial indicators of activity in the first quarter—including the Business Tendency Survey and the Composite State of the Economy Index—support the assessment that the economy continues to grow strongly.
This month the IMF reduced its global growth forecast for moderate in emerging market economies.
In Brazil the central bank cut the interest rate by 50 b.p.
The annual inflation rate remains above the lower bound, and the members' assessment was that in the coming months inflation will hover near it.
The Committee members also discussed the anomalous volatility in the exchange rate during March, against the background of the liquidity distress in the foreign exchange market in view of the sharp declines in global equity markets.
However, in contrast, the trend of depreciation in the shekel, which in the Committee’s assessment also reflects some increase in the economy’s risk premium, contributed to an increase in the inflation rate.
Finance Division, Research Department Dr Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of Information and International Affairs Division Most of the economic data published in June (up to the date of this interest rate decision) were better than expected.
In the twelve months ending in February, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand deposits) increased by 12.9 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 6.9 percent.
CDS spreads for most emerging economies declined at similar rates.
The stock of new homes available for sale continued to increase, and in May–July was on average 6.4 percent higher than the three preceding months.
Four Committee members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and one Committee member supported the proposal to reduce it to 0.1 percent.
In contrast, the increase in commodity and energy prices is expected to have an effect on the inflation rate in the near term and draw it near the center of the target range.
However, last month there were signs of a recovery, including in exports and manufacturing production.
China also appears to be showing signs of a slowdown this month (relative to its terms of growth) with a drop in industrial production, in consumer sales, and its purchasing managers' index in the manufacturing sector.
- The rate of increase in home prices continues to rise, and in the 12 months ending in December, home prices increased by 6.7 percent, compared with 5.8 percent in the 12 months to November.
In addition, the revision by the US Commerce Department of figures for the prior three years shows that GDP is currently only $13.5 trillion (not $14.3 trillion) and in effect is still lower than the level on the eve of the crisis in 2008.
The past few months have seen a decrease in the average loan-to-value ratio (LTV).
The number of employee posts, seasonally adjusted, increased by 0.6 percent in the three months March–May compared with the previous three months.
In May there was a surplus of NIS 1.2 billion in the general government budget in the domestic budget and a deficit of NIS 0.7 billion in government activities abroad.
The Committee held a broad discussion of the change that has taken place in the inflation environment.
Most of the slowdown in activity derives from Operation Protective Edge.
The strong growth rate is supported principally by a sharp rise in private consumption and in business-sector investment.
From the monetary policy discussion on June 21, 2015, through July 24, 2015, the shekel strengthened by about 0.25 percent against the dollar, and by about 3.5 percent against the euro.
Atypically, the decline in exports encompasses a large number of industries.
Stock market prices rose this month against the background of the easing of the debt crisis in Europe––due to the fiscal policy measures introduced in countries with refinancing problems––and positive financial statements in the second quarter.
The index of manufacturing production (seasonally adjusted) fell in March by rose sharply in March, by about 4 percent, after declining by 0.6 percent in February The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 0.1 percent in February compared with its January level.
However, after several weeks of war, it appears that the economy is in a process of economic recovery in some components of activity.
In particular an increase in manufacturing activity was evident, partly explained by recovery in the motor industry and in exports.
Eurozone inflation is expected to be 2.7 percent in 2011, and 2 percent in 2012.
- Although some of the change in the exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar was indeed affected by local factors, another part stemmed from the weakening of the dollar worldwide, and these trends could change.
Yields on Portuguese 10-year government bonds reached a record level of 7.4 percent, and gave rise to concern in the markets that the probability that Portugal would have to ask for aid was increasing, against the background of the fact that Greece and Ireland had requested aid after the yields on their bonds exceeded the 7 percent level.
In contrast, core inflation remains stable.
- During the past month, the expansionary policies of major central banks continued, and interest rates in those economies remained near zero.
The CDS spread of most emerging market countries also widened somewhat in this period.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](http://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Documents/April%2016%202018%20interest%20rate%20decision.docx) Bank of Israel—Minutes of interest rate discussion on April 15–16, 2018 Page 1 of 4 The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest for the economy.
In the eurozone too the central bank changed its approach, and tended towards a tighter policy.
On 19 December the Bank of Japan announced a 20-basis-point reduction in its interest rate to 0.1 percent, and several other steps intended to ease corporate financing and to increase liquidity in the financial markets.
The June composite state-of-the-economy index showed a drop of 0.3 percent, and the adjusted index for May a drop of 0.1 percent.
The expansionary policy of central banks in major advanced economies is expected to continue, according to their announcements, later into the year as well.
The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector increased by 1.2 percent in February compared with the January level.
Seven of the ten forecasters who updated their reports to the Bank of Israel after the publication of the June CPI expected the Bank to increase the interest rate for August, while the others expected an increase in September.
The various scenarios of the models yield contradictory results, making it difficult to analyze the relevant factors.
There were net withdrawals from corporate bond mutual funds and general bond mutual funds totaling about NIS 3.2 billion in June.
The medium term risks include recession in Europe, fiscal crisis in Japan, and slower than expected growth in developing economies.
After rises in the indices on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange in April and the beginning of May, the exchange registered falling share prices in the second half of May and the first half of June.
In addition, the Monetary Committee announced a targeted plan intended to assist the orderly granting of credit to small and micro businesses that were adversely impacted by the war.
Inflation expectations for two years and longer range between 2.3 percent and 2.4 percent, compared with a range of 2.4–2.5 percent in the previous quarter.
Inflation is expected to moderate in light of the drop in commodity and oil prices, the marked fall in share price indices, and the slowdown in global growth.
The consumer confidence index and the University of Michigan confidence index for December both rose more than expected.
In the discussions on the interest rate for January, one of the participating members of management recommended that the Governor leave the rate unchanged, and the other three recommended that he increase it by a quarter of a percentage point.
Government bond yields remained low, and it appears that the Bank of Israel’s intervention in the corporate bond market, which began in July, contributed to a marked decline in spreads on the main Tel Bond indices.
The monthly unemployment rate according to trend data was 6.9 percent in April small sample, so that the figures should be treated with caution.
In announcing the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following points that led to the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged at 2.5 percent for March 2012: - Inflation expectations from various sources, for the next twelve months and for longer terms, are within the inflation target range.
Total mortgages granted in July were 10 percent below the extent of mortgages granted in June, but still higher than in the previous months.
As a result, we are seeing disruptions in economic activity, which are accompanied by increases in energy prices and by delays in various production and supply chains—delays that it is reasonable to presume are transitory.
Domestic government expenditure in January–October was NIS 4.4 billion (2.3 percent) lower than the seasonal path consistent with full budget expenditure.
The Committee was presented with an analysis of the effect of the crisis by industry, which showed that the total negative impact to GDP, given Ministry of Health guidelines, is about 37 percent.
Germany’s trade surplus dropped sharply in September, emphasizing the weakness in the eurozone’s main engine of growth.
Inflation expectations for the coming 12 months, from all sources, were higher in June than in May, but the developments during the period were uneven: inflation expectations derived from the capital market declined, while professional forecaster’s projections increased slightly after the CPI was published.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/23-8-21.aspx) ' THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest.
However, it was noted that in the past week, the shekel's appreciation has been halted.
Despite all these, it was noted that the relatively strong state of Israel's economy at this time would allow it to absorb these shocks with relatively moderate damage.
Total mortgages granted in the twelve months ending in April were 2 percent lower than those advanced in the twelve months to March, continuing the decline from the peak level in May 2011.
They said that the inflation rate is expected to decline in the coming period, in accordance with the seasonal path and due to government-initiated price reductions; however, to the extent that the shekel deprecation will persist, it—and with it, the increase in wages—is expected to support a rise in inflation.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 0.1 percent in October, slightly above forecasters’ predictions prior to its publication, and below the seasonal path consistent with the inflation target.
One-year-forward inflation expectations derived from the capital market ("break-even inflation") remained relatively stable from the last interest rate decision on August 23 to the first week of September, at around 2.7 percent, and in the next two weeks (up to September 24) they increased slightly, to above 2.8 percent.
During the last month the members of the Federal Reserve emphasized that preventing inflation was now the focal objective currently facing the US economy, rather than concern over an economic slowdown.
Last month credit rating companies made further cuts in the rating of European countries, and warned of the credit rating outlook of other countries and of banks around the world.
The Committee members emphasized that they will expand the use of existing tools, including the interest rate tool, and will be able to operate additional tools, to the extent that the crisis lengthens and it is necessary in order to achieve the monetary policy goals and to moderate the negative economic impact resulting from the crisis.
During the period from August 22 to September 24, the shekel appreciated by about to the appreciation of the shekel against the dollar by about 2.7 percent, and depreciation against the euro by about 2.1 percent.
Uncertainty in the financial markets remained at a high level, and the situation in the banking sector deteriorated.
Exports of goods and services increased by 5.6 percent—after declines of 10 percent and 5 percent, respectively, in the previous two quarters— bringing the figure back to the level it was at in the first quarter of 2011.
Compared with September, nominal wages increased in October by 1.2 percent, and real wages increased by 0.5 percent, based on seasonally adjusted data.
Regarding budgetary pressures, it was also noted that adhering to the budget framework––and with it, the deficit––would help the economy remain stable and strengthen foreign and local investors' confidence in the economy.
Macro figures indicate continued deterioration in the state of the global economy, including in the major emerging economies.
The Governor decided to leave the interest rate for July unchanged at 3.5 percent.
Four Committee members supported the proposal to keep the interest rate unchanged, and two Committee members supported increasing the interest rate to 0.25 percent.
The discussion centered on two major issues.
Similar to the previous forecasts, the forecast is based on the assumption that the war will be focused mainly on the Southern front.
Labor force survey data indicate a slight increase in unemployment during the fourth quarter of 2012, to 6.9 percent, accompanied by a decline in the participation rate of 0.4 percentage points.
Since the previous interest rate decision, the shekel weakened by 1.1 percent against the dollar, and strengthened by 0.6 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate and by 2.2 percent against the euro.
The domestic deficit (excluding credit) in 2010 was NIS 30.2 billion, 3.7 percent of GDP.
The latest economic data indicate that the slowdown in US economic growth has deepened, specifically in light of the deterioration in the housing market and the weakening of the labor market.
The June CPI excluding fruit and vegetables rose by 0.6 percent, higher than the path consistent with the inflation target.
Based on the latest economic data, the international economic organizations assess that the probability of a renewed slowdown in the global economy has increased recently.
Global macroeconomic data presented a mixed picture this month.
Since the beginning of the year, the shekel has strengthened by about 4.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
Director of the Research Department Finance Division, Research Department A downward revision of US growth figures for the past three years, a cut in the credit rating of the US, stagnation in core economies in Europe, and concerns of an expansion of the debt crisis to Italy and Spain (which led to European Central Bank recession and led to an unsettled market.
Against the background of indicators for a gradual recovery in the labor market and in demand (with variance among the principal industries) and in contrast, the supply limitations in some industries—the Committee assessed that there are several main risks to a possible acceleration of inflation: the development of the war and its impact on economic activity, depreciation of the shekel, limitations on construction industry activity, fiscal developments, and global oil prices.
In this scenario the average exchange rate in 2010 would be NIS 3.79 to the dollar.
The total number of business sector employee posts increased by 3.4 percent in June– August, compared with the same period in 2009.
The makam yield for one year declined last month from 4.4 percent to 4.1 percent.
However since then data became available that support the assessment that inflation is stabilizing in the lower part of the target range, and in their evaluation, the probability of a prolonged decrease to below the lower bound is relatively low.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for January declined by 0.7 percent, a greater fall than that expected by the Bank of Israel and greater than the fall predicted by private forecasters of between 0.3 percent and 0.5 percent.
The inflation estimates and expectations to twelve months ahead are lower than the midpoint of the target range.
The modest rise in the index in the last few months supports the assessment that the rate of recovery of economic activity has slowed.
They emphasized that the worldwide easing of inflationary pressures, the global economic slowdown and the global financial crisis had led to expectations that the main central banks would continue to reduce their interest rates in the next few months, which supports a substantial interest rate reduction in Israel too, and in their opinion enables the rate for November to be cut by half a percentage point.
Prior to the interest rate decision for May, the _makam curve reflected_ expectations in the financial markets that the Bank of Israel interest rate will decline moderately during the next year.
The slowdown in activity is reflected especially in declines of goods exports and goods imports in April, continuing their decline in previous months.
The Fed Chair repeated the assessment that the Federal Reserve is likely to increase the interest rate this year.
The yield on one-year _makam went up from an_ average of 4.4 percent in October to an average of 4.5 percent in November.
The probability of the realization of the current geopolitical risks is unknown.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed bonds fell in March to an average of 1.2 percent, compared with 1.5 percent in March.
Though the CPI over the past twelve months fell by 0.3 percent, over the seven months since the beginning of the year the CPI has risen by a total 2.1 percent.
Nevertheless, there is evidence that the effects of the developments in the global economic environment are starting to filter through.
Tax revenues since the beginning of the year are some NIS 11 billion ahead of the seasonal budget path.
These forecasts are based on expectations that the interest rate will be increased.
Against the background of these developments, the ECB made a surprise cut in the interest rate this month, and the markets are pricing in interest rate cuts in other economies.
In addition, the Committee discussed the updated macroeconomic forecast compiled by the Research Department.
The average rate of unemployment is expected to drop to 7 percent (compared with 7.1 percent in the January forecast).
Their assessment was that if the crisis does not persist or spill over into additional countries, and particularly if significant preventative measures are not required in Israel, no significant impact is expected on macroeconomic activity in Israel.
The Fed and the ECB kept the interest rate unchanged and emphasized in their forward guidance that the interest rate is expected to remain at a high level for a longer period of time, with markets not pricing in additional interest rate increases by them, and only pricing in an interest rate decrease during the second quarter of 2024.
The Bank’s assessment is that inflation, measured over the previous twelve months, will return to within the range in mid2009.
The balance of outstanding housing credit to households increased by 0.5 percent in the twelve months to November to NIS 257 billion.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/08-10-18.aspx) The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the appropriate rate of interest for the economy.
As expected, the Bank of Japan left the interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent.
Responsible fiscal policy is important for strengthening markets’ trust, and in addition is likely to help entrench inflation within its target.
The Employers Survey and the Business Tendency Survey indicate expectations of continued growth in employment, though at a more moderate pace than in the past.
The Committee also discussed the updated macroeconomic forecast compiled by the Research Department.
Other forecasts also indicate a recession in the eurozone and the UK.
Negative indicators include October data on foreign trade, and third-quarter data from the Manufacturers Association survey of expectations (see below).
These tax increases are likely to be reflected in one-off price increases in the next few months.
The risk premium in most emerging markets increased significantly this month, in light of the global financial crisis.
Although the ECB left its interest rate unchanged at 4 percent at its last meeting, the President of the Bank hinted in the accompanying notification, and even more clearly in the press conference following the meeting, that a rise in the interest rate was to be expected as early as at the next meeting.
In the middle of January the CBS published its updated estimates of the National Accounts for the third quarter of 2010, showing an increase of 4.4 percent in GDP and of 5.1 percent in business sector product (annual rates, seasonally adjusted).
It can be assumed that upcoming elections are likely to continue the "paralysis" of the leadership there in its ability to deal with the crisis.
In total, companies that responded expect activity to continue to grow in the third quarter as a result of an increase in orders from the domestic market.
The expected level of activity remains robust and is around the economy’s potential growth.
It is worth mentioning that some European macroeconomic data exceeded expectations: unemployment in Germany declined slightly to 6.8 percent in December, from 6.9 percent in November.
A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s discussion is presented in the notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was published on July 8, 2024, and in the data file that accompanied the notice.
There is a high likelihood that the Federal Reserve will raise its rate by 0.25 percentage points at its next meeting on Regarding yield gaps, nominal yields in the US stand in June at about 5.1 percent both for one-year and 10-year terms, so that the nominal yield gap between Israel and the US ranges from 0.7 percentage points for one year to 1.4 percent in the long term.
Macroeconomic data in the US which were published this month continue to be encouraging, particularly employment figures, sales and production indices, and credit figures.
The number of employees joining the labor market each month (non-farm payrolls) averaged more than 200 thousand in the past six months, the most significant rise since 2006.
The main risk to the forecast is the materialization of the scenario in which legislative and institutional changes will be accompanied by an increase in the State’s risk premium and continued depreciation of the shekel, with an adverse impact on exports, and a decline in domestic investments and demand for private consumption.
Inflation expectations for two years and longer increased, and currently range from 2.5 percent for shorter terms to 2.9 percent for longer terms.
Most of the slowdown in growth derives from the weakness of exports, against the background of the weakness in the global economy; a moderation in domestic demand is also evident.
Based on the Telbor market (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offer Rate), the Bank of Israel interest rate in a year’s time is expected to be 4.2 percent, and forecasters’ predictions on average are that it will be 4.3 percent.
Taking into consideration the slowdown in the global economy and its expected negative effect on Israel's economy already in the second quarter, the differential between the interest rate in Israel and those in the major economies, and the moderation of actual and expected inflation, three members of management recommended that the Governor leave the rate of interest unchanged for July.
Nonetheless, some leading central banks are continuing to reduce their use of special instruments of monetary accommodation.
In that connection, it was stated that in the event of a scenario with a negative impact on the Israeli economy, the Monetary Committee will be prepared to reach necessary decisions, even during the intermeeting period.
The data that became available since the previous monetary rate decisions will be made by the Committee.
The data on real activity indicate that output recovered swiftly from the shock caused by the fighting.
Against the background of continued growth in this balance and the absence of appropriate growth in allowances for doubtful debts in respect of housing credit, the Supervisor of Banks published a draft directive increasing the required risk weighting and provisioning on housing loans, and reducing the required capital allocation for guarantees in respect of homes already delivered to residents.
China is showing the results of the government's efforts to cool the economy.
The IMF created a rescue plan for Greece that supported a reduction of the budget deficits (from 13.6 percent of GDP in 2009 to less than 3 percent in 2014).
Thus, in the above period Russia’s fiveyear CDS spread increased from 246 basis points to 1,071 basis points, the Czech Republic’s went from 45 to 216, Turkey’s from 291 to 838, and Poland’s from 60 to In the wake of the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers investment bank in midSeptember, there was increased concern over the stability of various financial institutions, and the global financial crisis worsened.
Exchange rates were characterized by high volatility, and since the previous policy decision, the shekel weakened by 1 percent against the dollar, by 2 percent against the euro, and by 1.3 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.
After considering all the above points, the Governor decided to raise the interest rate for June by 25 basis points, to 3.5 percent.
Participants in the discussion noted that as a result of concern over the debt crises in several European countries, the increases in interest rates that were expected to take place in the next few months in Europe and most advanced economies will be delayed, and the ECB is not expected to increase its interest rate in the next half year.
The housing market also yielded some encouraging signs of stabilization, although the data are still mixed.
In contrast, inflation expectations for the various ranges increased over the course of the period to around the upper bound of the target range, and they incorporate assessments for expected tax increases.
The marked decline in short-term yields was an indication of calm and the return of investors' confidence in those countries' ability to repay debts.
Prior to the current decision on the interest rate, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 2 percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate, and 0.25 percentage points lower than the ECB rate.
The official reason for the announcement was the impression created of the difficulty of leaders of the eurozone and the EU to make decisions, which indicates an inherent weakness in the decision making process.
The Latin American central banks adopted a more aggressive policy, whereas some of the Asian central banks tended to an expansionary monetary policy.
Nevertheless, the withdrawal of fiscal support and the continuing process of reducing leverage by banks are likely to hold demand down and thus represent a downside risk to the forecast recovery.
In contrast, private consumption contributed to growth during the recent period.
In the US, economic activity remained at a high level, with slight moderation in the most recent data.
Director of the Research Department Finance Division, Research Department Most macroeconomic data published during the month continued to indicate a slowdown in the rate of recovery of the global economy.
The main factors supporting real appreciation of the shekel are the expected further current account surplus in the balance of payments and the flow of foreign investment into the economy.
The Committee members who supported keeping the interest rate unchanged noted that indicators of expected real activity, particularly the improvement in expectations of activity compared to previous months, alongside the turnaround in imports, may point toward an end to the slowdown.
The Knesset approved the budget framework for 2007 determined by the government.
Trend data from the monthly indicators also continue to show that economic growth has continued and become more firmly established.
It was emphasized that in view of the crisis, there is a methodological difficulty in calculating the CPI and in analyzing the meaning of the measured change in prices.
There were 39,794 building starts in the 12 months ending in December, and this is expected to continue to support a high level of stock of homes.
The yield on 5-year CPI-indexed government bonds increased from 1 June to 18 June to an average of about 2.1 percent, compared with an average of about 1.7 percent in May.
They noted that the latest data indicated a slowdown in the rate of economic deterioration and that there were signs that the situation was stabilizing.
The sharp decline in exports of goods and services was also mentioned, as well as the moderate growth of private consumption.
Since the beginning of the year, the seasonally adjusted CPI has increased by 1.9 percent, consistent with an annual rate of inflation of 2.1 percent.
Labor Force Survey data indicate that despite a slight decline in November, the prime working ages (25– with 80.1 percent in October) and employment rate (76.6 percent, compared with 76.9 percent), and a low unemployment rate (3.9 percent, unchanged from October), while the job vacancy rate remains high, at 3.8 percent (seasonally adjusted).
The main argument in favor of cutting the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points was based on the combination of risks from the global arena.
The yield gap between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term declined to 127 basis points from 173 basis points in mid-September.
The price of an ounce of gold jumped during the month to a record $1,897, though in recent days it fell back significantly to only $1,750.
In assessing the state of the global economy, Committee members indicated positive and negative developments that accumulated over the previous month.
The inflation rate as measured by the change in the CPI over the past 12 months was -0.4 percent, while the change was -0.7 percent over the 12 months ending in August, and there has been a marked upward trend in the annual inflation rate since April.
Taking into consideration the points made in the discussion, the Governor decided to keep the interest rate for September unchanged at 1.75 percent.
The Bank of Israel announced that it will continue to act to achieve its price-stability objective, and will monitor Israeli and worldwide economic developments, and will use the instruments available to it to encourage employment and growth, and to support the stability of the financial system.
In September they rose by 0.3 percent, after falling by 0.8 percent in August.
On 16 February the Bank of Israel announced that from the following day it would employ an additional instrument of monetary policy, by starting to purchase government bonds on the secondary market, with the intention of strengthening the Bank's influence on interest rates for longer terms.
For the first time in four quarters, the Employers Survey of the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Labor shows a marked improvement in the balance of employment, the result of both an increase in the number of posts filled, and a reduction in the number of terminations of employment.
One member stated that he was not concerned about a continued rise in home prices, but just the opposite, a too rapid drop in their prices.
The decline in the average LTV ratio and in the proportion of mortgages for investment purposes apparently indicate the increasing influence of constraints imposed by the Banking Supervision Department.
The most recent data on economic activity in the first months of 2008 indicate a slowdown in growth in the services sector in Europe, which constitutes the major sector in the economy, to its lowest rate in four years, and a fall in consumer and business confidence indices.
Even after the security situation improves, recovery of incoming presented in the appendix.
It was expected that the recovery would be a slow one, and that it would be accompanied by a slow process of interest rate increases.
In the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the signs of moderation in the negative trend in economic activity firmed.
At that time the yield on one-year makam declined from 4.5 percent to 4.3 percent, while that on 3-month Prior to the current decision on the interest rate, the Bank of Israel interest rate was points lower than the ECB rate.
The Committee members noted that investment in residential construction declined in the past three quarters, and it is possible that this decline indicates a moderation in supply of homes as well.
Spreads in the corporate bond market narrowed, primarily for debt issued by companies with lower ratings.
A discussion developed regarding the forces acting to weaken the shekel, including the continued rise in the US interest rate, a process that worked, among other things, to reduce hedging activities among institutional investors, and the forces acting to strengthen it, including growth in exports.
The average real wage per employee post increased by 3.3 percent in October compared with September, and the nominal wage by 3.7 percent (both seasonally adjusted), and in May–October compared with the same months in 2009 they increased by 1.4 percent and 3.8 percent respectively.
In the second half of 2006, after four years of increases, the upward trend in labor productivity appears to have come to a halt and as a result, unit labor costs appear to be rising.
The Composite State of the Economy Index increased 0.2 percent in December Labor market data indicate a high level of employment and a low unemployment rate.
This, despite a 0.9 percent fall in manufacturing production from September to October.
The persistent rising trend of government tax revenue is expected to bring the budget deficit for 2007 to between 1 percent and 1.5 percent of GDP.
The Committee also discussed the marked uncertainty in the fiscal situation.
In the last three months, about NIS 10 billion were withdrawn.
It was also decided to narrow the interest rate corridor in the credit window and the commercial banks' deposit window from The Bank stressed the following points supporting the reduction in the interest rate for March: - The marked effects of the global crisis and the fall in domestic demand on economic activity in Israel; - The Bank’s assessment that inflation is on a steep downward path, and is likely to be below the target range in the second half of 2009; - The low interest rates set by the major central banks around the world, and the additional policy instruments used by them to bring about monetary expansion.
The World Bank expects China's economy to recover from the crisis in the second half of 2009, thus helping to stabilize the whole Asian economy.
Given recent government commitments, and particularly in light of the expected growth rate of 2.8 percent in 2012, which is lower than the 4 percent growth forecast underlying the budget, the Ministry of Finance expects the deficit in 2012 to be 3.4 percent of GDP, compared with the deficit ceiling of 2 percent set at the end of 2010.
Total outstanding credit to households increased in March by 1 percent compared with February, to NIS 389 billion.
Excluding the effects of changes in legislation, total tax revenues in January higher, and indirect taxes 22 percent.
- Economic indicators published this month show that activity expanded at a faster pace, led by domestic demand.
In addition, in light of the increase of only 1.2 percent in the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) index for May (which although higher than had been expected, is still not high), the Chairman of the Fed claims that the price increases (and their severe adverse effects on the purchasing power of US consumers) are temporary, and he therefore continues to feel more concerned over deflation.
At the same time, the rate of growth of government expenditures derived from the automatic pilot needs to decline in order to meet the expenditure rule.
In this regard, the Committee members noted the tight labor market and the employment rate among the prime working ages currently being at a record.
In 12-months hence, they expect, on average, that the interest rate will reach 6.25 percent compared to their previous forecast of 5.75 percent.
- Factors acting to push up inflation in recent months are expected to bring inflation back to within its target range during 2007, and to raise it close to the upper boundary of the range in 2008.
The investment houses expect that deflation will continue into next year.
The fact that the shekel weakened against both the dollar and the euro indicates that its weakening was essentially caused by domestic factors.
Short-term inflation expectations from various sources are around the lower bound of the target range.
However, the forecast for world trade growth was revised downward, to 2.9 percent from 3.2 percent, and the institution noted the concern of increased barriers to world trade.
Positive developments include the interest rate reduction by the ECB, extensive loans offered by the ECB, at easy terms, to commercial banks in the eurozone, and the move to reduce the interest rate on their dollar swap lines.
The Committee noted that, looking forward, there are a number of forces that will be able support an increase in inflation: continued growth in private consumption, which is supported by the strength of the labor market; stability in commodity prices; and a continued increase in labor cost per output unit.
In contrast, they noted the high level of uncertainty surrounding the forecast.
On average, they forecast inflation of 0.7 percent in 2007, and 2.1 percent in 2008.
while transport and communications and construction saw more modest growth.
These participants thought that it was important to reduce the interest rate by a larger amount this month so that the rate of price increases would be more likely to become consistent with the target inflation rate sooner rather than later.
In addition, the inflation rate over the past 6 months and even more so over the past 3 months (in annual terms, seasonally adjusted) is lower than the annual rate, in prices of tradable goods and nontradable goods.
In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations underlying the decision to keep the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent: - The inflation environment reflected in increased actual prices and expectations for one year ahead remains stable.
Most indicators published in the last month (in the period between the decision on the interest rate on August 23 and the current decision on September 27), showed that economic activity continued to increase at a buoyant rate in the third quarter, so that the output gap contracted further.
At the time of the meeting the 12-month inflation rate stood at 3.5 percent, above the upper limit of the target inflation range of 1-3 percent a year.
Expectations regarding interest rates around the world derived from the conduct of financial market traders are that the increases in interest rates by the central banks in most advanced economies will start later than expected last month.
In the last twelve months the CPI rose by 3.6 percent, and the wholesale price index by 7.6 percent, the latter reflecting price increases in most of the principal industries.
These include, among other things, the rising wages in the economy, the vigorous private consumption, inflation abroad and the expansionary fiscal policy.
The composite index fell in September to a six-year low, and capital investments fell for the fifth consecutive quarter.