At its meeting on May 18, 1999, the Committee adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets that would be consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 4-3/4 percent, but the directive also contained a bias toward a possible tightening of policy.
Accordingly, the Committee voted to incorporate the following statement regarding the 1999 and 2000 ranges in its domestic policy directive: The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
The manager also provided an update on staff work related to potential arrangements that would allow depository institutions to pledge funds held in a segregated account at the Federal Reserve as collateral in borrowing transactions with private creditors and which could potentially provide an additional supplementary tool during policy normalization.
Money market fund (MMF) net yields across all fund types rose notably, as increases in administered rates passed through to money market instruments.
Issuance of agency CMBS remained robust and issuance of non-agency CMBS strengthened notably in June.
However, the recent decrease in energy prices had already led to a reduction in drilling activity and was likely to reduce some investment in alternative fuels.
Participants agreed that cumulative policy firming to date had reduced demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing.
Yields on longer-dated Treasury securities rose late in the period following comments by Federal Reserve officials.
During their discussion of economic conditions and monetary policy, participants also commented on different concepts of the equilibrium real federal funds rate--that is, a reference value of the inflation-adjusted federal funds rate consistent with the economy achieving, over a specified time horizon, maximum employment and price stability.
In light of the recent economic data and anecdotal information, the Committee agreed that the statement to be released after the meeting should acknowledge that economic growth had slowed in the first part of the year.
The proposed changes were intended to allow the Committee to obtain additional information about the potential usefulness of ON RRP operations for affecting market interest rates when that step becomes appropriate.
Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting was a little weaker, on balance, than the one prepared for the July FOMC meeting.
While market commentary suggested that a number of factors contributed to the decline, a clear catalyst was difficult to identify.
The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate."
Members agreed that the Committee's evaluation of progress on its objectives would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.
Meanwhile, broad equity prices also increased notably.
A few participants noted that they already viewed the costs as likely outweighing the benefits and so would like to bring the program to a close relatively soon.
However, the effects of these factors were offset to some extent by actual and expected easing of monetary policy in the United States and abroad and by better-than-anticipated profits at some S&P 500 firms.
A straight read of OIS (overnight index swap) forward rates implied that the federal funds rate would decline about 60 basis points in 2019 and about 35 basis points in 2020.
The incoming information on inflation over the intermeeting period was largely in line with participants' expectations.
The average workweek and aggregate hours worked by nonfarm employees increased significantly, and the average level of nonfarm employee hours in October and November was noticeably above the average in the third quarter.
Overall, credit quality remained strong, al­though there was some deterioration for credit card and auto loan borrowers and some predictors of future credit quality worsened a bit further.
A number of participants commented that the counterparties at such a facility should include depository institutions.
In particular, if that pressure intensified, at some point further gains in productivity would not be able to offset rising wage increases.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods edged higher in May after posting large increases in earlier months of the year.
Expenditures on a wide range of other consumer goods and services expanded briskly.
Seasoned equity offerings in October and November were similar to the typical volumes observed in previous years, though equity raised through initial public offerings moderated somewhat from the robust rate of issuance in September.
Activity in the commercial real estate sector continued to be weak.
In China, retail sales and fixed-asset investment rose strongly.
Several also noted the possibility of larger-than-anticipated near-term cuts in federal government spending.
Some participants pointed to reports from contacts that firms could not as easily pass on price increases to consumers or were making less frequent price adjustments than they had in recent years.
The rise in longer-term real interest rates and some widening of private credit spreads in recent months were seen as perhaps having a little restraining effect on the investment outlook.
While liquid deposits rose rapidly, small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds continued to contract.
The decrease in exports was mainly in civilian aircraft and other capital goods.
Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.3 percent over the same 12-month period.
The incoming information on inflation over the intermeeting period showed that the earlier declines in energy prices and falling prices of non-energy imports were still contributing importantly to low headline inflation.
With respect to the statement to be released following the meeting, members agreed that only small changes were necessary to reflect the modest improvement in the near-term economic outlook.
Early in the intermeeting period, conditions in short-term wholesale funding markets appeared to deteriorate somewhat.
Some participants commented that trade policy developments remained a source of uncertainty for the outlook for domestic growth and inflation.
Persisting strength in manufacturing output was accompanied by brisk increases in mining activity and sizable declines in utilities services associated with cooler-than-normal temperatures.
Over the 12 months ending in March, total consumer prices as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) rose 2-1/2 percent, while core CPI inflation was 2 percent.
Important factors influencing this assessment were that foreign economic and geopolitical developments still seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed.
By contrast, District reports regarding the construction sector were mixed, al­though here, too, some contacts reported that supply constraints were acting as a drag on activity.
This view reflected their expectations that the current expansion, even if it did moderate to a pace approximating the economy's trend potential growth, would do so at a level of resource use that based on the historical record exceeded the economy's sustainable capacity--perhaps by even more than at present, given the evident strength of aggregate demand.
Motor vehicle purchases bounced back in late 2005 and early 2006 from the sluggish pace that followed the end of the past summer's "employee pricing" programs.
Another possibility might be for the Committee to express the inflation goal as a range centered on 2 percent and aim to achieve inflation outcomes in the upper end of the range in periods when resource utilization was high.
He felt that policymakers should instead focus their attention on improving the monetary policy transmission mechanism, particularly with regard to the activity of community banks, which are vital to small business lending and job creation.
Foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, as troubles in the property sector weighed on economic activity in China and monetary policy restraint contributed to the slowing in economic growth in Europe.
In the Manager's opinion, secondary market transactions would provide a helpful addition to the current range of assets that the System normally purchased, especially in a period of little or no increase in Treasury debt.
Recent information continued to indicate that consumer price inflation had picked up, while producer price inflation was essentially unchanged.
The staff assessed that leverage in the financial sector remained moderate.
Measures of labor compensation increased a little faster than consumer prices.
Excluding food and energy, core consumer price inflation picked up in April and May, pushing the 12-month change in the core consumer price index through May above its level of a year earlier.
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months ending in March.
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were generally unchanged over the intermeeting period.
The reversal was driven in part by a tighter spread between Treasury bill yields and repo rates.
The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A.
The participants' discussion was preceded by staff presentations that reviewed the principal channels through which asset purchases exert effects on financial conditions and the economy, with a focus on the implications of these channels for the Committee's deliberations regarding future adjustments to the Federal Reserve's asset purchases.
The S&P 500 index rose about 1-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period, as earnings reports from a range of companies appeared to indicate that profits in the second quarter had increased modestly relative to the first quarter.
Modest production increases in most manufacturing categories in December, including high-tech, consumer goods, and business equipment, outweighed production declines in the motor vehicles and parts sector.
The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted in April indicated that, on net, bank lending standards and terms had eased somewhat further during the first quarter of the year and demand for C&I loans, commercial mortgages, and auto loans had increased, while demand for residential mortgages continued to decline.
Implied rates on interest rate futures initially rose following the meeting but subsequently retraced, and expectations regarding the path of the target federal funds rate over the next few years ended the period only modestly changed.
Outlays on drilling and mining structures continued to climb in the first quarter, and available data pointed to ongoing growth.
Still, projected resource utilization was lower over the next two years than in the previous forecast.
Growth in business fixed investment slowed further in the first quarter, and new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft continued to decline in March, pointing to weakness in capital goods shipments in the near term.
Growth in consumer spending declined in recent months from the already modest pace in the first quarter.
Nominal Treasury yields rose in line with the shift in the outlook for monetary policy.
One member was persuaded, however, that such a policy move should be implemented at this meeting in order to avert the need for a stronger and probably more disruptive policy adjustment that would be needed later to head off rising inflation.
If instead deposit rates moved up in line with net yields on alternative investments, ON RRP takeup could remain relatively steady.
The expansion of domestic nonfinancial debt increased in November and December (latest data), reflecting greater business borrowing, perhaps to finance growing inventories and smaller contractions in the amount of federal debt outstanding.
While assessments by individual members of the likely pace of the expansion going forward differed somewhat, they generally expected growth to run at a rate that would trim slack in labor and goods markets over the forecast period, assuming no major shocks to the economy.
Sales of new homes edged up to a record level in September, and sales of existing homes continued to be brisk, though a little below the exceptional pace of the first half of the year.
But as suggested by the rise until recently in profit margins, businesses had been able to realize productivity gains that tended to offset the faster increases in compensation costs.
In this regard the risks of rising inflation could not be dismissed, and while those risks appeared to be quite limited for the nearer term, excessive monetary stimulus had to be avoided to avert rising inflation expectations and added inflation pressures over time.
Indeed, the severe ongoing financial market strains, the large reductions in household wealth, and the global nature of the economic slowdown were seen by some participants as suggesting the distinct possibility of a prolonged contraction, although that was not judged to be the most likely outcome.
Given recent developments, members anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time.
The available data suggested that consumer spending was supported by gains in personal income in the fourth quarter of 2010.
Members noted that inflation had picked up in recent months; however, they also noted that inflation had continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports.
In light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak, how much the economy would weaken, and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast.
Participants observed that the recent partial federal government shutdown had presented a significant hardship for many families.
The component of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE edged down in May, but light motor vehicle sales moved up briskly.
Some members also noted that any adjustment of these ranges to align them more fully with projections of money growth consistent with the Committee's expectations for expansion of the economy and prices in 1996 could be misinterpreted.
Imports from China were especially weak, which may in part reflect seasonal adjustment issues related to the timing of the Chinese New Year.
Retail stocks continued to climb in January, but sales rose by more; the sector's inventory-sales ratio also edged lower, but it remained near the top of its range for the past twelve months.
Equity prices also rose in most emerging market economies, with the stock market in China outperforming.
Aggregate delinquency rates on CMBS backed by office properties continued to be elevated in November.
In making these judgments, most policymakers emphasized the primacy of maintaining monetary control in setting the appropriate capacity of the ON RRP facility for the time being; participants indicated that the Committee's future decisions regarding the size and ultimate longevity of the facility should be largely driven by considerations of monetary control, although other factors, such as financial stability, should also be taken into account.
A number of policymakers were concerned that such an assertion could unduly constrain future adjustments to the stance of policy should the evidence emerging in coming months suggest that an appreciable firming would be appropriate.
Several meeting participants observed that, although the economy's sustainable potential output could not be observed directly or estimated with precision, historical patterns and recent data suggested that current levels of labor and product market resource utilization were in a zone consistent with little or no remaining economic slack.
Real residential construction contracted in November and December.
Both the share of workers employed part time for economic reasons and the rate of long-duration unemployment edged down in recent months, although both measures were still high.
As a result, financial conditions generally eased appreciably early in the intermeeting period.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Wednesday, November 12, 1997.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose in the third quarter in Japan, the euro area, and Canada, and the pace of contraction in the United Kingdom moderated substantially.
Although the price of natural gas had fallen because of continued plentiful inventories, retail gasoline prices surged, leading to a jump in overall energy prices for the month.
With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary policy, all participants saw some further firming of the stance of monetary policy as likely to be warranted.
However, they judged that purchases of longer-term Treasury securities would only modestly improve conditions in private credit markets at present, and that completing already-announced plans to purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and to support certain asset-backed securities markets was, in current circumstances, likely to be a more effective way to employ the Federal Reserve balance sheet to support credit flows to, and spending by, households and businesses.
Interest rates on intermediate-term Treasury securities rose in response to the revision to policy expectations, but longer-term yields were little changed over the intermeeting period.
Financing conditions for commercial real estate generally remained tight.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded in April and May at a faster rate than the average monthly pace during the previous two quarters.
The recent data on consumer price inflation were a little above staff expectations, but still indicated a slower increase in core prices compared with those of earlier in the year.
Estimates of such equilibrium real interest rates were highly uncertain, but some participants reported that their estimates were currently unusually low by historical standards, reflecting, for example, factors weighing persistently on aggregate demand.
The external sector continued to represent a major source of downside risk; the economies of several industrial countries seemed to be weakening, and the outlook for several key emerging market economies remained in doubt, with a further loss of confidence and contagion from the latter a continuing threat.
Moreover, the additional monetary policy tightening that would be necessitated by higher or more persistent inflation, and the potential for a greater tightening of financial conditions, represented a downside risk to the projection for real activity.
Against this background, all the members supported a proposal to maintain an unchanged policy stance and to adopt and announce an asymmetric directive that was tilted toward tightening.
Given that the balance of risks was seen as pointing to rising inflation over time, the members agreed that it was desirable to retain the tilt toward restraint in the directive.
Manufacturers added slightly to their stocks after two quarters of inventory liquidation.
Over 2025 and 2026, real GDP growth was expected to rise about in line with potential, leaving the output gap roughly flat in those years.
Sales increases were particularly large at furniture and appliance stores and apparel outlets.
The Committee's decision was widely anticipated and elicited little reaction in financial markets.
Reports from homebuilders in many parts of the country were encouraging.
Members also agreed that the statement should convey that "the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks" and that it "does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent."
Meeting participants noted that real consumer spending had been weakening through the summer, responding to lower employment and tighter credit.
They favored a stronger action to better address the stubbornly low inflation rates of the past several years, recognizing that the apparent low sensitivity of inflation to levels of resource utilization meant that a notably stronger real economy might be required to speed the return of inflation to the Committee's inflation objective.
Core PCE price inflation had also moved up moderately over the past year, and, over the 12 months ending in October, it was 1.7 percent for a third consecutive month.
In addition, participants reported hearing from contacts in a broad range of industries that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges were limiting the ability of firms to keep up with demand.
And fourth, asset sales would be implemented within a framework that had been communicated to the public in advance, and at a pace that potentially could be adjusted in response to changes in economic or financial conditions.
However, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real GDP growth would outpace growth in potential output over most of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels.
Although output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—had increased in January, available data indicated that output in this sector would decrease in February; the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices pointed to a reduction in mining-sector production over at least the near term.
The staff observed that the uncertainty related to the future course of the pandemic, the measures to control it, and the associated economic effects remained elevated.
Several European banks announced large declines in third-quarter profits, in part reflecting write-downs of their holdings of Greek sovereign debt.
Under these circumstances, the Committee judged that the costs of growth turning out to be weaker than anticipated could be relatively high.
They noted that the surge in prices of oil and other commodities associated with Russia's invasion of Ukraine was boosting gasoline and food prices and putting additional upward pressure on inflation.
Participants commented that recent inflation data generally had come in above expectations and that, correspondingly, inflation was declining more slowly than they had previously been anticipating.
Moreover, many of the factors that have been restraining the recovery, such as the large overhang of vacant houses, tight credit conditions, and elevated risk premiums, remained in place.
However, rates on high-yield private debt obligations fell only a little, and banks further tightened standards and terms on business loans, given the weakening outlook for profits.
In the multifamily sector, starts plunged in October to the slowest pace in almost six years.
In contrast, spreads on commercial paper not eligible for purchase under the CPFF remained elevated.
For 2000, the Committee agreed on a tentative basis in June to retain the same ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1999 to the fourth quarter of 2000.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the May 2-3 meeting indicated that the labor market strengthened further in March but that growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) slowed in the first quarter, with the slowing likely reflecting transitory factors.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September generally suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace.
There was limited evidence of increased strains in unsecured, short-term dollar funding markets over the intermeeting period despite heightened concerns about the situation in Europe.
An apparent consequence of reduced income growth and of lower equity prices was a change in the mix of single-family homebuilding, with less emphasis on construction of high-priced homes.
CRE loan growth at banks was weak, on net, through February, consistent with tight bank lending standards.
According to the staff projection, growth in the debt measure would be near the midpoint of the existing range over the period through 1997.
The votes to renew the Federal Reserve's participation in these arrangements were taken at this meeting because provisions in the arrangements specify that the Federal Reserve provide six months' prior notice of an intention to terminate its participation.
The expected path of the federal funds rate moved down following the June FOMC statement and the Chair's postmeeting press conference.
In contrast, some other participants continued to express concern that a substantial undershooting of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, if it was to occur, posed a significant upside risk to inflation, in part because of the possibility that the behavior of inflation could differ from that in recent decades.
The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was a little stronger, supported by the effects of a higher projected path for equity prices and a lower trajectory for interest rates.
Moreover, participants expressed concern that a failure of inflation to moderate as expected could entail significant costs if an upward drift in inflation expectations ensued.
Members believed that the economy probably would continue to operate with significant margins of slack in both labor and product markets.
Moreover, some noted a risk that expected inflation might actually increase to an undesirably high level if the public does not understand that the Federal Reserve's liquidity facilities will be wound down and its balance sheet will shrink as economic and financial conditions improve.
At its meeting on June 24-25, the Committee adopted a directive that called for lowering the target for the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 1 percent.
Nonetheless, with the significant under-utilization of resources expected to persist through 2011, the staff forecast core inflation to slow somewhat further over the next two years from the pace of the first half of 2009.
Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12‑month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained near 2 percent in June.
Investors took particular note of the statement's indication that inflation was below the levels consistent with the FOMC's dual mandate for maximum employment and price stability.
In early November, market concerns about the fiscal outlook and ongoing federal budget negotiations seemed to intensify, prompting a notable reduction in equity prices and yields on Treasury securities.
Rates moved lower immediately after the policy easing action, and most fell still more on balance over the remainder of the intermeeting interval in response to incoming information about the economy and the prospects for fiscal policy, at least in the near term.
Conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed and generally remained accommodative.
As experience had shown, at times of economic and financial market stress the specific policy tools used would depend on circumstances.
Higher equity prices appeared to result not only from generally better-than-expected corporate earnings, which seemed largely to reflect aggressive cost cutting, but also from a reduction in the perceived risk of extremely adverse outcomes and a consequent increase in investors' appetite for riskier assets.
Some participants noted the importance of clearly communicating to the public the conditions that would warrant an increase in the policy rate.
Leveraged loan issuance was also strong in July and August.
Moreover, with both core and headline inflation having been somewhat elevated, participants expressed some concern that inflation expectations might become less firmly anchored.
The statement also reiterated the Committee's intention to extend the average maturity of its securities holdings as announced in June.
Recent increases in house prices and equity prices were positives, but participants generally expected no more than moderate growth in consumer spending over the near term.
Conditions in the agricultural sector reportedly improved somewhat, but contacts were concerned about the effect of potentially higher tariffs on their exports.
The Committee anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
A vast majority of participants revised up their projections for real GDP growth this year compared with the projections they had submitted in March, citing stronger consumer demand and improvements in vaccination rates as the primary reasons for these upgrades.
Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices were up modestly over the November- December period and for all of 1995 advanced slightly more than in 1994.
The near-term forecast for core PCE price inflation was essentially unrevised.
On November 17, the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the maximum maturity of loans available under the discount window's primary credit program from 90 days to 28 days, effective January 14, 2010.
Additionally, all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS would be reinvested in agency MBS.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that, in light of further weaker-than-expected incoming economic data, the expansion of economic activity would be relatively muted for some time.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit remained about unchanged in June before narrowing in July.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, Committee members agreed that no changes to the Committee's asset purchase program or to its target range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this meeting.
Business-sector debt was increasing briskly, as the expansion of business loans remained robust.
Participants' Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2024 through 2026 and over the longer run.
Several participants remarked that the Committee's balance sheet plans indicated that it would slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level judged consistent with ample reserves.
Another view was that financial stability risks at present are moderate and that the largest banks would continue to maintain very substantial capital cushions in light of a range of regulatory requirements, including rigorous stress tests.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range of 0 to 1/4 percent for the federal funds rate.
Members noted the considerable uncertainty about the outcome of the vote and its potential economic and financial market consequences.
Some important measures of price inflation, after adjustment to exclude their volatile food and energy components, had shown a flat or even a declining trend in recent quarters.
Some modest year-end pressures were observed in repurchase agreement markets, but they dissipated by early January.
Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline for a time, reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities, until the Committee judges that reserve balances are at an ample level.
In China, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a higher-than-expected annual rate in the first quarter as the economic recovery remained broad based, with industrial production, investment, and domestic demand continuing to grow briskly.
After being roughly flat over most of the intermeeting period, initial claims for unemployment insurance rose moderately toward the end of the period but remained at a level consistent with further moderate job gains in the coming months.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its December projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years.
However, they noted some loosening of terms for both securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives transactions, on net, over the previous three months for certain classes of clients--including hedge funds, institutional investors, and nonfinancial corporations--and intensified efforts by those clients to negotiate more-favorable terms.
Most participants judged that long-term inflation expectations either were already below the Committee's 2 percent goal or could decline below the level consistent with that goal should there be a continuation of the pattern of inflation coming in persistently below 2 percent.
Consumer spending, however, showed some signs of weakening.
Members observed that price inflation had remained subdued, and by some measures had declined, in recent months despite very tight labor markets and indications of somewhat faster increases in labor compensation.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 18, 2007.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 4, 2004.
In April, the deficit widened as imports recovered somewhat, but it remained narrower than its first-quarter average.
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Delinquency rates for consumer debt edged down further in recent months, with delinquency rates on some categories moving back to pre-crisis levels.
All agreed that the path of short-term rates going forward would be dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook.
In part, worker willingness to accept compara- tively limited increases in compensation could be attributed to the apparent rise in insecurity about the permanence of jobs or the availability of alternative jobs, but the reasons were not fully understood.
The U.S. trade deficit in goods and services widened significantly over the October-November period from its average for the third quarter.
The expansion of broad measures of money had moderated in recent months.
The unemployment rate was 7.6 percent in March, a little below its average in the fourth quarter of last year.
The decline in imports was led by lower imports of non-oil industrial supplies, capital goods, and automotive products, although these declines were partly offset by an increase in the value of oil imports.
The contraction was reflected in widespread declines in payroll employment and industrial production.
The staff analysis suggested that further strong gains in income, along with the surge in household net worth over the past several years, would support brisk, though gradually diminishing, gains in consumer spending.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 25–26, 2023.
For the year through April, both aggregates expanded at rates appreciably above the upper bounds of their respective ranges for the year.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests a return to moderate economic growth following a pause late last year.
In addition, all but one member agreed to replace the date-based guidance with economic thresholds indicating that the exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate would remain appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
Manufacturing production was unchanged in June.
The intermeeting averages of the effective federal funds rate and the Secured Overnight Financing Rate remained unchanged from the previous intermeeting period averages, at 9 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively.
Starts for new single-family homes decreased in March, but the average pace in the first quarter was little changed from the fourth quarter.
Participants generally reported that their business contacts were optimistic about the economic outlook.
Inflation had been subdued in recent months, there was little evidence of wage or cost pressures, and longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 3-1/2 percent.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed sharply in February, as imports fell more than exports.
A substantial majority now viewed the near-term risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced, with several of them indicating the risks from Brexit had receded.
Other forward-looking indicators, such as subdued readings from surveys of business conditions and capital spending plans, also pointed toward roughly flat real expenditures for business equipment in the near term.
In November, the euro-area and U.K. purchasing managers indexes for services were well below their level over the first half of the year; nevertheless they pointed to moderate expansion.
Moreover, they were concerned that, despite the improvement in labor market conditions, the new language might be misinterpreted as indicating increased concern about underutilization of labor resources.
In the ensuing discussion, participants considered the advantages and disadvantages of alternative approaches to reinvestment.
Manufacturing activity continued to generally outperform activity in the services sector, and manufactured exports from China and some other Asian economies remained strong, especially to the United States.
On net, the U.K. 10-year sovereign yield increased, though by less than the comparable yield in the United States, while the yield on German bunds was little changed.
The members also believed that the balance of risks remained weighted toward conditions that could generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.
Some forward-looking indicators of investment in E&S improved, suggesting that conditions had become less adverse than earlier in the year.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in 1998, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead.
Going forward, participants expected a deceleration in house prices to contribute to an increase in the household saving rate and to weigh on consumption growth.
Even so, the outlook for jobs and income and the buildup of financial wealth constituted favorable home affordability factors that appeared likely to support a continuing high level of housing demand, especially in the single-family sector.
U.S. real GDP was forecast to show a historically large decline in the second quarter of this year, and the unemployment rate was expected to be sharply higher than in the first quarter.
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period.
In this regard, members referred to earlier unsustainable rates of investment by many high-tech firms that were now obliged to retrench despite still high rates of growth in the demand for their products and services.
Yields on nominal U.S. Treasury securities moved down in the early part of the intermeeting period but later retraced their declines.
Business sector debt advanced more slowly in the second quarter, although the expansion of business loans remained brisk and net issuance of corporate bonds was solid.
The staff also noted that the sustained growth of lending by banks to nonbank financial firms represented an increase in financial interconnectedness.
In addition, retail investors evidently placed redemptions from equity and bond mutual funds into bank deposits and retail money market funds.
Equity prices had varied widely and were substantially lower, on net.
Spreads on most types of longer-tenor commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed, reportedly reflecting reduced market concerns about the effects of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, although some of the spreads remained slightly wider than those seen earlier this year.
Many participants noted that although the economic recovery had slowed recently and the August increase in payrolls had fallen short of expectations, the labor market had continued to show improvement since the Committee's previous meeting.
Consistent with the decision made at the March meeting, the vote did not formally encompass the wording of the press statement to be released shortly after this meeting.
Developments in the banking sector later in the period were met with sharp reductions in Treasury yields, particularly at shorter tenors.
Although some stabilization in housing markets was likely needed to help underpin an economic recovery in coming quarters, there was little indication that that process had yet begun.
However, several participants pointed out that the 3-month change in that index had firmed recently, signaling some improvement in the inflation outlook.
Another area of uncertainty was the outlook for fiscal and trade policies.
Core consumer price inflation remained subdued in October, although it was up from even lower levels in the first part of the year, when it was depressed by transitory factors.
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. Dudley, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, Charles I. Plosser, Jerome H. Powell, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid pace in July and August.
Measures of hourly labor compensation continued to increase moderately with no sign of acceleration.
Real GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023 but still outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels, as monetary policy was assumed to remain highly accommodative.
Consumer price inflation moved further below the FOMC's longer-run objective of 2 percent, held down by continuing large decreases in energy prices.
Yields on nominal Treasury securities were little changed on net.
Labor markets continued to be very tight, but there were few signs of any acceleration in labor costs.
In addition, some market participants pointed to heightened demand for federal funds at month end by some banks in connection with their efforts to meet liquidity coverage ratio requirements as contributing to upward pressure on the federal funds rate.
The Committee's action at the January 30 meeting had been viewed by market participants as the most likely outcome, but near-term futures rates declined a few basis points as investors had placed some probability on a smaller policy move.
Consumer credit continued to grow on a year-over-year basis, but the expansion of credit card and auto loan balances appeared to slow from the rapid pace that was evident through the end of last year.
The expansion in economic activity was anticipated to lead to a slow reduction in resource slack over the projection period, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline gradually to the staff's estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
Over the intermeeting period, market yields fluctuated in response to news about developments abroad, including Greek debt negotiations.
Moreover, despite further declines in mortgage interest rates in recent months, other factors continued to restrain housing demand, including consumer pessimism about the outlook for jobs and income, the depressed rate of household formation, and tight underwriting standards for mortgages.
Readings on economic activity in Latin America were more mixed.
With respect to the economic outlook and its implications for monetary policy, members continued to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators would strengthen somewhat further.
He did not believe that providing more monetary accommodation was the appropriate response to those changes in the economy, given the current policy framework.
The fair value of banks' longer-term fixed-rate assets, including loans, increased in the fourth quarter as longer-term interest rates decreased, though banks remained vulnerable to significant increases in longer-term interest rates.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:15 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April suggests that the pace of economic contraction is slowing.
Accordingly, a steady policy would not incur an unacceptable risk of a seriously deteriorating economic performance.
One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—increased moderately, on balance, remaining elevated relative to its historical distribution and significantly above average pre-pandemic levels.
In addition, there was not complete consensus within the Committee that headwinds were the only explanation for the low expected future path of policy rates.
The upward pressure on consumer prices from increases in import and commodity prices earlier in the year, along with the temporary boost to motor vehicle prices from low inventories, were expected to recede further in the coming quarters.
Most participants described labor market conditions as strong, noting that payroll gains had remained well above the pace regarded as consistent with absorbing new labor force entrants over time, the unemployment rate had stayed low, job openings had been high, or that initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had been low.
Except for oil, most sensitive commodity prices have risen only slightly after years of decline, the dollar remains strong, real short-term interest rates are near historical norms, and productivity growth has accelerated in recent quarters.
For many emerging market economies, the recent slowing in growth of economic activity was most evident in exports, industrial production, and other indicators of manufacturing activity.
On September 19, it announced the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF), which extends nonrecourse loans at the primary credit rate to U.S. depository institutions and bank holding companies to finance the purchase of high-quality asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) from money market mutual funds.
Although spending on high-tech capital goods and software expanded at a robust pace in the third quarter, data on new orders and shipments in October pointed to more moderate growth in the fourth quarter.
Progress in reducing unemployment over the projection period was expected to be relatively slow.
Most long-term interest rates changed little over the intermeeting period, but Treasury bond yields moved up slightly on balance, apparently in response to incoming data suggesting stronger-than-expected economic growth.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the expansion in economic activity had slowed considerably after a very rapid advance in the first quarter.
Bond issuance by domestic corporations generally stayed strong, commercial and industrial loans on banks' books increased by a notable amount late in the fourth quarter, and issuance of leveraged loans and collateralized loan obligations generally continued apace.
These participants cited, for example, the still-elevated levels of long-term unemployment and workers employed part time for economic reasons as well as low labor force participation.
Participants agreed that falling prices for energy and other commodities and diminished economic activity had resulted in an appreciable reduction in inflationary pressures.
However, the average effective federal funds rate was modestly higher than in the previous intermeeting period.
Explanations tended to focus on the concerns about job security felt by many workers, the muted rise in the costs of worker benefits, notably for health care, and the increased use of innovative and highly targeted methods of compensation.
The deterioration in CRE credit quality sparked investor concerns about the health of a few small U.S. and foreign banks over the intermeeting period.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan and Geithner, Ms. Bies, Messrs. Ferguson, Guynn, Kohn, Lacker, and Olson, Mses.
These positive factors were partly offset in the staff's medium-term GDP projection by higher projected paths for both longer-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
A couple of participants noted the need to continue to monitor and evaluate the effects of balance sheet normalization on long-term interest rates and economic performance.
Results from the Desk's July Survey of Primary Dealers, conducted shortly before the July FOMC meeting, indicated that market participants' expectations for the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate and the subsequent policy path were largely unchanged from those reported in the survey taken just before the June meeting.
As German yields fell to new record lows, spreads of most euro-area peripheral bonds over those yields narrowed.
Nevertheless, many firms evidently remained slow to expand hiring, in part because of rising benefit costs.
Although labor markets already were tight, inflation had remained relatively subdued, and there were no signs in price data that it was picking up.
However, members underscored that the pace of asset purchases was not on a preset course and would remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of purchases.
On net, financial conditions eased modestly over the period but remained substantially tighter than at the start of the year.
Industrial output strengthened for the fourth quarter as a whole, largely reflecting a surge in the production of motor vehicles and parts that more than offset sizable reductions in mining and utility output.
To be sure, the economy's potential output appeared to be expanding briskly, with much of the impetus provided by accelerating productivity.
Although financial market conditions had improved, credit was still quite tight in many sectors.
In particular, leverage and maturity transformation in the financial sector were subdued relative to historical levels, and growth of aggregate private nonfinancial-sector credit was modest.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting adjustments to policy, all the members indicated at least some preference for retaining a symmetric directive.
The moderation in core PCE prices was widespread across categories of goods and services.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting continued to suggest that the expansion would gradually moderate from its currently elevated pace to a rate around, or perhaps a little below, the growth of the economy's estimated potential.
A number of factors continued to be seen as likely to limit the economic expansion to a moderate pace in the near term; these included slow growth or even contraction in some major foreign economies, ongoing and prospective fiscal tightening in the United States, modest growth in household income, and--despite some recent signs of improvement--continued weakness in the housing sector.
Although many of those economies recently experienced sharp declines in equity prices and widening credit spreads amid deepening concerns about credit quality, these developments occurred too late in the intermeeting period to have any apparent effect on incoming data.
A few participants, however, highlighted factors other than weather that had likely contributed to the slowdown during the first quarter, including slower growth in net exports following its unusually large positive contribution to growth in the fourth quarter of 2013.
At the same time, the persistence of very strong competitive pressures, including those arising from foreign competitors, was preventing most business firms from passing on higher costs by raising prices, and this lack of pricing power did not appear to be diminishing.
Net issuance of bonds was particularly strong, supported by heavy issuance in both the speculative- and investment-grade sectors.
Book-value inventory-to-sales ratios in April were similar to their pre-recession norms, and survey data also suggested that inventory positions generally remained in a comfortable range.
Producer prices for both core and total finished goods posted unusually large increases in October, reflecting in part a sizable advance in the prices of motor vehicles.
In these circumstances, she believed it appropriate to gradually increase the target range for the federal funds rate, consistent with the Committee's recent communications.
Among the other sources of risk noted by participants were that fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might prove to be insufficient and that foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad.
The allotment limit was subsequently increased to $10 billion per counterparty in early April.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that economic activity continued to expand very slowly in the first quarter.
The current regime was therefore effective both in providing control of the policy rate and in ensuring transmission of the policy stance to other rates and broader financial markets.
Nevertheless, the staff continued to forecast that economic activity would increase more rapidly in the second half of this year than over the first half, as supply chain disruptions in the motor vehicle sector eased.
Growth of M2 moderated somewhat in January and February from a brisk pace in late 1996, while expansion of M3 remained rapid in both months.
M2 was estimated to have increased for the year through June at a rate somewhat above the Committee's annual range and M3 at a rate near the upper end of its range.
Inflation rebounded in many foreign economies, reflecting rising energy prices and other temporary factors.
In the nonresidential sector, building activity remained soft in October.
Partly as a consequence, they lack the flexibility for use to drain reserves late during the business day, a flexibility that might be particularly desirable to have in place during the upcoming year-end period.
Several others indicated that they did not anticipate making adjustments to the program before its intended completion.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion.
In addition, economic activity appeared to have decelerated in many developing countries in the third quarter but remained solid in most of those nations.
Although payroll employment remained below its pre-pandemic level, the shortfall was concentrated in a few sectors and reflected a shortage of workers rather than insufficient demand for labor.
However, yields remained high even after these announcements and moved up subsequently, notwithstanding the ECB's purchases of government debt.
Consistent with lower mortgage rates, home-purchase mortgage originations increased, reversing a yearlong decline.
In October, the producer price index for core intermediate materials moved up only slightly for a second month, and the twelve-month increase in these prices was considerably below that of the year-earlier period.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods posted further large gains in July and August, with outlays for high-tech machinery and transportation equipment particularly strong.
The disruptions to economic activity here and abroad had significantly affected financial conditions and had impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses.
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose modestly over 2012, and, with small increases in productivity, unit labor costs also advanced only modestly.
The staff forecast for overall and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation over the next two years was revised down slightly.
Nevertheless, recent data on foreign industrial production and trade seemed to be stronger than private analysts had anticipated and were consistent with moderate economic growth abroad.
The staff's forecast for inflation was little changed from the projection prepared for the previous FOMC meeting.
International trade in emerging market economies picked up, supported by Chinese demand, while demand from advanced economies still appeared weak.
Downside risks included the possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may have edged lower or that the run of soft core inflation readings this year could prove to be more persistent than the staff expected.
Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting, the near-term forecast for real GDP growth was a little weaker, on net, than in the previous projection.
The German economy continued to perform strongly, while recent data showed weakness in the peripheral euro-area countries.
As a result, the announcement of the decision elicited little market reaction, as did the subsequent publication of the minutes of the meeting.
Growth of M2 and M3 picked up somewhat in the first quarter from already robust rates in the fourth quarter.
This acceleration in economic activity was expected to be supported by an easing in the effects of fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, increases in consumer and business sentiment, continued improvements in credit availability and financial conditions, a further easing of the economic stresses in Europe, and still-accommodative monetary policy.
Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) funding consumer loans was robust in recent months, and ABS spreads were about unchanged over the intermeeting period.
In addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage‑backed securities.
The slowing in loan growth was concentrated mainly in real estate credits and was due partly to heavy securitizations.
The Federal Reserve is facilitating the extension of credit to households and businesses and supporting the functioning of financial markets through a range of liquidity programs.
In such an environment, households' saving behavior was an important source of uncertainty in the outlook.
The intense strains across a range of short-term funding markets that emerged in March had subsided.
Nonetheless, home construction was still below the trend that would appear consistent with population growth, sales remained at low levels, and credit availability was still relatively tight.
With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally anticipated that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would most likely be consistent with a sustained economic expansion, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near 2 percent over the medium term.
In the meantime, nonresidential construction and energy-related investments were a source of some support to investment spending, but they provided only a very partial offset to widespread weakness in other business spending.
However, the pace of job gains so far this year was slower than last year, even after accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics' benchmark revision to payroll employment, which will be incorporated in the published data in February 2020.
Moreover, participants noted that employment in the leisure and hospitality sector was still down substantially from its pre-pandemic level despite a sharp rebound in February.
Business fixed investment remained soft even as the drag from the sharp contraction in drilling rigs over the first half of this year appeared to be fading.
A few participants also suggested that the Committee should solicit additional information from the public regarding the possible effects of an ON RRP facility, but some others pointed out that the Committee would continue to receive such feedback informally in response to its ongoing communications regarding normalization.
With regard to nominal GDP growth in 1998, the forecasts were mainly in a range of 3-3/4 to 4-1/2 percent, with an overall range of 3-1/2 to 5 percent.
But the dollar depreciated, on net, over the remainder of the intermeeting period, reflecting concerns about an escalation of trade frictions prompted by the U.S. imposition of import quotas on Chinese textiles, the ability of the United States to continue to finance its current account deficit, and risks stemming from developments in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Turkey.
However, business sentiment appeared to remain strong for some industries, particularly those most closely connected with consumer goods.
They acknowledged that the timing and extent of a potential rise in inflation were subject to considerable uncertainty.
In support of the Committee's longer-run planning for improvements in the implementation of monetary policy, the Desk report also included a briefing on the potential for establishing a fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility as an additional tool for managing money market interest rates.
A few participants commented that the Committee's accommodative policies were intended in part to promote a more balanced approach to risk-taking, but several others expressed concern about the potential for excessive risk-taking and adverse consequences for financial stability.
With the increase in the caps on redemptions to be implemented beginning in October, reinvestment of Treasury securities would occur almost exclusively in the middle month of each quarter in connection with the Treasury's midquarter refunding auctions.
Twelve-month inflation remained elevated but declined further in Mexico and Brazil.
On this issue, participants judged there to be a great deal of uncertainty and expressed concerns about the possibility that an early reopening would contribute to a significant increase of infections.
As a result, growth of spending on consumer durables was expected to be appreciably below the rapid pace in the first half of last year, and housing demand would increase only a little from its recent level.
The prices of a number of intermediate goods, including a wide range of petrochemical products and building materials, were subject to upward pressure, reflecting high crude oil prices, production disruptions in the energy sector, and elevated demands for materials in anticipation of rebuilding in the Gulf Coast region.
Several participants cited statistical evidence for the United States that inversions of the yield curve have often preceded recessions.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services continued to widen in April.
Rates also moved up on a broad array of fixed-income securities, including investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds, municipal bonds, both agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), and agency residential mortgage-backed securities.
Members concurred that the statement should note that the expansion remained solid despite elevated energy prices and hurricane-related disruptions.
Bank lending to businesses surged in August, apparently because some banks funded leveraged loans that they had intended to syndicate to institutional investors and perhaps because some firms substituted bank credit for commercial paper.
ON RRP usage was also likely supported by typical month-end dynamics.
Nonetheless, the cutbacks in both defense and nondefense federal outlays, as well as state governments' budget restraint, continued to weigh on jobs and income in some parts of the country.
Households' debt-to-GDP ratio remained relatively low, and there were few signs of increased stress among lower-income households.
Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. real GDP growth prepared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting was revised up a little for the second half of 2019 relative to the previous projection.
Participants generally continued to judge that a tightening in credit conditions spurred by banking-sector stress earlier in the year would likely weigh further on economic activity, but the extent remained uncertain.
Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector was strengthening, but mortgage rates had risen somewhat and fiscal policy was restraining economic growth.
Real personal consumption expenditures had shown essentially no growth in September and October, suggesting that tighter credit conditions, higher gasoline prices, and the continuing housing correction might be restraining growth in real consumer spending.
The improvements were concentrated in the advanced foreign economies and China, supported by vaccine rollouts, the unwinding of public health restrictions, economic adaptation to the virus, and the reopening of the services sector.
However, factory output has changed little on balance in recent months.
Regarding inflation, members agreed to update the language in the statement to acknowledge that inflation had recently moved somewhat closer to the Committee's longer-run objective and to convey their judgment that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent had diminished somewhat.
However, the staff's medium-term projection for real GDP growth in the April forecast was little changed from the one presented in March.
In light of the improved conditions, the staff proposed that the Desk no longer be required to increase agency CMBS holdings or reinvest principal payments for agency CMBS.
The improvement was reflected not only in a pickup in payroll employment gains and a noticeable decline in the overall unemployment rate, but also in reductions in broader measures of underutilization such as long- duration joblessness and the number of workers with part-time jobs who would prefer full-time employment.
Consumer price inflation picked up in recent months, while measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained stable.
For the second quarter as a whole, both total IP and manufacturing output declined, while mining output rose notably, supported by a strong gain in crude oil extraction.
Members noted that one broad measure of wages had picked up and that there was a small rise in the number of anecdotal reports indicating that labor shortages were contributing to higher wages in some parts of the country.
Several other participants pointed out that the largest contributors to the recent elevated measures of inflation were a handful of COVID-related, pandemic-sensitive categories in which specific, identifiable bottlenecks were at play.
The available information on economic activity abroad in the third quarter indicated that economic expansion remained moderate in the United Kingdom and sluggish in the euro area.
Available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was slowing somewhat in the third quarter as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending.
He saw the costs of delaying action at this meeting as likely to be small relative to the gains from promoting a faster return of both elements of the Committee's dual mandate to their longer-run objectives.
In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.
Moreover, the unusually large fraction of those individuals with jobs who were working part time for economic reasons, as well as the uncommonly low level of the average workweek, pointed to only a gradual decline in unemployment as the economic recovery proceeded.
Imports rose a bit, with increases in imports of consumer goods and automotive products, but imports of capital goods declined sharply from September's elevated level.
The 12‑month change in the headline PCE price index moved up further to 1.4 percent in October, as the rise in energy prices since the spring offset much of the decline earlier in the year.
Real goods exports edged down in May after growing robustly in March and April.
The civilian unemployment rate fell to 5.7 percent in August despite advances in claims for unemployment insurance.
Housing activity was well sustained in April, with the run-up in mortgage rates that began in February having had little perceptible effect to date.
The added clarity in that regard might help forestall the development of expectations that inflation would decline below desired levels, and hence keep real interest rates low and support aggregate demand.
Credit remained generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to reduce the demand for credit, resulting in lower financing volumes in some markets.
Recent statistics supported by widespread anecdotal reports pointed to persisting strength in housing activity, though there were indications of softness in high-priced homes in at least some parts of the country.
On the other hand, slowing job gains might also be indicative of some cooling in labor demand, which may be consistent with an observed decline in the rate of job openings and decreases in other measures of labor market tightness.
Sales of existing single-family homes held steady in November and rose in December, while sales of new homes inched up in both months.
All the members favored or could support the retention of the current ranges for this year and their extension on a provisional basis to 1999.
With sales and profits projected to grow more slowly, and with utilization of existing capacity having eased considerably, business investment in new equipment and structures was expected to expand at a more moderate rate.
It was noted that credit conditions had eased further, although nonfinancial corporations continued to hold very high levels of cash.
Growing market perceptions that monetary policy would remain stimulative for a longer period than previously anticipated appeared to have contributed to significant declines in interest rates across maturities and risk classes, and to rising prices in equity markets.
Looking ahead, a number of factors seemed likely to undergird consumer spending, including the positive effects on permanent incomes of robust ongoing growth in productivity, the possibly accelerated phase-in of tax reductions stemming from earlier legislation, the prospects for additional reductions in federal taxes affecting household incomes, and more generally the continued favorable effects of low interest rates and widely available financing on consumer purchases of motor vehicles and other durables.
Corporate bond spreads narrowed modestly, and corporations continued to tap credit markets at a solid pace.
Because such firms tend to be more dependent on commercial banks for financing, participants saw limited credit availability as a potential constraint on future investment and hiring by small businesses, which normally are a significant source of employment growth in recoveries.
Information received since the Committee met in January indicated that the labor market remained strong through February and that economic activity rose at a moderate rate.
Late in the period, equity prices retraced some of their gains, as concerns about the spread of the coronavirus weighed negatively on risk sentiment.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance were little changed over the intermeeting period.
Reflecting investor concerns about the conditions of financial institutions, spreads on credit default swaps for U.S. banks widened sharply, and those for insurance companies remained elevated.
At the producer level, core price inflation for finished goods over the twelve months ended in October was at a very low rate.
Participants discussed the implications of the economic outlook for the likely future path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
Foreign economic growth continued to be subdued, as fiscal retrenchment and financial stresses in the euro area continued to weigh on economic activity in Europe and elsewhere.
The staff provided its latest report on vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system.
Real GDP growth in the first quarter had moderated relative to the second half of last year, but PDFP growth maintained a strong pace.
However, some areas that were affected by the slowdown in the energy sector experienced house price declines or increases in mortgage delinquency rates.
Average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2 percent over the 12 months ending in February.
The stock market's rise was viewed as somewhat puzzling, given indications of some slowing in the growth of profits and the potential for earnings disappointments as the expansion in spending moderated and profit margins narrowed in the context of more rapid labor cost increases.
The amendments also removed the central banks of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland, and the Bank for International Settlements from the list of institutions with which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements (swap facilities).
The current ranges set in February for the period from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997 were unchanged from the ranges for 1996 and included expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for M3.
Investors also focused on the state of negotiations over Brexit and the Italian government budget deficit.
Given the substantial ongoing slack in resource utilization, some slight downward pressure on core consumer price inflation was anticipated in the staff forecast.
In November, however, the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE stepped down, possibly reflecting some holiday sales having been pulled forward to October.
The median respondent to the Desk surveys expected the three-month bill yield to increase slightly relative to the similar-maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rate and to remain above it into the fourth quarter.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the June 17-18 meeting indicated that real gross domestic product (GDP) had dropped significantly early in the year but that economic growth had bounced back in recent months.
Some participants saw the risks to inflation as tilted to the downside in the near term, reflecting the quite elevated level of economic slack and the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to decline in response to the low level of actual inflation.
Moreover, the downward revision to first-quarter GDP growth and the slow growth reported for the second quarter indicated that the recovery was quite sluggish in the first half of this year.
Even so, corporate bond spreads remained extremely high by historical standards.
With inflation still high, most major foreign central banks, while keeping their policy rates unchanged, indicated their intentions to hold these rates at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to target rates.
For borrowers with lower scores, credit availability tightened slightly in April but remained close to pre-pandemic levels.
Incoming data for foreign industrial economies were generally favorable and pointed to continued expansion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 30-May 1, 2019.
Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.
A number of the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions were oversubscribed, as was the auction of options for 13-day Schedule 2 TSLF loans straddling the end of the year.
Business expenditures were also likely to be held back by a weaker sales outlook and tighter credit conditions.
In these circumstances, the members recognized the need to monitor with special care price movements in the stock market and asset markets more generally for their implications for consumer and other spending.
House prices were largely stable, on balance, in recent months.
In contrast, some other participants were more worried about risks arising from a labor market that had already reached full employment and was projected to tighten further or from the easing in financial conditions that had developed since the Committee's policy normalization process was initiated in December 2015.
The members also viewed business inventory investment as likely to provide some support to the economic expansion over the year ahead.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation The market-implied path for the federal funds rate moved down over the intermeeting period.
Even so, favorable prospects for employment and incomes and the large gains that had occurred in financial wealth suggested that consumer expenditures were likely to be well maintained over the projection horizon.
And the recent firming in oil prices, if sustained, was anticipated to boost domestic energy production.
A few participants remarked on the decline in energy prices and the associated reduction in activity in the energy sector.
Corporate bond issuance by nonfinancial firms remained fairly robust in February; commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfinancial CP also continued to expand.
Other downside risks included the possibility of sizable spillovers from a greater-than-expected economic slowdown in Europe and China, persistence of the softness in spending, or a sharp falloff in fiscal stimulus.
In particular, these participants preferred forward guidance in which the target range for the federal funds rate remained at the ELB until inflation had moved above 2 percent for some time.
He believed that holding rates artificially low would invite the development of new imbalances and undermine long-run growth.
Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased, on net, in February and March.
Many participants, including some of those who were focused on the increasing risks, expressed the view that continued solid improvement in the outlook for the labor market could prompt the Committee to slow the pace of purchases beginning at some point over the next several meetings, while a few participants suggested that economic conditions would likely justify continuing the program at its current pace at least until late in the year.
The March increase in payrolls had been smaller than expected, and the unemployment rate had remained steady.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective January 28, 2016, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
With regard to inflation, a number of participants saw a risk that it could run persistently below their 2 percent objective, with some expressing concern that such an outcome could undermine the credibility of the Committee's commitment to that objective.
Job gains were strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate stayed low.
In the aftermath of the hurricanes, higher prices for gasoline and some other items were likely to boost inflation temporarily.
The increase in exports primarily reflected higher exports of services and agricultural products.
The rates of private-sector job openings and of hires increased over June and July, and the rate of quits was unchanged.
At earlier stages of production, producer prices of core intermediate materials moved down, on net, during July and August while most indexes of spot commodity prices increased.
Participants noted disappointing readings on inflation over the first quarter and indicators pointing to strong economic momentum, and assessed that it would take longer than previously anticipated for them to gain greater confidence that inflation was moving sustainably toward 2 percent.
Despite the sharp liquidation of inventories in the manufacturing sector in February and March, the aggregate inventory-shipments ratio for that sector edged higher in March to a level well above that of a year ago.
Regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at least at the current pace.
Delinquency rates on consumer loans remained high in recent months.
Credit market conditions for small businesses remained relatively accommodative despite sluggish credit growth among these firms.
Moreover, because a policy action was not currently anticipated, some commented that a tightening could produce an outsized and undesirable response in financial markets.
Business debt, which appeared to be high compared with fundamentals before the coronavirus outbreak, seemed poised to rise further as businesses borrowed to maintain their capacity to restart operations.
The Committee agreed that that the statement to be released after the meeting should take note of the substantial policy easing to date and the ongoing measures to foster market liquidity.
All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1A.
The unemployment rate edged down to 5.8 percent in October and remained at that level in November.
Participants noted that, in light of conditions in the business sector, business investment spending continued to be subdued.
In combination with a decline in government spending, the weakness of private spending had led to a substantial slowing in economic growth in the first quarter.
The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations was stable over the intermeeting period, and the ratio of aggregate debt to assets remained near multidecade highs.
In their discussion of economic developments across the nation, a number of Committee members noted some slippage in business and consumer confidence from the high levels reached late last year.
Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio moved up slightly, and both measures had recovered only partially from their lows during the pandemic.
However, a number of participants anticipated that the return to 2 percent would take longer than previously projected even with an assumed path for the federal funds rate that was lower than in their previous projections.
Participants also discussed whether to communicate to the public additional details regarding the approach they intend to take when it becomes appropriate to begin the normalization process, including the width of the target range for the federal funds rate, the settings of the IOER and ON RRP rates, and the use of supplementary tools.
Investor sentiment was strongly influenced by prospects for Europe, as market participants remained highly attuned to developments regarding possible steps to contain the fiscal and banking problems there.
No decision was made at this meeting to change the Committee's policy strategy or communications.
He also discussed the developments in connection with the bankruptcy filing of MF Global Holdings Ltd. and its finance subsidiary, MF Global Finance USA Inc., and with the termination of MF Global Inc. as a primary dealer.
Most measures of the increase in nominal wages from a year earlier continued to trend down, including the 12-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees, which was 4.1 percent in May, 0.2 percentage point lower than at the end of last year.
Votes against this action: Mr. Lindsey and Ms. Yellen.
(Data on compensation per hour that reflected the comprehensive revision of the national income and product accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) were not available at the time of the meeting.)
Several participants noted the possibility that there may be limits to the amount of additional accommodation that could be provided through increases in the Federal Reserve's asset holdings in light of the low level of longer-term yields, and they expressed concerns that a significant expansion in asset holdings could have unintended consequences.
Total real government purchases looked to be roughly flat, on balance, in the third quarter.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low.
Private nonfarm employment rose at a solid pace in June, as in recent months, while total government employment decreased further.
The aggregate inventory-sales ratio outside of motor vehicles likely edged up in the fourth quarter but remained within the range that had prevailed since the middle of last year.
In January, the trade deficit was little changed.
First, the Committee could consider halting all reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing securities.
Outside of those sectors, spending declined a bit further in the third quarter, although not as steeply as it had earlier in the year.
Net equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was negative again in the first quarter as the solid pace of gross public issuance was more than offset by equity retirements from both cash-financed mergers and share repurchases.
In addition, indicators of business sentiment were upbeat in recent months.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in January for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996.
Nevertheless, some participants observed that portions of the labor market, such as the health-care sector and in less urban areas, remained very tight.
Recent data on the book value of inventories, along with readings on inventories from national and regional manufacturing surveys, did not point to significant inventory imbalances in most industries except in the energy sector, where inventories appeared unusually low after having been drawn down during the winter.
Commercial mortgage markets continued to show tentative signs of stabilization.
Another problem related to certain tax proposals under consideration in the Congress, notably the exclusion of dividends from income, that could have adverse consequences for the revenues of numerous state and local governments that linked their taxable incomes to those reported on federal returns.
Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations--including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk's Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants--were little changed on balance.
Business fixed investment increased at an unusually rapid rate in the third quarter.
Nonetheless, significant structural vulnerabilities remained at entities such as prime money funds, and new financial arrangements such as stablecoins appeared to have the same structural maturity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities but with less transparency and an underdeveloped regulatory framework.
The Chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, System Open Market Account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chairman.
Against this backdrop, and in consideration of the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting.
Most participants continued to anticipate that, based on their assessment of current economic conditions and their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, the conditions for policy firming had been met or would likely be met by the end of the year.
The positive vaccine news also supported risk sentiment abroad, leading many global equity price indexes to advance and the U.S. dollar to depreciate further.
Still, they recognized that incoming data on core inflation continued to be favorable, and they generally were a little more confident that the decline in inflation earlier this year would be sustained.
In fact, recent orders and shipments data suggested an upturn in spending for new equipment, but the improvement was still quite limited, unevenly distributed across industries, and not yet firmly indicative of a sustained advance.
Available information suggested that growth in business spending on capital goods likely would slow further in the months ahead.
Participants commented on how the Committee's communications in its postmeeting statement might need to be revised in coming meetings if the economy evolved broadly as expected.
With the uncertainties in the outlook for both economic activity and inflation elevated, members noted that appropriately calibrating the stance of policy was difficult, partly because some time would be required to assess the effects of the substantial easing of policy to date.
However, more recently, expectations of future credit quality for businesses deteriorated slightly, and delinquency rates rose for some types of credit owed by households with low credit scores.
A couple of participants remarked that activity in the energy sector continued to be weak, and a few noted that financial conditions in the agricultural sector would likely remain challenging for many despite farm subsidies from the federal government and recent optimism surrounding trade prospects.
Over the next couple of years, the economy seemed poised to expand at a moderate rate in the neighborhood of its sustainable pace.
A concern in this regard was that the apparent upturn in final demand, particularly if it proved to be somewhat stronger than currently expected, and related business optimism about sales prospects might well result in a further buildup of inventories at a relatively rapid rate.
That said, contacts recognized that some potentially sizeable downside risks remained.
Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined in July, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation--an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector--held about steady in recent weeks.
In their discussion of the balance-of-risks sentence in the press statement to be issued shortly after this meeting, all the members agreed that the latter should continue to express, as it had for every meeting earlier this year, their belief that the risks remained weighted toward rising inflation.