Although the projected degree of slack in resource utilization over the next two years was a little lower than shown in the previous staff forecast, it was still quite substantial.
Sales of motor vehicles remained an area of strength, in part due to favorable credit conditions.
The Committee is prepared to adjust the details of its approach to policy normalization in light of economic and financial developments.
Members noted that the current stance of monetary policy remained quite accommodative and, given the tenor of the latest information on the performance of the economy in the context of generally favorable financial conditions, they believed that policy was appropriately positioned to foster further strengthening of the economic expansion.
This retreat led to a broad appreciation of the dollar as well as declines in equity prices abroad and in yields on benchmark sovereign bonds.
The available information from District business contacts was generally consistent with the recent trend in data on spending, although a couple of reports noted that households were spending cautiously and that some price discounting was likely.
Reports on planned capital expenditures by small businesses showed some signs of improvement in recent months, although they remained relatively subdued.
Moreover, some members continued to see downside risks to inflation from the possibility of further dollar appreciation and declines in commodity prices.
Participants observed that labor market conditions had continued to improve in recent months, with roughly half of the 22 million jobs lost over March and April having been regained.
Aggregate labor market conditions had been mixed in recent months.
The core component of the CPI also accelerated in January and on a year-over-year basis, but by lesser amounts than did the total index.
Nonfarm payroll employment registered another substantial increase in April after a slight decline in March, and the civilian unemployment rate fell to 4.3 percent in April.
Inflation had been subdued, even though the prices of some key commodities had increased recently.
These actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and would continue to help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed at the January 29-30 meeting indicated that the expansion in overall economic activity slowed in the fourth quarter of last year, reflecting weather-related disruptions and other transitory factors, but private domestic final demand grew at a solid rate.
The members concurred with the staff's recommendation that the staff studies prepared for the Committee in January 2001, when it discussed in detail various alternatives to holding U.S. government securities, should be released to the public after light editing was completed.
Specifically, those members supported a program under which the Committee would announce its intention to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less.
Market participants cited funding from the additional longer-term repo operations spanning year-end and increased capacity in daily operations as helping to maintain stable conditions in short-term funding markets.
Exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods also rose strongly, while exports of services expanded modestly.
Spreads for commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit across tenors were largely unchanged at historically low levels.
On the Board members' return, Chairman Greenspan announced that the Board had approved a ¼ percentage point increase in the discount rate to a level of 5-1/2 percent.
In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, FOMC participants noted that the data received since the March FOMC meeting, while pointing to continued weakness in economic activity, had been broadly consistent with their expectations.
Both core and overall PCE price inflation were expected to be damped by low rates of resource utilization, falling import prices, and easing cost pressures as a result of the sharp net declines in oil and other raw materials prices since last summer.
Real GDP was anticipated to increase at a rate noticeably below its potential in 2008.
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting the staff's assessment that neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well positioned to help the economy withstand substantial adverse shocks; the downside risks to the forecast of economic activity were seen as more pronounced than in December, mainly reflecting the greater uncertainty about global economic prospects and the financial market turbulence in the United States and abroad.
Owing to the limited availability of agency debt and concerns that larger purchases could impair market functioning, the Committee's transactions in these instruments for some time had been on a trajectory that would leave total purchases somewhat below the previously established maximum.
Generally small changes in shipments and sales in the July-August period kept book-value inventory-sales ratios about flat at very low levels.
In its accompanying statement, the Committee expressed its perception that, with appropriate monetary policy action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
In money markets, the 75 basis point increase in the target range at the July meeting passed through fully to overnight rates.
Subsequently, higher-than-expected inflation data, remarks by the Chairman that were viewed as pointing to future rate increases, and the depreciation of the dollar all led market participants to price in a somewhat steeper path for future policy.
Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector had continued to improve and the drag from net exports appeared to have lessened, but business fixed investment had been soft.
Most participants indicated a preference for clarifying the dependence of the current forward guidance on economic data and the Committee's assessment of progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and all principal payments from holdings of agency CMBS in agency CMBS.
Against this background, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had brought together key interested parties with the aim of increasing the probability of an orderly private-sector solution to the hedge fund's difficulties.
Manufacturing, notably in high-tech industries, led the way, but growth in mining and utilities also was sizable.
Participants' economic projections and policy assessments are described in more detail in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
The staff's inflation forecast was slightly lower than the one prepared for the previous meeting, reflecting incoming data and the lower projected level of resource utilization.
Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities increased somewhat but remained at low levels.
However, other participants noted that the continued subdued trend in wages was evidence of an absence of upward pressure on inflation from the current level of resource utilization.
Although the rise in hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector picked up slightly in the first quarter, the employment cost index decelerated further.
The motor vehicle and construction-related industries continued to hold down overall manufacturing output even as high-tech production posted moderate increases.
In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that recent data on spending had been strong, supported by a strong job market and rising incomes.
Concerns about the global growth outlook weighed on equity prices, and the broad dollar edged up.
Automakers' production schedules indicated that the pace of light motor vehicle assemblies would increase in the second quarter, and broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the readings on new orders from national manufacturing surveys, were consistent with an expectation of moderate expansion in factory output in the coming months.
While retail sales had slowed recently, the latest surveys indicated that consumer sentiment had risen further from an already markedly high level.
On the other hand, declining house prices remained a drag on household wealth and thus on consumer spending.
At the same time, members noted that policy had already been eased by 75 basis points and that the effects of those actions on the real economy would be evident only with a lag.
Some members indicated that in light of continued robust economic growth, tight labor markets, and improving financial conditions they had a preference for awaiting further developments that might provide a stronger basis for an easing action.
The Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part of the normalization process, although limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings.
In June, preliminary data indicated declining nominal goods exports and imports.
Participants also exchanged views on the likely benefits and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase program.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that a slightly higher federal funds rate might be acceptable or a somewhat lower federal funds rate would be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
CMBS issuance picked up in March, reportedly reflecting a return to a more normal pace after the adoption of a credit risk retention rule in late December caused some issuance to be shifted from January and February into the fourth quarter.
Inventories in most industries looked to be fairly well aligned with sales in recent months, although motor vehicle stocks were still relatively lean.
On average, the economy expanded at a moderate pace during the first half of the year despite the ongoing drag from the housing sector.
September sales totals were boosted by strong spending at automotive dealers, food stores, and nondurable goods outlets.
However, economic activity continued to be depressed in areas affected by the downturn in the energy sector and falling agricultural commodity prices, al­though several participants noted that the recent firming in crude oil prices had led to a modest increase in drilling activity.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 26-27, 2016.
The available surveys indicated that service-sector activity continued to expand.
The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained generally strong, with low default rates for both corporate bonds and leveraged loans.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had moved up considerably over the intermeeting period.
There were no reported corporate defaults in April, and defaults were low in May.
The timing and magnitude of the impact of the stimulus package on GDP was also seen as depending on the extent to which the boost to consumption spending is absorbed by a temporary run-down in firms' inventories or by an increase in imports rather than by an expansion in domestic output.
Though banks in the April SLOOS reported tightening standards on new consumer loans, respondents also experienced weaker demand for all consumer loan types.
The lagged effects of the earlier rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar were expected to place continuing, though diminishing, restraint on the demand for U.S. exports for some period ahead.
The economies of the technology-sensitive Asian countries had already turned up in the fourth quarter and seemed to have grown rapidly in the early months of the year.
Setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 10 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC's target range.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that, before the landfall of Hurricane Katrina on the Gulf Coast, expansion of economic activity had been solid, led by robust gains in housing and buoyant consumer spending.
Members also agreed that there was only a remote possibility that the process of disinflation would cumulate to the point of a decline for an extended period in the general price level.
The Federal Reserve's balance sheet increased modestly over the intermeeting period to $7.2 trillion, as growth in securities holdings was partially offset by a decline in U.S. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding.
Compared with the December forecast, the conditioning assumptions underlying the forecast were little changed and roughly offsetting: Although higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of the dollar were expected to be slightly more supportive of economic growth, the staff anticipated that these influences would be about offset by lower house prices and higher oil prices.
The year-end expected rate was about 70 basis points higher than the year-end expectation before the May FOMC meeting.
Moreover, it was likely in the view of these members that core inflation, which was already modest, would decelerate further.
This development appeared to reflect worker concerns about job security in a period of major business restructuring and downsizing activities as well as substantially reduced increases in benefit costs, notably those relating to health care.
At this meeting the Committee engaged in a broad-ranging discussion of its communication practices.
Policy expectations declined a bit more in the wake of the Chairman’s semiannual monetary policy testimony, which apparently reinforced investors’ beliefs that the FOMC anticipated gradually diminishing inflation pressures.
However, the importance of resource slack as a factor influencing inflation was debated, and some participants suggested that other variables, such as current and expected rates of economic growth, could be useful indicators of inflation pressures.
Participants generally expected that core inflation would edge lower over the next two years, reflecting a slight easing of pressures on resources, well-anchored inflation expectations, and the waning of temporary factors that had boosted prices last year and early this year.
While the prevailing negative influences on household spending might spill over a bit more to housing activity over the year ahead, there were few current developments in housing markets that might be read as signaling any marked weakening in this sector of the economy.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997.
Activity in the housing sector improved somewhat in recent months but remained slow.
Part of the July advance reflected a surge in the output of electric utilities associated with the heat wave in the eastern United States and an upturn in mining production after a weak first half of the year.
Stock prices declined somewhat, but spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds were little changed.
This outlook was predicated on financial conditions that were more accommodative than earlier this year.
Participants also considered open market operations to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS to support the smooth functioning of these securities markets, which in turn would help support the supply of credit to households and businesses.
They noted that continued relatively rapid growth of economic activity in the first quarter suggested greater persisting strength in demand than they had anticipated.
They noted that doing so would allow more time to assess the financial and economic effects of recent banking-sector developments and of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy.
Particularly large increases were recorded in expenditures on durable goods, apparel, and general merchandise.
They expressed a range of views on the appropriate pace of purchases, both now and as the outlook evolved.
Producer prices of finished goods also were affected by the volatility of energy prices in April and May, but core producer prices recorded only a small rise in each month.
Speeches by Federal Reserve officials, the minutes of the March meeting, and Congressional testimony by the Chairman combined to restrain policy expectations some.
When economic conditions warrant, the Committee's next step in the process of policy normalization will be to begin raising its target for the federal funds rate, and from that point on, changing the level or range of the federal funds rate target will be the primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.
A few participants warned against inferring too much from comparisons of the current low level of the unemployment rate with historical benchmarks, arguing that the much higher levels of education of today's workforce--and the lower average unemployment rate of more highly educated workers than less educated workers--suggested that the U.S. economy might be able to sustain lower unemployment rates than was the case in the 1950s or 1960s.
Al­though the unemployment rate was little changed in recent months, job gains had been solid, on average.
Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in December.
Participants agreed that in coming quarters inflation was likely to move down to levels consistent with price stability, reflecting the recent declines in the prices of energy and other commodities, the appreciation of the dollar, and the expected widening of margins of resource slack.
The decline in rates coincided with an appreciable increase in the volume of refinancing activity.
But many believed that the slow growth in economic activity anticipated for the first half of this year and the associated slack in resource utilization would contribute to an easing of price pressures.
The pace of bond issuance by nonfinancial firms increased further in October and November after rising robustly in the third quarter, as some firms reportedly sought to issue new debt before the end of the year.
However, anecdotal information suggested that many firms remained quite cautious about expanding payrolls, citing, among other factors, continued uncertainty about economic prospects and the high cost of providing health care benefits.
Total PCE price inflation was 2.7 percent in April, and core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 2.8 percent.
The presentation also outlined some staff recommendations for further testing of Term Deposit Facility operations.
Energy prices were high enough to encourage continued investment in alternative fuels.
The expansion in economic activity was expected to narrow the significant margin of slack in labor and product markets only slowly over the projection period, and the unemployment rate was anticipated to still be elevated at the end of 2014.
In their discussion of the foreign economic outlook, participants generally viewed the risks from the fiscal and financial problems in Greece as having diminished somewhat, although it was observed that Greece still faced many challenges and that Greek economic progress was likely to be limited over the near term.
Some participants suggested that the recent domestic economic data had increased their confidence in the outlook for growth going forward.
Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially.
Inflation data had been disappointing in recent months, and a few participants cited anecdotal reports that some firms were able to pass on costs to consumers.
A recent increase in oil drilling rigs in operation was seen as a positive sign for business investment, al­though the continued low level of oil prices was still weighing on capital investment in the energy industry.
These moves likely reflected a number of factors, including investors' perceptions of an improvement in the economic outlook, decreased concerns about the risk of deflation, a reversal of flight-to-quality flows, and selling of long-duration assets as exposure to mortgage prepayment risk dropped with a rise in mortgage rates.
Such an announcement would provide more certainty about the process for completing the normalization of the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
Over the medium term, participants expected strong growth in employment, driven by continued progress on vaccinations and an associated rebound of economic activity and of consumer and business confidence, as well as accommodative fiscal and monetary policy.
Exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods also moved up smartly in September.
Members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time.
Residential construction activity remained at a high level, evidently supported in part by recent declines in mortgage interest rates.
The Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks.
The economy appeared to be continuing to expand at a moderate pace that was likely to be rapid enough to gradually reduce margins of underutilized resources.
Real consumer outlays, excluding cars and trucks, were flat in April but turned up in May.
Participants stressed that it was important to communicate that the Committee would be prepared to increase the size of the securities purchases, as needed, on the basis of its close monitoring of market conditions.
Indeed, some price measures suggested that inflation had trended lower through the second quarter.
Credit continued to be available to most businesses, households, and municipalities.
They cited a variety of statistical and anecdotal signs that could be viewed as harbingers of rising price inflation.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that the information received since the Committee met in July indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity had picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year.
Anecdotal reports from business contacts about capital spending plans were indicative of appreciable further acceleration in business expenditures on a widening range of capital goods.
Government incentives for motor vehicle purchases contributed to a modest expansion of the German and French economies, but the euro-area economy as a whole contracted slightly as inventory drawdowns weighed on activity.
Near-term indicators of business spending on equipment and software were generally positive.
In contrast to many other types of loans, the payment performance of home mortgages improved.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the intermeeting period, members judged that the softening in the outlook for economic growth warranted an easing of the stance of policy at this meeting.
A few participants noted that other measures provided additional evidence that inflation was approaching the Committee's objective; for example, the 12-month changes in the headline and core CPI, the median CPI, and the trimmed mean PCE price index had also moved up from year-earlier levels.
With regard to PCE price inflation, the staff revised up its projection for the second half of 2022 in response to stronger-than-expected wage growth and the staff's assessment that the boost to inflation from supply–demand imbalances in the economy, including in food and energy markets, would be more persistent than previously assumed.
Productivity and economic potential seemed to have been growing at an increasingly rapid rate in recent years.
Members saw both downside and upside risks to prospects for inflation.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective February 2, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan, McDonough, Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Jordan, Kelley, McTeer, Meyer, and Mses.
Inflationary pressures remained subdued in most foreign economies amid substantial economic slack.
Meeting participants were highly uncertain about future financial developments and their implications for the broader economy.
Other participants were prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circumstances were to indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.
The output of the mining sector increased since April after having trended down from late 2014.
One member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the current meeting, citing the easing of financial conditions since the U.K. referendum, the return to trend economic growth, solid job growth, and inflation moving toward 2 percent.
Members debated the appropriate characterization of inflation expectations in the statement.
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt appeared to have expanded at a somewhat slower pace in the fourth quarter, down from the rapid increase in the third quarter.
Over the past year, broad measures of labor underutilization that include both the unemployed and workers marginally attached to the labor force had trended lower, the labor force participation rate had been relatively steady despite downward pressure from demographic trends, and layoffs had fallen to low levels.
Consumer spending appeared to be increasing in the first quarter at a pace considerably faster, on balance, than in the fourth quarter of last year.
Firming domestic demand, rising exports, and business inventory restocking appeared to have provided upward impetus to factory production.
Returning the portfolio to its historical composition of essentially all Treasury securities would minimize the extent to which the Federal Reserve portfolio might be affecting the allocation of credit among private borrowers and sectors of the economy.
Business spending on equipment and structures was projected to expand less rapidly in light of some anticipated slowing in the growth of sales and profits.
Business expenditures on nonresidential structures also were seen to be advancing robustly in a number of markets, possibly providing some offset to reduced residential construction activity.
Participants noted the continued stability of the labor force participation rate in the face of its demographically driven downward trend.
To some extent, the recent strengthening may have reflected precautionary stockbuilding as insurance against potential supply disruptions relating to the century date change.
Secretary's note: On September 24, 2009, the Federal Reserve announced schedules for operations under the TAF and the TSLF through January 2010 and indicated that it would seek public comment on a proposal for a permanent TAF.
Inflation was running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations were stable.
The statement language was revised to indicate that the Committee continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near 2 percent as "the most likely outcomes."
Several participants pointed out that readings on high-frequency economic indicators, such as individual mobility indexes and online restaurant reservation data, might already be registering the effects of the recent rise in virus cases.
In Europe, concerns about the political situation in Italy and its potential economic implications prompted a significant widening in risk spreads on Italian sovereign securities.
The external sector was projected to exert a small restraining influence on economic activity over the projection period, even though an anticipated firming of economic activity abroad would bolster demand for U.S. exports.
And Canadian employment and sales data were strong in the fourth quarter, with the housing sector continuing to make a significant contribution to growth.
The amendment was made necessary by the change in the language of the directive.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have edged down.
Staff Economic Outlook In the economic projection prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year was estimated to have been markedly slower than in the forecast for the December meeting.
However, many participants also expressed some concerns about potential costs and risks arising from further asset purchases.
Recent data on initial claims for unemployment insurance pointed to a further moderation in employment losses in January.
By contrast, the dollar rose slightly on average in terms of an index of the currencies of other important trading partners, notably the currencies of several Latin American countries that were experiencing political and economic problems.
Ten-year Treasury yields also declined, but less than shorter-term yields.
The Chair noted that he had asked the subcommittee on communications to consider ways to improve the information contained in the SEP and to improve communications regarding the role of the federal funds rate projections in the SEP as part of the policy process.
Participants also discussed the potential for clarifying or strengthening the Committee's forward guidance for the federal funds rate.
Participants generally expected that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term.
The Committee also anticipates that over coming quarters, inflation will run at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate.
Meeting participants generally agreed that the recovery in the housing sector had continued.
Measures of volatility and financial stress moved down and risk spreads narrowed in many markets, perhaps partly because of investors' perceptions of diminished downside tail risks.
They agreed, though, that because a significant acceleration in inflation did not appear to be imminent and because uncertainties continued to surround the economic outlook, a gradual approach to policy adjustments was warranted.
In this situation, they saw a clear need for a preemptive policy action that would head off any pickup of inflation, and it was noted that a shift to a tighter policy stance would seem to pose little risk to the expansion.
A few participants commented that recent news on inflation, against a background of continued prospects for a solid pace of economic growth, supported the view that inflation on a 12-month basis would likely move slightly above the Committee's 2 percent objective for a time.
Manufacturers ran off stocks at a fairly rapid pace in both months, while wholesalers and retailers excluding motor vehicle and parts dealers recorded small declines in stocks in August after accumulations in July.
In addition to the effects of lower market interest rates, extensive mortgage financing activity and a flight to safety from volatile equity markets likely added to M2's strong upward trend.
Household spending has continued to advance, but growth in business fixed investment appears to have slowed.
Real disposable personal income fell for the fourth consecutive month in September, reflecting the weakness in the labor market.
After growing at a considerably faster rate in the fourth quarter, M2 and M3 apparently increased at a more moderate but still brisk pace in January.
Recent cutbacks in new residential construction reduced the level of new home inventories, and the relative stability in sales of new homes allowed those inventory reductions to begin to bring down the months' supply of new homes for sale.
In judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases, the Committee will, at its coming meetings, assess whether incoming information continues to support the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective.
Participants also cited other indicators suggesting that labor market conditions continued to strengthen, including increases in the labor force participation rates of both prime-age and all individuals.
Participants generally noted that high interest rates could contribute to vulnerabilities in the financial system.
Nonetheless, recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated.
Meanwhile, mining output continued to contract as a result of further declines in drilling activity associated with low crude oil prices.
Some meeting participants noted that the announced decrease in the balance in the Treasury's Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) would increase reserves in the banking system unless it were offset by Federal Reserve actions or by a further reduction in borrowing from the Federal Reserve's various credit and liquidity facilities, and that these increases could be expansionary.
In June, the pace of inventory investment in manufacturing slowed from the rapid average rate for April and May, and the inventory-shipments ratio for the sector was at a very low level.
After robust issuance earlier in the first quarter, corporate bond issuance came to a near standstill around late February in the midst of elevated volatility following the escalation of concerns about the coronavirus outbreak.
Beyond the near term, real GDP was expected to increase slightly faster than in the previous forecast, largely reflecting a somewhat higher projected trajectory for equity prices and lower assumed paths for both longer-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Both prime and government money market funds experienced moderate inflows since the July FOMC meeting.
Even so, the pool of unemployed workers willing to take a job had continued to be drawn down, and it seemed likely to many members that prospective growth in aggregate demand might generate increasing pressures on the economy's ability to produce goods and services and thus add to inflationary pressures over time.
It was noted that a reasonable argument could be made either for an increase at this meeting or for waiting for some additional information on the labor market and inflation.
Homebuilding was forecast to decline somewhat but to stabilize at a relatively high level in the context of continued income growth and the generally favorable cash-flow affordability of home ownership.
Further gains in productivity and the prospect for relatively contained demand pressures on resources, which were likely to be somewhat more limited for a time than members had anticipated earlier, would contribute to keeping price inflation subdued.
Most participants anticipated that economic growth would move up to a rate somewhat above its longer-run trend during the second half of 2016 and that the labor market would strengthen further.
First, while the overall outlook remained favorable, there had been signs of deceleration in economic activity in recent quarters, particularly in business fixed investment and manufacturing.
In addition, the British government launched its Asset Protection Scheme, which insured assets placed in the scheme by the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Bank.
The labor market showed signs of a nascent recovery in recent months.
In their discussion of language for the postmeeting statement, members generally agreed that they should acknowledge the broad improvement in labor market conditions over the intermeeting period as well as their judgment that labor market slack continued to diminish.
In the past year, businesses had added to inventories at a rate that exceeded the rise in final sales, and somewhat reduced accumulation to a pace more in line with that of final sales was seen as a reasonable expectation.
Several participants noted that statistical models designed to gauge the probability of recession, including those based on information from the yield curve, suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium term had fallen somewhat over the intermeeting period.
A reduction in the attractiveness of home equity borrowing was mentioned as possibly contributing to the slowdown.
The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons was little changed on net.
Single-family starts ticked up in February, and adjusted permit issuance in this sector moved up to a level slightly above starts.
They observed that the decision was a close one for them, and in light of the uncertainties that were involved, they were willing to join the majority and wait for further evidence bearing on the outlook for inflation.
Participants discussed the still-elevated rate of housing services inflation and commented on the uncertainty regarding when and by how much lower readings for rent growth on new leases would pass through to this category of inflation.
Among the other industries cited as relatively strong in recent months were transportation, energy, and services.
The risk that a global growth slowdown would further weigh on the domestic economy remained prominent.
Growth of M2 picked up in November, while expansion of M3 moderated somewhat from its brisk pace in October.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments."
With regard to inflation expectations, two of the briefings presented findings that the longer-run trend in inflation, absent cyclical disturbances or transitory fluctuations, had been stable in recent years at a little below 2 percent.
Recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending were consistent with solid real PCE growth for the third quarter as a whole, including continued gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households' net worth.
In nonmortgage credit, automobile loans and student loans both continued to expand rapidly, while balances on revolving consumer credit stayed about flat.
However, the effects of these communications on the expected path for the federal funds rate were more than offset by reactions to stronger-than-expected data for the labor market and consumer inflation, along with perceptions of receding downside risks to the foreign economic outlook.
According to the October SLOOS, commercial banks tightened their standards on credit cards and other consumer loans over the third quarter.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appeared to be rising at a solid rate in the fourth quarter.
Inflation picked up in recent months, but it continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective.
In Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets, many market functioning indicators had returned to levels prevailing before the pandemic, and, as a result, purchases were conducted at the minimum pace directed by the Committee.
However, members anticipated that sales would pick up again, partly in response to an anticipated rebound in incentives.
Participants judged that the potential for more-widespread disruptions in oil production, and thus for a larger jump in energy prices, posed both downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation.
Although the rate of job openings moved up in February, the hiring rate was flat and continued to be subdued.
Participants generally agreed that sluggish job growth and the elevated unemployment rate reflected both weak demand for goods and services and a mismatch between the characteristics of the unemployed and the needs of the employers that currently have jobs available, but they had varying views about the relative importance of these two factors.
These points included that the characterization of the stance of policy as "accommodative" had provided useful forward guidance in the early stages of the policy normalization process, that this characterization was no longer providing meaningful information in light of uncertainty surrounding the level of the neutral policy rate, that it was appropriate to remove the characterization of the stance from the Committee's statement before the target range for the federal funds rate moved closer to the range of estimates of the neutral policy rate, and that the Committee's earlier communications had helped prepare the public for this change.
Regarding the outlook for inflation, some participants continued to be concerned that faster-than-expected economic growth or a substantial undershooting of the longer-run normal unemployment rate posed upside risks to inflation.
Contacts in many Districts were said to be generally optimistic about business prospects.
A few added that continued gradual strengthening in labor markets would help return inflation to the Committee's 2 percent objective.
Closed-end residential mortgage loans held by banks also increased amid the modest pickup in refinancing activity, while CRE loans contracted.
Many participants mentioned that selling assets that will mature in a relatively short time could be considered at some stage, if necessary to reduce ON RRP usage.
Moreover, these participants were concerned that forward guidance that involved the target range for the federal funds rate remaining at the ELB until employment and inflation criteria were achieved could limit the Committee's flexibility for years.
Some upward pressures on overnight rates were evident in the repurchase agreement (repo) market, apparently from higher issuance of Treasury bills and an associated expansion of primary dealer inventories over the intermeeting period.
Investment in nonresidential structures appeared to have risen at a markedly slower pace in the second quarter than in the first.
Members stated that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals.
A few participants expressed concerns about the possibility of substantially overshooting full employment, with one citing past difficulties in achieving a soft landing.
Those viewing greater policy accommodation as appropriate at this meeting generally supported a maturity extension program that would combine asset purchases and sales to extend the average maturity of securities held in the SOMA without generating a substantial expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet or reserve balances.
June's spike in multifamily starts was related to more-stringent building codes that took effect in New York City on July 1, which apparently led developers to pull forward the start date of some planned apartment projects.
Industrial production fell in the first quarter, with another drop in the drilling of new oil and gas wells as well as a decrease in manufacturing output that appeared to reflect, in part, the effects of the labor dispute at West Coast ports.
Participants remarked on the extent to which financial conditions remained supportive of economic expansion.
Industrial output had declined slightly in recent months after having rebounded in August when production resumed at General Motors following settlement of the labor strike.
The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.
The manager pro tem turned next to a review of money market developments and Open Market Desk operations.
In addition, real purchases by state and local governments declined further.
Housing activity was improving, with sales and new construction trending higher.
Wholesale borrowing by large banks increased over the intermeeting period.
Similarly, employment would be temporarily depressed by the hurricanes, but, abstracting from those effects, employment gains were anticipated to remain solid, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline a bit further by year-end.
The rise in exports in July more than offset their decline in June, as overseas sales of capital goods rose sharply.
Both the accompanying statement and the minutes of the meeting were broadly in line with market expectations and elicited limited price action in financial markets.
Economic performance in line with their current forecasts would at some point require an adjustment to policy toward a less accommodative stance once more definitive indications of sustained strengthening started to emerge.
Purchases of motor vehicles surged in response to aggressive zero-rate financing packages offered by automakers, while spending on other goods made a partial recovery from the September drop.
Surveys and information gathered from contacts in several Districts indicated an improvement in manufacturing activity as well as expectations for further gains in factory production in the near term.
New usage across many funding operations and facilities had declined over the intermeeting period as conditions in funding markets improved.
A number of participants noted that their business contacts had become more optimistic about the outlook for sales and production.
The members voted unanimously to adopt on a permanent basis, subject to the annual review required for all the Committee's instruments, paragraph 1 (c) of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations in the form reproduced below.
Most participants were of the view that there was not yet enough evidence to indicate whether the balance of risks to the medium-term outlook had changed materially, but others judged that recent developments had increased the level of downside risks or that the risks were no longer balanced.
Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import prices dissipate.
Total PCE prices increased 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in January, while core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 2.9 percent over the same period.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, December 17-18, 2013.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 12:30 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months.
In reviewing Federal Reserve operations, the manager noted that market reaction to the ongoing reduction in the System's holdings of Treasury and agency securities had been muted to date.
Conditions in unsecured short-term funding markets continued to improve over the intermeeting period, and spreads on most types of commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed to levels that approached pre-pandemic ranges.
As previously announced, over the next few quarters the Federal Reserve will purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets, and it stands ready to expand its purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities as conditions warrant.
Banks were raising new capital and in some cases paying back funds received from the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
Announcements by foreign central banks garnered investor attention and contributed to somewhat higher asset price volatility later in the period.
On the upside, the recent strength in household spending raised the possibility that domestic final demand could snap back more rapidly than anticipated.
Forthcoming data on capital spending including new orders and contracts were likely to point to a weaker uptrend in business fixed investment.
Nominal Treasury yields also rose noticeably, and the Treasury yield curve flattened.
Participants noted that elevated uncertainty about employment prospects continued to weigh on consumption spending.
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams.
Somewhat larger increases would have been projected in consumer price inflation in the absence of anticipated technical measurement changes to the index.
Many participants noted that, since the Committee's previous meeting, the economy appeared to have lost some momentum and pointed to a number of factors supporting that view including recent weak indicators for business confidence, business spending and manufacturing activity; trade developments; and signs of slowing global economic growth.
Real disposable income rose further in July, as wages and salaries posted a strong gain and energy prices came down.
The current ranges were not expected to be guides to money growth under anticipated conditions in the period ahead, but instead could be viewed as anchors or benchmarks for money growth that would be associated with approximate price stability and sustained economic growth, assuming behavior of velocity in line with historical experience.
The slowing appeared to mainly reflect transitory factors like lower energy consumption induced by warm weather or delays in processing income tax refunds.
The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.
The unemployment rate, at 5.0 percent in November, was 0.7 percentage point lower than in January and close to most participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level.
Conditions in the housing sector continued to improve, as real expenditures for residential investment expanded briskly in the first quarter, although from a low level.
Rates on jumbo loans came down as well, although the spread between the rates on jumbo and conforming loans was still wide and the market for private-label nonprime MBS remained impaired.
The average selling price of existing homes rose in the twelve months ending in September at about the same rapid clip as a year earlier, but the average selling price of new homes rose more slowly over the past few months.
The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core CPI inflation was 1-3/4 percent.
However, some anecdotal and other evidence suggested that retail sales had moderated in recent weeks in at least some areas; the moderation appeared to be only partly associated with the work stoppage at General Motors.
Allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation; adjust the IOER rate and the parameters of the ON RRP facility, and use other tools such as term operations, as necessary for appropriate monetary control, based on policymakers' assessments of the efficacy and costs of their tools.
Outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a modest pace, and credit spreads in emerging market economies narrowed somewhat on net.
On the negative side, there were few indications of a possible upturn in commercial construction activity.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective economic developments, members commented that recent statistical and anecdotal information provided clear indications of significant slowing in the expansion of business activity and also pointed to appreciable erosion in business and consumer confidence.
Real disposable income continued to increase in the first quarter, further gains in house prices likely bolstered household net worth, and consumer sentiment in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers improved, on balance, in March and April.
It was again noted that the cyclical impetus to economic expansion appeared to be weaker than in past recoveries, but that the reasons for the weakness were unclear, contributing to greater uncertainty about the economic outlook.
A few participants noted that the current weakness in capital expenditures could lead to a slower pace of productivity growth in future years.
That new language was meant to clarify that the maintenance of a very low federal funds rate over that period did not reflect an expectation that the economy would remain weak, but rather reflected the Committee's intention to support a stronger economic recovery.
A few participants attributed the recent equity price appreciation to expectations for corporate tax cuts or to increased risk tolerance among investors rather than to expectations of stronger economic growth.
However, those effects were reversed late in the period when investors appeared to pull back from riskier assets in reaction to rising concern about developments in some emerging market economies and their possible implications for global economic growth.
The staff's forecast for inflation over the projection period was just a bit above the forecast prepared for the March FOMC meeting, reflecting somewhat higher-than-expected data on core consumer prices and a slightly narrower margin of economic slack than in the March forecast.
It was noted that a slowdown in the rate of increase in home prices going forward might lead households to increase their desired saving.
Participants generally agreed that fiscal negotiations could develop in a way that would result in significantly greater drag on economic growth than in their baseline outlook.
However, other participants anticipated that TALF loans would increase over time as financial market institutions became more familiar with the program.
Investment-grade corporate bond spreads were little changed, on net, and spreads of municipal bond indexes increased slightly but remained well below pre-pandemic levels.
Consumer spending remained firm, and residential construction continued at a high level.
Gains in consumer spending picked up for the quarter as a whole, driven by a surge in January that was followed by a small net decline over February and March.
Accordingly, much stronger growth in such investment could occur, with concomitant effects on incomes and the growth of overall spending.
The very limited available information on economic activity abroad in the third quarter suggested continued sluggish expansion in the euro area and Japan, moderate growth in the United Kingdom, further brisk recovery in Canada, and ongoing recovery in emerging Asia.
Participants also discussed the possible implications of a flattening in the term structure of market interest rates.
However, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed.
The credit quality of municipal debt continued to be stable, as the number of bond upgrades outpaced downgrades, and defaults were relatively low.
At its meeting on February 4-5, 1997, the Committee issued a directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Mr. Kocherlakota's perspective on the policy decision was again shaped by his view that in November 2010, the Committee had chosen a level of accommodation that was well calibrated for the condition of the economy.
Issuance of short-term securities was likely to increase in coming periods, and, as more clarity emerged in the economic and policy outlook, demand for short-term assets could moderate.
In addition, lower mortgage rates had spurred a rise in refinancing activity, which, along with the increases in household wealth attributable to higher home values and equity prices, would provide support for consumer spending going forward.
Most participants commented on the continuing weakness in housing activity.
Most participants again projected that the economy would grow somewhat faster in 2011 and 2012, generating a more pronounced decline in the unemployment rate.
Moreover, it was noted that some of the pickup in economic growth that had appeared to have been indicated by the data available at the January meeting had been reversed by subsequent data revisions.
However, given the underlying strength of the expansion, favorable financial conditions, and the absence of major imbalances in the economy, the risks of a different outcome were judged to be in the direction of somewhat faster growth than currently projected.
At the same time, imports continued to expand rapidly, reflecting not only growth in U.S. domestic demand but also the increased availability of foreign products at attractive prices stemming from the rapid expansion of output capacity in a number of foreign countries.
The unemployment rate declined to 4.9 percent in January and remained at that level in February, while both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio increased over these months.
Although consumer spending had continued to advance, growth in business fixed investment appeared to have slowed.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 10, 2010.
The termination of some inducements to purchase motor vehicles was expected to retard expenditures on consumer durables in the latter part of this year.
Real PCE slumped in April, with declines widespread across most spending categories.
However, leverage continued to increase in the nonfinancial business sector, particularly among energy-related and other relatively risky firms.
CRE loans on banks' books continued to expand moderately, and issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities remained solid.
On the one hand, the participation rate for prime-age males remained significantly below its level before the financial crisis, suggesting that it could rise further over time.
Spending on office buildings and manufacturing structures continued to be depressed by high vacancy rates, while outlays for commercial buildings moved up in conjunction with declines in vacancy rates for such structures.
Several of them noted that interpreting the next few inflation reports would likely be complicated by the temporary run-up in energy costs and in the prices of other items affected by storm-related disruptions and rebuilding.
It was noted that recent increases in consumer energy prices could cause inflation to temporarily reach or even rise a bit above 2 percent in the near term.
Most major foreign central banks kept their policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting period and emphasized the need for greater confidence that inflation was falling back to target before easing policy.
Although the Committee's decision to raise the intended level of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points was widely anticipated in financial markets, the accompanying statement was read as setting a more optimistic tone about economic prospects than had been anticipated and prompted investors to mark up their expectations for the near-term path of policy.
Industrial production moved down in April and picked up in May, leaving output about flat over those two months, but production was lower than at the beginning of the year.
The employment cost index for private compensation advanced moderately in the year ending the third quarter, and the markup of prices over labor costs remained somewhat elevated.
Treasury yields rose materially over the intermeeting period.
Sales of existing single-family homes in October were only a bit below the record level set in September.
With energy price increases expected to slow next year, total PCE inflation was seen as likely to fall back in line with core inflation by the end of 2011, as in previous projections.
Thus, inventory investment was likely to respond to the expected deceleration in final sales over coming quarters.
Concerns about the possibility of a restructuring of Greek government debt drove spreads of yields on the sovereign debts of Greece, Ireland, and Portugal to record highs relative to yields on German bunds.
Excluding food and energy, inflation appeared to have moderated slightly from its pace in the early part of the year.
Output increased markedly at both motor vehicle manufacturers and their upstream suppliers as the supply chain disruptions associated with the earthquake in Japan eased.
The Committee also retained its forward guidance about the federal funds rate, including the thresholds on the unemployment and inflation rates.
But construction activity in both the residential and nonresidential sectors remained depressed, and a significant portion of the rise in domestic demand was again met by imports.
Credit card balances continued to decline through the third quarter, with gains in balances for account holders with prime credit scores offset by declines in those for nonprime accounts.
And in energy-producing regions, the count of drilling rigs in operation had begun to level off before the onset of Hurricane Harvey.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had risen slightly but remained low.
The projection for total inflation in 2020 was a little lower than for core inflation due to a projected decline in consumer energy prices.
Mr. McTeer does not believe that rapid growth based on new technology, rising productivity, and other supply-side factors is inflationary, especially in the current global environment.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved lower; survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained stable.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the FOMC met in June indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at a moderate pace in the third quarter, supported by continued gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households' net worth.
Consumer spending continued to advance, but spending on items other than motor vehicles was relatively soft.
The outlook remained subject, as usual, to considerable uncertainty, but many of the members observed that underlying trends in key sectors of the economy along with generally supportive financial conditions seemed consistent with further moderate economic expansion.
Real GDP growth slowed markedly in China, largely reflecting lower investment growth and exports.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appeared to have increased at a slower rate in the fourth quarter than in the previous quarter.
The Committee thought that the statement should reiterate the view that the adjustment in the housing market was ongoing, but that nevertheless the economy seemed likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.
Real disposable personal income moved up at a solid rate in March and April, reflecting increases in employment and hours worked as well as slightly higher real wages, but home values declined in recent months and equity prices moved down since the April meeting.
Although financial markets, and perhaps business and household confidence, had been shaken by revelations of accounting irregularities, the economy had continued to expand and the prospects for accelerating aggregate demand remained positive.
Some members were concerned that the effectiveness of cuts in the target federal funds rate may have been diminished by the financial dislocations, suggesting that further policy action might have limited efficacy in promoting a recovery in economic growth.
Reports on activity in the airline, trucking, and warehousing industries were uneven.
The access of investment-grade corporate borrowers to credit so far remained unimpeded, and rates on investment-grade bonds had declined in recent weeks.
Market sentiment toward large domestic banking organizations appeared to improve somewhat over the intermeeting period, likely related in part to further reductions in nonperforming loans and growing confidence in the economic outlook.
In conclusion, participants agreed to have a broad discussion of the experiences gathered from the two experimental exercises in conjunction with the October FOMC meeting.
Some participants commented that recent readings of inflation measures that exclude volatile components, such as trimmed mean measures, had been relatively stable at or just below 2 percent.
However, some members said that their decision to raise the target range was a close call, particularly given the uncertainty about inflation dynamics, and emphasized the need to monitor the progress of inflation closely.
More fundamentally, however, the income and wealth effects that were boosting household expenditures generally should help to sustain a perhaps somewhat diminished but still high level of homebuilding activity for a while, despite higher mortgage financing costs.
On balance, consumer credit financing conditions did not appear to be a major drag on household spending.
A few of these participants noted that this possibility was heightened by factors beyond the Committee's actions, including the tightening of monetary policy stances abroad and the weakening global economic outlook, that were also likely to restrain domestic economic activity in the period ahead.
Participants judged that uncertainty about economic growth over the next couple of years was elevated.
Early in the intermeeting period, bond yields in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) plunged and foreign equities declined notably following an increase in U.S.–China trade tensions.
The durability of the economic expansion would be jeopardized by price and wage decisions reflecting expectations that the purchasing power of the dollar would decline at faster rates in the future.
The dollar was mixed against the EME currencies.
Another possibility was that market-based measures might be assigning considerable weight to less favorable outcomes for the U.S. economy in which the federal funds rate would remain low for quite some time or fall back to very low levels in the future, whereas the projections in the SEP report the paths for the federal funds rate that participants see as appropriate given their views of the most likely evolution of inflation and real activity.
However, high levels of resource utilization and the high prices for energy and other commodities had the potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the March 15–16 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was increasing in the first quarter at a pace that was slower than the rapid gain posted in the fourth quarter of 2021.
In April, nominal orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased a little after rising briskly in March.
The members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals and that, if progress continued broadly as expected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted.
Several participants commented that a government shutdown might result in the delayed release of some economic data and that this outcome would make it more difficult to assess economic conditions.
Although business fixed investment in the second quarter was a little lower than had been expected, participants noted that this development appeared mainly to reflect the timing of purchases, particularly of transportation equipment, and not weakness in the underlying trend.
The S&P 500 stock price index increased sizably, on net, over the intermeeting period, led by technology-related stocks.
In this context, the Committee judged that some inflation risks remained and indicated that it would continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
The major uncertainty was the extent to which labor productivity would continue to accelerate and hold down the rise in unit labor costs.
Some moderation in housing starts from recent peak levels appeared likely, however, in the context of the slowing in job and income gains associated with the members' overall forecasts.
Labor market conditions remained tight in March, as job gains were robust and the unemployment rate was low.
On balance, core inflation was expected to continue at a subdued rate over the projection period.
An unchanged range of 3 to 7 percent also was set in February for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt in 1999.
In December, the 12‑month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.4 percent, while core CPI inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested continued strong expansion of economic activity.
Since the Committee met in November, the Federal Reserve's total assets were about unchanged, at nearly $2.2 trillion, as the increase in the System's holdings of securities roughly matched a further decline in usage of the System's credit and liquidity facilities.
Members generally continued to see the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished, on net, since last fall.
Measures of forward inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and inflation swaps fell further.
The number of participants and the total amount awarded increased over the course of the first five operations.
Among the major components, shipments of both computing and communications equipment fell sharply in April and retraced only part of that decline in May.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective July 28, 2016, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
In addition, new orders for durable equipment turned up sharply in the two months.
In addition, rates on Treasury repurchase agreements (repo), were, in part, pushed higher by tax-related outflows from government-only money market mutual funds and a corresponding decline in repo lending by those funds.
Although a substantial fraction of banks continued to tighten their credit policies on commercial real estate loans in the fourth quarter, lending standards for most other types of loans were little changed, according to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.
Manufacturing, construction, and the service sector recorded large payroll declines in April, and gains elsewhere were small.
Against this background, U.S. short-term interest rates registered small mixed changes over the period since the September 30 meeting, while Treasury bond yields declined somewhat on balance.
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to the downside, primarily reflecting the staff's assessment that monetary policy appeared to be better positioned to respond to large positive shocks to the economic outlook than to substantial adverse ones.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Geithner, Ms. Bies, Messrs. Guynn, Kohn, Kroszner, Ms. Pianalto, Mr. Warsh, and Ms.Yellen.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May as the value of exports of goods and services rose slightly and the value of imports declined, partly reflecting a sharp drop in the value of oil imports.
Goods exports, however, had only recovered three-fourths of their decline since January despite brisk growth in agricultural exports.
Business contacts in a couple of Districts—particularly those in the manufacturing, health-care, and technology sectors—reported having trouble hiring workers for reasons likely related to virus cases or workers' need to provide childcare.
In addition, CRE prices remained high relative to rental income.
They noted that the economic recovery thus far had been stronger than anticipated—suggesting greater momentum in economic activity than had been previously thought—but viewed the more recent indicators as signaling that the pace of recovery had slowed.
The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period.
Participants judged that overall conditions in labor markets had continued to improve, albeit gradually.
Participants observed that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjustments on economic activity and inflation.
Given the outlook for slower growth in final demand, many businesses would not have to add significantly to capacity.
Foreign inflation appeared to have moderated a bit in the third quarter, reflecting declines in energy prices.
Late in the period, investor focus appeared to turn to the U.S. debt ceiling and the potential for delayed debt service payments by the Treasury Department, the possibility of a downgrade of U.S. sovereign debt, and the prospects for significant long-term fiscal consolidation.
Emerging market currencies were generally resilient in recent weeks, reportedly benefiting from investors' anticipation of stronger global economic growth, after depreciating significantly against the dollar during the previous intermeeting period.
The sharp decline in oil prices weighed on inflation compensation and left a mixed imprint on other asset markets.
Spending was supported in recent months by the sizable boost to disposable personal income from tax cuts as well as by levels of wealth and confidence that were considerably above their values earlier in the year.
The monthly step-up in exports was also broadly spread across categories of goods.
Strains in global financial markets continued to pose significant downside risks to economic activity.
Market participants attributed some of the recent decline in market repo rates to a reduction in the supply of Treasury bills in advance of the reinstatement of the statutory debt limit on March 16.
Tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation.
A number of businesses continued to report that they were holding back on hiring and capital spending because of uncertainty about future taxes, health-care costs, and regulations.
Inflation has picked up in recent months, mainly reflecting higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the recent supply chain disruptions.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that economic activity was expanding at a more moderate pace than in the first half of the year.
The staff projection pointed to a contraction of real GDP in the first half of 2008 followed by a modest rise in the second half of this year, aided in part by the fiscal stimulus package.
In October, nominal new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft moved up a little, but shipments of these capital goods edged down and the level of orders remained below that of shipments.
Consumer prices excluding food and energy increased moderately in January and February.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it is instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
Vote against this action: Mr. McTeer.
In contrast, yields on nominal 10-year Treasury securities edged higher on balance.
Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate.
In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, participants generally noted that incoming information pointed to a somewhat weaker outlook for spending than at the time of the October meeting.
Moreover, some participants noted that the specifics and effectiveness of some government programs to support financial markets and institutions remained unclear.
Participants agreed that the inflation data that were received since the December meeting had been disappointing.
Inflation remained subdued despite very tight labor markets.
Should market conditions appear to warrant the resumption of Schedule 1 TSLF or TOP auctions, the Account Manager is to consult with the Chairman and, if possible, the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee."
Auto loans increased, consistent with significant declines in auto loan interest rates this year.
While the tests of ON RRPs had been informative, the staff suggested that additional testing could further improve understanding of how this supplementary tool could be used to achieve greater control of the federal funds rate during policy normalization.
The Committee agreed that it was important to acknowledge, in the statement to be released following the meeting, that economic growth remained slow and that indicators pointed to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions.
Nonetheless, they saw some pickup in inflation as a distinct possibility under anticipated economic conditions and concluded that the directive should indicate that prospective developments were more likely to warrant an increase than a decrease in the funds rate objective in the near term.
Consumer price inflation was subdued, and measures of long-run inflation expectations remained stable.
The decline in spending for other types of nonresidential buildings appeared to be slowing, and there were a few signs that financial conditions in commercial real estate markets, though still difficult, were stabilizing.
Credit card balances contracted at a slower rate in June and July than in the spring.
The implications of continued robust growth for the inflation outlook depended critically on judgments about the supply side of the economy.
Surveys indicated that households’ expectations of inflation over the next year were little changed in February while households’ and professional forecasters’ longer-term inflation expectations edged lower.
The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth.
One-month-ahead option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index--the VIX--rose appreciably in mid-April, reflecting in part increased investor concerns about geopolitical factors and foreign political developments, but ended the period slightly lower, as investor concerns appeared to ease after the first round of the French presidential election.
However, larger or prolonged disruptions in commodities markets could interfere with other markets and real activity more broadly.
Participants generally agreed that such steps to return the Federal Reserve's liquidity provision to a normal footing would be technical adjustments to reflect the notable diminution of the market strains that had made the creation of new liquidity facilities and expansion of existing facilities necessary and emphasized that such steps would not indicate a change in the Committee's assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy or the proper time to begin moving to a less accommodative policy stance.
The dollar also gained slightly on average in relation to the currencies of the other G-10 currencies.
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
The Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further.
Members commented that the market unsettlement that had in large measure prompted the Committee's easing actions during the fall had now lessened appreciably.
Housing activity softened somewhat over the summer but has remained at a high level.
Vacancy rates continued to rise, property prices fell further, and, as indicated by the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, financing for nonresidential construction projects became even tighter.
But some other participants were uncertain that a period of tight labor utilization would yield lasting labor market benefits or were concerned that it risked a buildup of inflationary pressures.
The labor force participation rate increased in February, as did the employment-to-population ratio.
However, a number of participants noted that it could be difficult to communicate the reason for such sales to the public, and, in particular, that the announcement of such sales would risk an outsized market reaction, as the public could view the sales as a signal of a tighter overall stance of monetary policy than they had anticipated or as an indication that the Committee might be more willing than had been thought to sell longer-term assets.
However, in some theoretical frameworks, the connection between resource slack and inflation depends on the nature of the shock and its impact on marginal costs and markups.
Participants noted strong recent payroll growth, while the unemployment rate remained low.
Members judged that the implications of the war for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain.
Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace.
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased 3-1/4 percent over the four quarters of 2016, and average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2-3/4 percent over the 12 months ending in February.
Participants judged that moderate growth of investment outlays going forward was the most likely outcome.
Industrial production decreased slightly further in September, and available weekly information pointed to another reduction in output in October.
The Committee's action and its announcement that the risks were weighted in the direction of rising inflation were widely anticipated and had little immediate effect on market yields.
Foreign economic growth appeared to have slowed significantly in recent months.
In their discussion of current conditions and the economic outlook, meeting participants observed that incoming data over the intermeeting period hinted at possible upside risks for inflation and downside risks for economic growth.
While participants generally saw the risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced, they agreed that inflation developments should be monitored closely.
Participants generally expected the strength in household spending to continue, especially for durable goods and residential investment.
On net, U.S. equity prices declined, corporate bond spreads widened, and nominal Treasury yields rose.
The July trade data provided additional evidence that the levels of both exports and imports probably reached their trough in the second quarter.
Against that backdrop, longer-term Treasury yields declined somewhat while, in private debt markets, a sense of reduced concern about governance issues and perhaps some increased appetite for risk-taking led to a substantial decline in yields across the credit spectrum that further narrowed risk spreads.
Spreads on yields of both investment-grade and high-yield nonfinancial corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities declined somewhat to levels fairly close to their historical norms.
Several participants discussed the pickup in residential investment in the first quarter.
Longer-term sovereign yields in AFEs edged lower on net.
However, real private domestic final purchases (PDFP)—which comprises PCE and private fixed investment and which often provides a better signal than GDP of underlying economic momentum—posted a solid second-quarter increase that was in line with its first-quarter pace and only moderately slower than its average rate of increase in 2023.
Participants again exchanged views on the likely benefits and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase program.
In foreign exchange markets, the dollar appreciated against most major currencies over the intermeeting period, and it also gained against an index of the currencies of other major U.S. trading partners.
Other members indicated that if the labor market appeared to be tightening significantly more than anticipated or if inflation pressures appeared to be developing more rapidly than expected as resource utilization tightened, it might become necessary to adjust the Committee's communications about the expected path of the federal funds rate.
The possible downshift in the pace of high-tech spending also raised the possibility of an erosion of profit margins that could result from a slackening in the pace of technology-led productivity growth and the associated increase in cost pressures.
A couple of participants had received indications from contacts that business investment spending in their Districts might strengthen.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial conditions were affected by developments abroad over the intermeeting period but were little changed on balance.
Both imports and exports recovered from weak readings in February, with imports of consumer goods, automotive products, and capital goods rising significantly and exports of capital goods and industrial supplies showing particular strength.
The pace of economic expansion in the euro area softened somewhat further in the fourth quarter, as consumer spending remained weak.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed.
The drop in commercial real estate loans persisted, reflecting weak fundamentals that limited originations as well as charge-offs of existing loans.
Inference about the labor force participation rate was complicated by its long-run downward trend.
Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP that were available through the first part of July suggested that the pace of private employment gains had remained strong.
The upward pressure on consumer prices from the increases in commodity and import prices earlier in the year was expected to continue to subside in the current quarter.
Most forward-looking indicators of housing demand, including an index of pending home sales, pointed to a further deterioration in sales in the near term.
Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 2.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.
The manager pro tem next turned to a review of money market developments since early October.
Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was revised up somewhat in the near term, as an upward revision to households' real disposable income in the first half of the year led to a slightly higher second-half forecast for consumer spending.
These operations shall be conducted in addition to the authorized overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which remain subject to a separate overall size limit authorized by the FOMC."
Residential housing activity continued to display substantial strength in the fourth quarter.
According to third-quarter Call Report data, unused loan commitments shrank for the seventh consecutive quarter, though the rate of decline slowed, especially for commitments to lend to businesses.
Despite generally lackluster results for first-quarter earnings, corporate guidance for profits in coming quarters led to upward revisions in analysts' forecasts of year-ahead earnings per share for S&P 500 firms.
A couple of participants added that nonresidential construction activity was rising in their Districts.
Nevertheless, participants judged that aggregate demand and aggregate supply continued to come into better balance, as a result of the current restrictive stance of monetary policy and the continued normalization of aggregate supply conditions.
The U.S. trade deficit in goods and services reached another new high in February as the value of imports rose sharply further and the value of exports changed little.
Monthly changes in PCE prices since April had been smaller than those seen in the first three months of the year.
However, closed-end residential mortgage loans on banks' books increased modestly for the second month in a row.
The meeting was recessed briefly after this vote and the members of the Board of Governors left the room to vote on increases in the discount rate that were pending at several Federal Reserve Banks.
Inflation was expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further decline in energy prices.
Concurrently, however, weakness persisted in business capital expenditures, which members continued to view as the critical factor inhibiting the economic expansion.
In particular, in the absence of clear progress toward an agreement on further fiscal stimulus, the staff removed the assumption that an additional tranche of fiscal policy support would be enacted.
Moreover, primary issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was sporadic, and that of speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans virtually stopped after late February.
Consumer loans held by banks also shrank, amid heavy securitization.
With longer-run inflation expectations stable and significant slack anticipated to persist in labor and product markets, the staff continued to expect prices to rise at a subdued pace in 2012 and 2013.
At its meeting on August 22, 2000, the Committee adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 6-1/2 percent.
Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities declined over the intermeeting period while yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities were roughly unchanged, which left inflation compensation noticeably lower.
On net, foreign yields declined somewhat less than U.S. yields, contributing to a modest depreciation of the dollar against both the AFE and EME currencies.