Although the projected degree of slack in resource utilization over the next two years was a little lower than shown in the previous staff forecast, it was still quite substantial.
Sales of motor vehicles remained an area of strength, in part due to favorable credit conditions.
The Committee is prepared to adjust the details of its approach to policy normalization in light of economic and financial developments.
Members noted that the current stance of monetary policy remained quite accommodative and, given the tenor of the latest information on the performance of the economy in the context of generally favorable financial conditions, they believed that policy was appropriately positioned to foster further strengthening of the economic expansion.
This retreat led to a broad appreciation of the dollar as well as declines in equity prices abroad and in yields on benchmark sovereign bonds.
The available information from District business contacts was generally consistent with the recent trend in data on spending, although a couple of reports noted that households were spending cautiously and that some price discounting was likely.
Reports on planned capital expenditures by small businesses showed some signs of improvement in recent months, although they remained relatively subdued.
Moreover, some members continued to see downside risks to inflation from the possibility of further dollar appreciation and declines in commodity prices.
Participants observed that labor market conditions had continued to improve in recent months, with roughly half of the 22 million jobs lost over March and April having been regained.
Aggregate labor market conditions had been mixed in recent months.
The core component of the CPI also accelerated in January and on a year-over-year basis, but by lesser amounts than did the total index.
Nonfarm payroll employment registered another substantial increase in April after a slight decline in March, and the civilian unemployment rate fell to 4.3 percent in April.
Inflation had been subdued, even though the prices of some key commodities had increased recently.
These actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and would continue to help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed at the January 29-30 meeting indicated that the expansion in overall economic activity slowed in the fourth quarter of last year, reflecting weather-related disruptions and other transitory factors, but private domestic final demand grew at a solid rate.
The members concurred with the staff's recommendation that the staff studies prepared for the Committee in January 2001, when it discussed in detail various alternatives to holding U.S. government securities, should be released to the public after light editing was completed.
Specifically, those members supported a program under which the Committee would announce its intention to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less.
Market participants cited funding from the additional longer-term repo operations spanning year-end and increased capacity in daily operations as helping to maintain stable conditions in short-term funding markets.
Exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods also rose strongly, while exports of services expanded modestly.
Spreads for commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit across tenors were largely unchanged at historically low levels.
On the Board members' return, Chairman Greenspan announced that the Board had approved a ¼ percentage point increase in the discount rate to a level of 5-1/2 percent.
In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, FOMC participants noted that the data received since the March FOMC meeting, while pointing to continued weakness in economic activity, had been broadly consistent with their expectations.
Both core and overall PCE price inflation were expected to be damped by low rates of resource utilization, falling import prices, and easing cost pressures as a result of the sharp net declines in oil and other raw materials prices since last summer.
Real GDP was anticipated to increase at a rate noticeably below its potential in 2008.
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting the staff's assessment that neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well positioned to help the economy withstand substantial adverse shocks; the downside risks to the forecast of economic activity were seen as more pronounced than in December, mainly reflecting the greater uncertainty about global economic prospects and the financial market turbulence in the United States and abroad.
Owing to the limited availability of agency debt and concerns that larger purchases could impair market functioning, the Committee's transactions in these instruments for some time had been on a trajectory that would leave total purchases somewhat below the previously established maximum.
Generally small changes in shipments and sales in the July-August period kept book-value inventory-sales ratios about flat at very low levels.
In its accompanying statement, the Committee expressed its perception that, with appropriate monetary policy action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
In money markets, the 75 basis point increase in the target range at the July meeting passed through fully to overnight rates.
Subsequently, higher-than-expected inflation data, remarks by the Chairman that were viewed as pointing to future rate increases, and the depreciation of the dollar all led market participants to price in a somewhat steeper path for future policy.
Since the beginning of the year, the housing sector had continued to improve and the drag from net exports appeared to have lessened, but business fixed investment had been soft.
Most participants indicated a preference for clarifying the dependence of the current forward guidance on economic data and the Committee's assessment of progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and all principal payments from holdings of agency CMBS in agency CMBS.
Against this background, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had brought together key interested parties with the aim of increasing the probability of an orderly private-sector solution to the hedge fund's difficulties.
Manufacturing, notably in high-tech industries, led the way, but growth in mining and utilities also was sizable.
Participants' economic projections and policy assessments are described in more detail in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
The staff's inflation forecast was slightly lower than the one prepared for the previous meeting, reflecting incoming data and the lower projected level of resource utilization.
Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities increased somewhat but remained at low levels.
However, other participants noted that the continued subdued trend in wages was evidence of an absence of upward pressure on inflation from the current level of resource utilization.
Although the rise in hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector picked up slightly in the first quarter, the employment cost index decelerated further.
The motor vehicle and construction-related industries continued to hold down overall manufacturing output even as high-tech production posted moderate increases.
In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that recent data on spending had been strong, supported by a strong job market and rising incomes.
Concerns about the global growth outlook weighed on equity prices, and the broad dollar edged up.
Automakers' production schedules indicated that the pace of light motor vehicle assemblies would increase in the second quarter, and broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the readings on new orders from national manufacturing surveys, were consistent with an expectation of moderate expansion in factory output in the coming months.
While retail sales had slowed recently, the latest surveys indicated that consumer sentiment had risen further from an already markedly high level.
On the other hand, declining house prices remained a drag on household wealth and thus on consumer spending.
At the same time, members noted that policy had already been eased by 75 basis points and that the effects of those actions on the real economy would be evident only with a lag.
Some members indicated that in light of continued robust economic growth, tight labor markets, and improving financial conditions they had a preference for awaiting further developments that might provide a stronger basis for an easing action.
The Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part of the normalization process, although limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings.
In June, preliminary data indicated declining nominal goods exports and imports.
Participants also exchanged views on the likely benefits and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase program.
Accordingly, in the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided that a slightly higher federal funds rate might be acceptable or a somewhat lower federal funds rate would be acceptable during the intermeeting period.
CMBS issuance picked up in March, reportedly reflecting a return to a more normal pace after the adoption of a credit risk retention rule in late December caused some issuance to be shifted from January and February into the fourth quarter.
Inventories in most industries looked to be fairly well aligned with sales in recent months, although motor vehicle stocks were still relatively lean.
On average, the economy expanded at a moderate pace during the first half of the year despite the ongoing drag from the housing sector.
September sales totals were boosted by strong spending at automotive dealers, food stores, and nondurable goods outlets.
However, economic activity continued to be depressed in areas affected by the downturn in the energy sector and falling agricultural commodity prices, al­though several participants noted that the recent firming in crude oil prices had led to a modest increase in drilling activity.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 26-27, 2016.
The available surveys indicated that service-sector activity continued to expand.
The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained generally strong, with low default rates for both corporate bonds and leveraged loans.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had moved up considerably over the intermeeting period.
There were no reported corporate defaults in April, and defaults were low in May.
The timing and magnitude of the impact of the stimulus package on GDP was also seen as depending on the extent to which the boost to consumption spending is absorbed by a temporary run-down in firms' inventories or by an increase in imports rather than by an expansion in domestic output.
Though banks in the April SLOOS reported tightening standards on new consumer loans, respondents also experienced weaker demand for all consumer loan types.
The lagged effects of the earlier rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar were expected to place continuing, though diminishing, restraint on the demand for U.S. exports for some period ahead.
The economies of the technology-sensitive Asian countries had already turned up in the fourth quarter and seemed to have grown rapidly in the early months of the year.
Setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 10 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC's target range.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that, before the landfall of Hurricane Katrina on the Gulf Coast, expansion of economic activity had been solid, led by robust gains in housing and buoyant consumer spending.
Members also agreed that there was only a remote possibility that the process of disinflation would cumulate to the point of a decline for an extended period in the general price level.
The Federal Reserve's balance sheet increased modestly over the intermeeting period to $7.2 trillion, as growth in securities holdings was partially offset by a decline in U.S. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding.
Compared with the December forecast, the conditioning assumptions underlying the forecast were little changed and roughly offsetting: Although higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of the dollar were expected to be slightly more supportive of economic growth, the staff anticipated that these influences would be about offset by lower house prices and higher oil prices.
The year-end expected rate was about 70 basis points higher than the year-end expectation before the May FOMC meeting.
Moreover, it was likely in the view of these members that core inflation, which was already modest, would decelerate further.
This development appeared to reflect worker concerns about job security in a period of major business restructuring and downsizing activities as well as substantially reduced increases in benefit costs, notably those relating to health care.
At this meeting the Committee engaged in a broad-ranging discussion of its communication practices.
Policy expectations declined a bit more in the wake of the Chairman’s semiannual monetary policy testimony, which apparently reinforced investors’ beliefs that the FOMC anticipated gradually diminishing inflation pressures.
However, the importance of resource slack as a factor influencing inflation was debated, and some participants suggested that other variables, such as current and expected rates of economic growth, could be useful indicators of inflation pressures.
Participants generally expected that core inflation would edge lower over the next two years, reflecting a slight easing of pressures on resources, well-anchored inflation expectations, and the waning of temporary factors that had boosted prices last year and early this year.
While the prevailing negative influences on household spending might spill over a bit more to housing activity over the year ahead, there were few current developments in housing markets that might be read as signaling any marked weakening in this sector of the economy.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997.
Activity in the housing sector improved somewhat in recent months but remained slow.
Part of the July advance reflected a surge in the output of electric utilities associated with the heat wave in the eastern United States and an upturn in mining production after a weak first half of the year.
Stock prices declined somewhat, but spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds were little changed.
This outlook was predicated on financial conditions that were more accommodative than earlier this year.
Participants also considered open market operations to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS to support the smooth functioning of these securities markets, which in turn would help support the supply of credit to households and businesses.
They noted that continued relatively rapid growth of economic activity in the first quarter suggested greater persisting strength in demand than they had anticipated.
They noted that doing so would allow more time to assess the financial and economic effects of recent banking-sector developments and of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy.
Particularly large increases were recorded in expenditures on durable goods, apparel, and general merchandise.
They expressed a range of views on the appropriate pace of purchases, both now and as the outlook evolved.
Producer prices of finished goods also were affected by the volatility of energy prices in April and May, but core producer prices recorded only a small rise in each month.
Speeches by Federal Reserve officials, the minutes of the March meeting, and Congressional testimony by the Chairman combined to restrain policy expectations some.
When economic conditions warrant, the Committee's next step in the process of policy normalization will be to begin raising its target for the federal funds rate, and from that point on, changing the level or range of the federal funds rate target will be the primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.
A few participants warned against inferring too much from comparisons of the current low level of the unemployment rate with historical benchmarks, arguing that the much higher levels of education of today's workforce--and the lower average unemployment rate of more highly educated workers than less educated workers--suggested that the U.S. economy might be able to sustain lower unemployment rates than was the case in the 1950s or 1960s.
Al­though the unemployment rate was little changed in recent months, job gains had been solid, on average.
Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in December.
Participants agreed that in coming quarters inflation was likely to move down to levels consistent with price stability, reflecting the recent declines in the prices of energy and other commodities, the appreciation of the dollar, and the expected widening of margins of resource slack.
The decline in rates coincided with an appreciable increase in the volume of refinancing activity.
But many believed that the slow growth in economic activity anticipated for the first half of this year and the associated slack in resource utilization would contribute to an easing of price pressures.
The pace of bond issuance by nonfinancial firms increased further in October and November after rising robustly in the third quarter, as some firms reportedly sought to issue new debt before the end of the year.
However, anecdotal information suggested that many firms remained quite cautious about expanding payrolls, citing, among other factors, continued uncertainty about economic prospects and the high cost of providing health care benefits.
Total PCE price inflation was 2.7 percent in April, and core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 2.8 percent.
The presentation also outlined some staff recommendations for further testing of Term Deposit Facility operations.
Energy prices were high enough to encourage continued investment in alternative fuels.
The expansion in economic activity was expected to narrow the significant margin of slack in labor and product markets only slowly over the projection period, and the unemployment rate was anticipated to still be elevated at the end of 2014.
In their discussion of the foreign economic outlook, participants generally viewed the risks from the fiscal and financial problems in Greece as having diminished somewhat, although it was observed that Greece still faced many challenges and that Greek economic progress was likely to be limited over the near term.
Some participants suggested that the recent domestic economic data had increased their confidence in the outlook for growth going forward.
Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially.
Inflation data had been disappointing in recent months, and a few participants cited anecdotal reports that some firms were able to pass on costs to consumers.
A recent increase in oil drilling rigs in operation was seen as a positive sign for business investment, al­though the continued low level of oil prices was still weighing on capital investment in the energy industry.
These moves likely reflected a number of factors, including investors' perceptions of an improvement in the economic outlook, decreased concerns about the risk of deflation, a reversal of flight-to-quality flows, and selling of long-duration assets as exposure to mortgage prepayment risk dropped with a rise in mortgage rates.
Such an announcement would provide more certainty about the process for completing the normalization of the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
Over the medium term, participants expected strong growth in employment, driven by continued progress on vaccinations and an associated rebound of economic activity and of consumer and business confidence, as well as accommodative fiscal and monetary policy.
Exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods also moved up smartly in September.
Members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time.
Residential construction activity remained at a high level, evidently supported in part by recent declines in mortgage interest rates.
The Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks.
The economy appeared to be continuing to expand at a moderate pace that was likely to be rapid enough to gradually reduce margins of underutilized resources.
Real consumer outlays, excluding cars and trucks, were flat in April but turned up in May.
Participants stressed that it was important to communicate that the Committee would be prepared to increase the size of the securities purchases, as needed, on the basis of its close monitoring of market conditions.
Indeed, some price measures suggested that inflation had trended lower through the second quarter.
Credit continued to be available to most businesses, households, and municipalities.
They cited a variety of statistical and anecdotal signs that could be viewed as harbingers of rising price inflation.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that the information received since the Committee met in July indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity had picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year.
Anecdotal reports from business contacts about capital spending plans were indicative of appreciable further acceleration in business expenditures on a widening range of capital goods.
Government incentives for motor vehicle purchases contributed to a modest expansion of the German and French economies, but the euro-area economy as a whole contracted slightly as inventory drawdowns weighed on activity.
Near-term indicators of business spending on equipment and software were generally positive.
In contrast to many other types of loans, the payment performance of home mortgages improved.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the intermeeting period, members judged that the softening in the outlook for economic growth warranted an easing of the stance of policy at this meeting.
A few participants noted that other measures provided additional evidence that inflation was approaching the Committee's objective; for example, the 12-month changes in the headline and core CPI, the median CPI, and the trimmed mean PCE price index had also moved up from year-earlier levels.
With regard to PCE price inflation, the staff revised up its projection for the second half of 2022 in response to stronger-than-expected wage growth and the staff's assessment that the boost to inflation from supply–demand imbalances in the economy, including in food and energy markets, would be more persistent than previously assumed.
Productivity and economic potential seemed to have been growing at an increasingly rapid rate in recent years.
Members saw both downside and upside risks to prospects for inflation.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective February 2, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan, McDonough, Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Jordan, Kelley, McTeer, Meyer, and Mses.
Inflationary pressures remained subdued in most foreign economies amid substantial economic slack.
Meeting participants were highly uncertain about future financial developments and their implications for the broader economy.
Other participants were prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circumstances were to indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.
The output of the mining sector increased since April after having trended down from late 2014.
One member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the current meeting, citing the easing of financial conditions since the U.K. referendum, the return to trend economic growth, solid job growth, and inflation moving toward 2 percent.
Members debated the appropriate characterization of inflation expectations in the statement.
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt appeared to have expanded at a somewhat slower pace in the fourth quarter, down from the rapid increase in the third quarter.
Over the past year, broad measures of labor underutilization that include both the unemployed and workers marginally attached to the labor force had trended lower, the labor force participation rate had been relatively steady despite downward pressure from demographic trends, and layoffs had fallen to low levels.
Consumer spending appeared to be increasing in the first quarter at a pace considerably faster, on balance, than in the fourth quarter of last year.
Firming domestic demand, rising exports, and business inventory restocking appeared to have provided upward impetus to factory production.
Returning the portfolio to its historical composition of essentially all Treasury securities would minimize the extent to which the Federal Reserve portfolio might be affecting the allocation of credit among private borrowers and sectors of the economy.
Business spending on equipment and structures was projected to expand less rapidly in light of some anticipated slowing in the growth of sales and profits.
Business expenditures on nonresidential structures also were seen to be advancing robustly in a number of markets, possibly providing some offset to reduced residential construction activity.
Participants noted the continued stability of the labor force participation rate in the face of its demographically driven downward trend.
To some extent, the recent strengthening may have reflected precautionary stockbuilding as insurance against potential supply disruptions relating to the century date change.
Secretary's note: On September 24, 2009, the Federal Reserve announced schedules for operations under the TAF and the TSLF through January 2010 and indicated that it would seek public comment on a proposal for a permanent TAF.
Inflation was running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations were stable.
The statement language was revised to indicate that the Committee continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near 2 percent as "the most likely outcomes."
Several participants pointed out that readings on high-frequency economic indicators, such as individual mobility indexes and online restaurant reservation data, might already be registering the effects of the recent rise in virus cases.
In Europe, concerns about the political situation in Italy and its potential economic implications prompted a significant widening in risk spreads on Italian sovereign securities.
The external sector was projected to exert a small restraining influence on economic activity over the projection period, even though an anticipated firming of economic activity abroad would bolster demand for U.S. exports.
And Canadian employment and sales data were strong in the fourth quarter, with the housing sector continuing to make a significant contribution to growth.
The amendment was made necessary by the change in the language of the directive.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have edged down.
Staff Economic Outlook In the economic projection prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year was estimated to have been markedly slower than in the forecast for the December meeting.
However, many participants also expressed some concerns about potential costs and risks arising from further asset purchases.
Recent data on initial claims for unemployment insurance pointed to a further moderation in employment losses in January.
By contrast, the dollar rose slightly on average in terms of an index of the currencies of other important trading partners, notably the currencies of several Latin American countries that were experiencing political and economic problems.
Ten-year Treasury yields also declined, but less than shorter-term yields.
The Chair noted that he had asked the subcommittee on communications to consider ways to improve the information contained in the SEP and to improve communications regarding the role of the federal funds rate projections in the SEP as part of the policy process.
Participants also discussed the potential for clarifying or strengthening the Committee's forward guidance for the federal funds rate.
Participants generally expected that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term.
The Committee also anticipates that over coming quarters, inflation will run at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate.
Meeting participants generally agreed that the recovery in the housing sector had continued.
Measures of volatility and financial stress moved down and risk spreads narrowed in many markets, perhaps partly because of investors' perceptions of diminished downside tail risks.
They agreed, though, that because a significant acceleration in inflation did not appear to be imminent and because uncertainties continued to surround the economic outlook, a gradual approach to policy adjustments was warranted.
In this situation, they saw a clear need for a preemptive policy action that would head off any pickup of inflation, and it was noted that a shift to a tighter policy stance would seem to pose little risk to the expansion.
A few participants commented that recent news on inflation, against a background of continued prospects for a solid pace of economic growth, supported the view that inflation on a 12-month basis would likely move slightly above the Committee's 2 percent objective for a time.
Manufacturers ran off stocks at a fairly rapid pace in both months, while wholesalers and retailers excluding motor vehicle and parts dealers recorded small declines in stocks in August after accumulations in July.
In addition to the effects of lower market interest rates, extensive mortgage financing activity and a flight to safety from volatile equity markets likely added to M2's strong upward trend.
Household spending has continued to advance, but growth in business fixed investment appears to have slowed.
Real disposable personal income fell for the fourth consecutive month in September, reflecting the weakness in the labor market.
After growing at a considerably faster rate in the fourth quarter, M2 and M3 apparently increased at a more moderate but still brisk pace in January.
Recent cutbacks in new residential construction reduced the level of new home inventories, and the relative stability in sales of new homes allowed those inventory reductions to begin to bring down the months' supply of new homes for sale.
In judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases, the Committee will, at its coming meetings, assess whether incoming information continues to support the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective.
Participants also cited other indicators suggesting that labor market conditions continued to strengthen, including increases in the labor force participation rates of both prime-age and all individuals.
Participants generally noted that high interest rates could contribute to vulnerabilities in the financial system.
Nonetheless, recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated.
Meanwhile, mining output continued to contract as a result of further declines in drilling activity associated with low crude oil prices.
Some meeting participants noted that the announced decrease in the balance in the Treasury's Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) would increase reserves in the banking system unless it were offset by Federal Reserve actions or by a further reduction in borrowing from the Federal Reserve's various credit and liquidity facilities, and that these increases could be expansionary.
In June, the pace of inventory investment in manufacturing slowed from the rapid average rate for April and May, and the inventory-shipments ratio for the sector was at a very low level.
After robust issuance earlier in the first quarter, corporate bond issuance came to a near standstill around late February in the midst of elevated volatility following the escalation of concerns about the coronavirus outbreak.
Beyond the near term, real GDP was expected to increase slightly faster than in the previous forecast, largely reflecting a somewhat higher projected trajectory for equity prices and lower assumed paths for both longer-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Both prime and government money market funds experienced moderate inflows since the July FOMC meeting.
Even so, the pool of unemployed workers willing to take a job had continued to be drawn down, and it seemed likely to many members that prospective growth in aggregate demand might generate increasing pressures on the economy's ability to produce goods and services and thus add to inflationary pressures over time.
It was noted that a reasonable argument could be made either for an increase at this meeting or for waiting for some additional information on the labor market and inflation.
Homebuilding was forecast to decline somewhat but to stabilize at a relatively high level in the context of continued income growth and the generally favorable cash-flow affordability of home ownership.
Further gains in productivity and the prospect for relatively contained demand pressures on resources, which were likely to be somewhat more limited for a time than members had anticipated earlier, would contribute to keeping price inflation subdued.
Most participants anticipated that economic growth would move up to a rate somewhat above its longer-run trend during the second half of 2016 and that the labor market would strengthen further.
First, while the overall outlook remained favorable, there had been signs of deceleration in economic activity in recent quarters, particularly in business fixed investment and manufacturing.
In addition, the British government launched its Asset Protection Scheme, which insured assets placed in the scheme by the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Bank.
The labor market showed signs of a nascent recovery in recent months.
In their discussion of language for the postmeeting statement, members generally agreed that they should acknowledge the broad improvement in labor market conditions over the intermeeting period as well as their judgment that labor market slack continued to diminish.
In the past year, businesses had added to inventories at a rate that exceeded the rise in final sales, and somewhat reduced accumulation to a pace more in line with that of final sales was seen as a reasonable expectation.
Several participants noted that statistical models designed to gauge the probability of recession, including those based on information from the yield curve, suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium term had fallen somewhat over the intermeeting period.
A reduction in the attractiveness of home equity borrowing was mentioned as possibly contributing to the slowdown.
The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons was little changed on net.
Single-family starts ticked up in February, and adjusted permit issuance in this sector moved up to a level slightly above starts.
They observed that the decision was a close one for them, and in light of the uncertainties that were involved, they were willing to join the majority and wait for further evidence bearing on the outlook for inflation.
Participants discussed the still-elevated rate of housing services inflation and commented on the uncertainty regarding when and by how much lower readings for rent growth on new leases would pass through to this category of inflation.
Among the other industries cited as relatively strong in recent months were transportation, energy, and services.
The risk that a global growth slowdown would further weigh on the domestic economy remained prominent.
Growth of M2 picked up in November, while expansion of M3 moderated somewhat from its brisk pace in October.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments."
With regard to inflation expectations, two of the briefings presented findings that the longer-run trend in inflation, absent cyclical disturbances or transitory fluctuations, had been stable in recent years at a little below 2 percent.
Recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending were consistent with solid real PCE growth for the third quarter as a whole, including continued gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households' net worth.
In nonmortgage credit, automobile loans and student loans both continued to expand rapidly, while balances on revolving consumer credit stayed about flat.
However, the effects of these communications on the expected path for the federal funds rate were more than offset by reactions to stronger-than-expected data for the labor market and consumer inflation, along with perceptions of receding downside risks to the foreign economic outlook.
According to the October SLOOS, commercial banks tightened their standards on credit cards and other consumer loans over the third quarter.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appeared to be rising at a solid rate in the fourth quarter.
Inflation picked up in recent months, but it continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective.
In Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets, many market functioning indicators had returned to levels prevailing before the pandemic, and, as a result, purchases were conducted at the minimum pace directed by the Committee.
However, members anticipated that sales would pick up again, partly in response to an anticipated rebound in incentives.
Participants judged that the potential for more-widespread disruptions in oil production, and thus for a larger jump in energy prices, posed both downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation.
Although the rate of job openings moved up in February, the hiring rate was flat and continued to be subdued.
Participants generally agreed that sluggish job growth and the elevated unemployment rate reflected both weak demand for goods and services and a mismatch between the characteristics of the unemployed and the needs of the employers that currently have jobs available, but they had varying views about the relative importance of these two factors.
These points included that the characterization of the stance of policy as "accommodative" had provided useful forward guidance in the early stages of the policy normalization process, that this characterization was no longer providing meaningful information in light of uncertainty surrounding the level of the neutral policy rate, that it was appropriate to remove the characterization of the stance from the Committee's statement before the target range for the federal funds rate moved closer to the range of estimates of the neutral policy rate, and that the Committee's earlier communications had helped prepare the public for this change.
Regarding the outlook for inflation, some participants continued to be concerned that faster-than-expected economic growth or a substantial undershooting of the longer-run normal unemployment rate posed upside risks to inflation.
Contacts in many Districts were said to be generally optimistic about business prospects.
A few added that continued gradual strengthening in labor markets would help return inflation to the Committee's 2 percent objective.
Closed-end residential mortgage loans held by banks also increased amid the modest pickup in refinancing activity, while CRE loans contracted.
Many participants mentioned that selling assets that will mature in a relatively short time could be considered at some stage, if necessary to reduce ON RRP usage.
Moreover, these participants were concerned that forward guidance that involved the target range for the federal funds rate remaining at the ELB until employment and inflation criteria were achieved could limit the Committee's flexibility for years.
Some upward pressures on overnight rates were evident in the repurchase agreement (repo) market, apparently from higher issuance of Treasury bills and an associated expansion of primary dealer inventories over the intermeeting period.
Investment in nonresidential structures appeared to have risen at a markedly slower pace in the second quarter than in the first.
Members stated that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals.
A few participants expressed concerns about the possibility of substantially overshooting full employment, with one citing past difficulties in achieving a soft landing.
Those viewing greater policy accommodation as appropriate at this meeting generally supported a maturity extension program that would combine asset purchases and sales to extend the average maturity of securities held in the SOMA without generating a substantial expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet or reserve balances.
June's spike in multifamily starts was related to more-stringent building codes that took effect in New York City on July 1, which apparently led developers to pull forward the start date of some planned apartment projects.
Industrial production fell in the first quarter, with another drop in the drilling of new oil and gas wells as well as a decrease in manufacturing output that appeared to reflect, in part, the effects of the labor dispute at West Coast ports.
Participants remarked on the extent to which financial conditions remained supportive of economic expansion.
Industrial output had declined slightly in recent months after having rebounded in August when production resumed at General Motors following settlement of the labor strike.
The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.
The manager pro tem turned next to a review of money market developments and Open Market Desk operations.
In addition, real purchases by state and local governments declined further.
Housing activity was improving, with sales and new construction trending higher.
Wholesale borrowing by large banks increased over the intermeeting period.
Similarly, employment would be temporarily depressed by the hurricanes, but, abstracting from those effects, employment gains were anticipated to remain solid, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline a bit further by year-end.
The rise in exports in July more than offset their decline in June, as overseas sales of capital goods rose sharply.
Both the accompanying statement and the minutes of the meeting were broadly in line with market expectations and elicited limited price action in financial markets.
Economic performance in line with their current forecasts would at some point require an adjustment to policy toward a less accommodative stance once more definitive indications of sustained strengthening started to emerge.
Purchases of motor vehicles surged in response to aggressive zero-rate financing packages offered by automakers, while spending on other goods made a partial recovery from the September drop.
Surveys and information gathered from contacts in several Districts indicated an improvement in manufacturing activity as well as expectations for further gains in factory production in the near term.
New usage across many funding operations and facilities had declined over the intermeeting period as conditions in funding markets improved.
A number of participants noted that their business contacts had become more optimistic about the outlook for sales and production.
The members voted unanimously to adopt on a permanent basis, subject to the annual review required for all the Committee's instruments, paragraph 1 (c) of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations in the form reproduced below.
Most participants were of the view that there was not yet enough evidence to indicate whether the balance of risks to the medium-term outlook had changed materially, but others judged that recent developments had increased the level of downside risks or that the risks were no longer balanced.
Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import prices dissipate.
Total PCE prices increased 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in January, while core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 2.9 percent over the same period.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, December 17-18, 2013.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 12:30 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent months.
In reviewing Federal Reserve operations, the manager noted that market reaction to the ongoing reduction in the System's holdings of Treasury and agency securities had been muted to date.
Conditions in unsecured short-term funding markets continued to improve over the intermeeting period, and spreads on most types of commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed to levels that approached pre-pandemic ranges.
As previously announced, over the next few quarters the Federal Reserve will purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets, and it stands ready to expand its purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities as conditions warrant.
Banks were raising new capital and in some cases paying back funds received from the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
Announcements by foreign central banks garnered investor attention and contributed to somewhat higher asset price volatility later in the period.
On the upside, the recent strength in household spending raised the possibility that domestic final demand could snap back more rapidly than anticipated.
Forthcoming data on capital spending including new orders and contracts were likely to point to a weaker uptrend in business fixed investment.
Nominal Treasury yields also rose noticeably, and the Treasury yield curve flattened.
Participants noted that elevated uncertainty about employment prospects continued to weigh on consumption spending.
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams.
Somewhat larger increases would have been projected in consumer price inflation in the absence of anticipated technical measurement changes to the index.
Many participants noted that, since the Committee's previous meeting, the economy appeared to have lost some momentum and pointed to a number of factors supporting that view including recent weak indicators for business confidence, business spending and manufacturing activity; trade developments; and signs of slowing global economic growth.
Real disposable income rose further in July, as wages and salaries posted a strong gain and energy prices came down.
The current ranges were not expected to be guides to money growth under anticipated conditions in the period ahead, but instead could be viewed as anchors or benchmarks for money growth that would be associated with approximate price stability and sustained economic growth, assuming behavior of velocity in line with historical experience.
The slowing appeared to mainly reflect transitory factors like lower energy consumption induced by warm weather or delays in processing income tax refunds.
The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth will proceed at a moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.
The unemployment rate, at 5.0 percent in November, was 0.7 percentage point lower than in January and close to most participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level.
Conditions in the housing sector continued to improve, as real expenditures for residential investment expanded briskly in the first quarter, although from a low level.
Rates on jumbo loans came down as well, although the spread between the rates on jumbo and conforming loans was still wide and the market for private-label nonprime MBS remained impaired.
The average selling price of existing homes rose in the twelve months ending in September at about the same rapid clip as a year earlier, but the average selling price of new homes rose more slowly over the past few months.
The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core CPI inflation was 1-3/4 percent.
However, some anecdotal and other evidence suggested that retail sales had moderated in recent weeks in at least some areas; the moderation appeared to be only partly associated with the work stoppage at General Motors.
Allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation; adjust the IOER rate and the parameters of the ON RRP facility, and use other tools such as term operations, as necessary for appropriate monetary control, based on policymakers' assessments of the efficacy and costs of their tools.
Outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a modest pace, and credit spreads in emerging market economies narrowed somewhat on net.
On the negative side, there were few indications of a possible upturn in commercial construction activity.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective economic developments, members commented that recent statistical and anecdotal information provided clear indications of significant slowing in the expansion of business activity and also pointed to appreciable erosion in business and consumer confidence.
Real disposable income continued to increase in the first quarter, further gains in house prices likely bolstered household net worth, and consumer sentiment in the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers improved, on balance, in March and April.
It was again noted that the cyclical impetus to economic expansion appeared to be weaker than in past recoveries, but that the reasons for the weakness were unclear, contributing to greater uncertainty about the economic outlook.
A few participants noted that the current weakness in capital expenditures could lead to a slower pace of productivity growth in future years.
That new language was meant to clarify that the maintenance of a very low federal funds rate over that period did not reflect an expectation that the economy would remain weak, but rather reflected the Committee's intention to support a stronger economic recovery.
A few participants attributed the recent equity price appreciation to expectations for corporate tax cuts or to increased risk tolerance among investors rather than to expectations of stronger economic growth.
However, those effects were reversed late in the period when investors appeared to pull back from riskier assets in reaction to rising concern about developments in some emerging market economies and their possible implications for global economic growth.
The staff's forecast for inflation over the projection period was just a bit above the forecast prepared for the March FOMC meeting, reflecting somewhat higher-than-expected data on core consumer prices and a slightly narrower margin of economic slack than in the March forecast.
It was noted that a slowdown in the rate of increase in home prices going forward might lead households to increase their desired saving.
Participants generally agreed that fiscal negotiations could develop in a way that would result in significantly greater drag on economic growth than in their baseline outlook.
However, other participants anticipated that TALF loans would increase over time as financial market institutions became more familiar with the program.
Investment-grade corporate bond spreads were little changed, on net, and spreads of municipal bond indexes increased slightly but remained well below pre-pandemic levels.
Consumer spending remained firm, and residential construction continued at a high level.
Gains in consumer spending picked up for the quarter as a whole, driven by a surge in January that was followed by a small net decline over February and March.
Accordingly, much stronger growth in such investment could occur, with concomitant effects on incomes and the growth of overall spending.
The very limited available information on economic activity abroad in the third quarter suggested continued sluggish expansion in the euro area and Japan, moderate growth in the United Kingdom, further brisk recovery in Canada, and ongoing recovery in emerging Asia.
Participants also discussed the possible implications of a flattening in the term structure of market interest rates.
However, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector continues to be depressed.
The credit quality of municipal debt continued to be stable, as the number of bond upgrades outpaced downgrades, and defaults were relatively low.
At its meeting on February 4-5, 1997, the Committee issued a directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Mr. Kocherlakota's perspective on the policy decision was again shaped by his view that in November 2010, the Committee had chosen a level of accommodation that was well calibrated for the condition of the economy.
Issuance of short-term securities was likely to increase in coming periods, and, as more clarity emerged in the economic and policy outlook, demand for short-term assets could moderate.
In addition, lower mortgage rates had spurred a rise in refinancing activity, which, along with the increases in household wealth attributable to higher home values and equity prices, would provide support for consumer spending going forward.
Most participants commented on the continuing weakness in housing activity.
Most participants again projected that the economy would grow somewhat faster in 2011 and 2012, generating a more pronounced decline in the unemployment rate.
Moreover, it was noted that some of the pickup in economic growth that had appeared to have been indicated by the data available at the January meeting had been reversed by subsequent data revisions.
However, given the underlying strength of the expansion, favorable financial conditions, and the absence of major imbalances in the economy, the risks of a different outcome were judged to be in the direction of somewhat faster growth than currently projected.
At the same time, imports continued to expand rapidly, reflecting not only growth in U.S. domestic demand but also the increased availability of foreign products at attractive prices stemming from the rapid expansion of output capacity in a number of foreign countries.
The unemployment rate declined to 4.9 percent in January and remained at that level in February, while both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio increased over these months.
Although consumer spending had continued to advance, growth in business fixed investment appeared to have slowed.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, August 10, 2010.
The termination of some inducements to purchase motor vehicles was expected to retard expenditures on consumer durables in the latter part of this year.
Real PCE slumped in April, with declines widespread across most spending categories.
However, leverage continued to increase in the nonfinancial business sector, particularly among energy-related and other relatively risky firms.
CRE loans on banks' books continued to expand moderately, and issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities remained solid.
On the one hand, the participation rate for prime-age males remained significantly below its level before the financial crisis, suggesting that it could rise further over time.
Spending on office buildings and manufacturing structures continued to be depressed by high vacancy rates, while outlays for commercial buildings moved up in conjunction with declines in vacancy rates for such structures.
Several of them noted that interpreting the next few inflation reports would likely be complicated by the temporary run-up in energy costs and in the prices of other items affected by storm-related disruptions and rebuilding.
It was noted that recent increases in consumer energy prices could cause inflation to temporarily reach or even rise a bit above 2 percent in the near term.
Most major foreign central banks kept their policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting period and emphasized the need for greater confidence that inflation was falling back to target before easing policy.
Although the Committee's decision to raise the intended level of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points was widely anticipated in financial markets, the accompanying statement was read as setting a more optimistic tone about economic prospects than had been anticipated and prompted investors to mark up their expectations for the near-term path of policy.
Industrial production moved down in April and picked up in May, leaving output about flat over those two months, but production was lower than at the beginning of the year.
The employment cost index for private compensation advanced moderately in the year ending the third quarter, and the markup of prices over labor costs remained somewhat elevated.
Treasury yields rose materially over the intermeeting period.
Sales of existing single-family homes in October were only a bit below the record level set in September.
With energy price increases expected to slow next year, total PCE inflation was seen as likely to fall back in line with core inflation by the end of 2011, as in previous projections.
Thus, inventory investment was likely to respond to the expected deceleration in final sales over coming quarters.
Concerns about the possibility of a restructuring of Greek government debt drove spreads of yields on the sovereign debts of Greece, Ireland, and Portugal to record highs relative to yields on German bunds.
Excluding food and energy, inflation appeared to have moderated slightly from its pace in the early part of the year.
Output increased markedly at both motor vehicle manufacturers and their upstream suppliers as the supply chain disruptions associated with the earthquake in Japan eased.
The Committee also retained its forward guidance about the federal funds rate, including the thresholds on the unemployment and inflation rates.
But construction activity in both the residential and nonresidential sectors remained depressed, and a significant portion of the rise in domestic demand was again met by imports.
Credit card balances continued to decline through the third quarter, with gains in balances for account holders with prime credit scores offset by declines in those for nonprime accounts.
And in energy-producing regions, the count of drilling rigs in operation had begun to level off before the onset of Hurricane Harvey.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had risen slightly but remained low.
The projection for total inflation in 2020 was a little lower than for core inflation due to a projected decline in consumer energy prices.
Mr. McTeer does not believe that rapid growth based on new technology, rising productivity, and other supply-side factors is inflationary, especially in the current global environment.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved lower; survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained stable.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the FOMC met in June indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at a moderate pace in the third quarter, supported by continued gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households' net worth.
Consumer spending continued to advance, but spending on items other than motor vehicles was relatively soft.
The outlook remained subject, as usual, to considerable uncertainty, but many of the members observed that underlying trends in key sectors of the economy along with generally supportive financial conditions seemed consistent with further moderate economic expansion.
Real GDP growth slowed markedly in China, largely reflecting lower investment growth and exports.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appeared to have increased at a slower rate in the fourth quarter than in the previous quarter.
The Committee thought that the statement should reiterate the view that the adjustment in the housing market was ongoing, but that nevertheless the economy seemed likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.
Real disposable personal income moved up at a solid rate in March and April, reflecting increases in employment and hours worked as well as slightly higher real wages, but home values declined in recent months and equity prices moved down since the April meeting.
Although financial markets, and perhaps business and household confidence, had been shaken by revelations of accounting irregularities, the economy had continued to expand and the prospects for accelerating aggregate demand remained positive.
Some members were concerned that the effectiveness of cuts in the target federal funds rate may have been diminished by the financial dislocations, suggesting that further policy action might have limited efficacy in promoting a recovery in economic growth.
Reports on activity in the airline, trucking, and warehousing industries were uneven.
The access of investment-grade corporate borrowers to credit so far remained unimpeded, and rates on investment-grade bonds had declined in recent weeks.
Market sentiment toward large domestic banking organizations appeared to improve somewhat over the intermeeting period, likely related in part to further reductions in nonperforming loans and growing confidence in the economic outlook.
In conclusion, participants agreed to have a broad discussion of the experiences gathered from the two experimental exercises in conjunction with the October FOMC meeting.
Some participants commented that recent readings of inflation measures that exclude volatile components, such as trimmed mean measures, had been relatively stable at or just below 2 percent.
However, some members said that their decision to raise the target range was a close call, particularly given the uncertainty about inflation dynamics, and emphasized the need to monitor the progress of inflation closely.
More fundamentally, however, the income and wealth effects that were boosting household expenditures generally should help to sustain a perhaps somewhat diminished but still high level of homebuilding activity for a while, despite higher mortgage financing costs.
On balance, consumer credit financing conditions did not appear to be a major drag on household spending.
A few of these participants noted that this possibility was heightened by factors beyond the Committee's actions, including the tightening of monetary policy stances abroad and the weakening global economic outlook, that were also likely to restrain domestic economic activity in the period ahead.
Participants judged that uncertainty about economic growth over the next couple of years was elevated.
Early in the intermeeting period, bond yields in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) plunged and foreign equities declined notably following an increase in U.S.–China trade tensions.
The durability of the economic expansion would be jeopardized by price and wage decisions reflecting expectations that the purchasing power of the dollar would decline at faster rates in the future.
The dollar was mixed against the EME currencies.
Another possibility was that market-based measures might be assigning considerable weight to less favorable outcomes for the U.S. economy in which the federal funds rate would remain low for quite some time or fall back to very low levels in the future, whereas the projections in the SEP report the paths for the federal funds rate that participants see as appropriate given their views of the most likely evolution of inflation and real activity.
However, high levels of resource utilization and the high prices for energy and other commodities had the potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the March 15–16 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was increasing in the first quarter at a pace that was slower than the rapid gain posted in the fourth quarter of 2021.
In April, nominal orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased a little after rising briskly in March.
The members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals and that, if progress continued broadly as expected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted.
Several participants commented that a government shutdown might result in the delayed release of some economic data and that this outcome would make it more difficult to assess economic conditions.
Although business fixed investment in the second quarter was a little lower than had been expected, participants noted that this development appeared mainly to reflect the timing of purchases, particularly of transportation equipment, and not weakness in the underlying trend.
The S&P 500 stock price index increased sizably, on net, over the intermeeting period, led by technology-related stocks.
In this context, the Committee judged that some inflation risks remained and indicated that it would continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
The major uncertainty was the extent to which labor productivity would continue to accelerate and hold down the rise in unit labor costs.
Some moderation in housing starts from recent peak levels appeared likely, however, in the context of the slowing in job and income gains associated with the members' overall forecasts.
Labor market conditions remained tight in March, as job gains were robust and the unemployment rate was low.
On balance, core inflation was expected to continue at a subdued rate over the projection period.
An unchanged range of 3 to 7 percent also was set in February for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt in 1999.
In December, the 12‑month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.4 percent, while core CPI inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested continued strong expansion of economic activity.
Since the Committee met in November, the Federal Reserve's total assets were about unchanged, at nearly $2.2 trillion, as the increase in the System's holdings of securities roughly matched a further decline in usage of the System's credit and liquidity facilities.
Members generally continued to see the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished, on net, since last fall.
Measures of forward inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and inflation swaps fell further.
The number of participants and the total amount awarded increased over the course of the first five operations.
Among the major components, shipments of both computing and communications equipment fell sharply in April and retraced only part of that decline in May.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective July 28, 2016, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
In addition, new orders for durable equipment turned up sharply in the two months.
In addition, rates on Treasury repurchase agreements (repo), were, in part, pushed higher by tax-related outflows from government-only money market mutual funds and a corresponding decline in repo lending by those funds.
Although a substantial fraction of banks continued to tighten their credit policies on commercial real estate loans in the fourth quarter, lending standards for most other types of loans were little changed, according to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.
Manufacturing, construction, and the service sector recorded large payroll declines in April, and gains elsewhere were small.
Against this background, U.S. short-term interest rates registered small mixed changes over the period since the September 30 meeting, while Treasury bond yields declined somewhat on balance.
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to the downside, primarily reflecting the staff's assessment that monetary policy appeared to be better positioned to respond to large positive shocks to the economic outlook than to substantial adverse ones.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Geithner, Ms. Bies, Messrs. Guynn, Kohn, Kroszner, Ms. Pianalto, Mr. Warsh, and Ms.Yellen.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May as the value of exports of goods and services rose slightly and the value of imports declined, partly reflecting a sharp drop in the value of oil imports.
Goods exports, however, had only recovered three-fourths of their decline since January despite brisk growth in agricultural exports.
Business contacts in a couple of Districts—particularly those in the manufacturing, health-care, and technology sectors—reported having trouble hiring workers for reasons likely related to virus cases or workers' need to provide childcare.
In addition, CRE prices remained high relative to rental income.
They noted that the economic recovery thus far had been stronger than anticipated—suggesting greater momentum in economic activity than had been previously thought—but viewed the more recent indicators as signaling that the pace of recovery had slowed.
The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period.
Participants judged that overall conditions in labor markets had continued to improve, albeit gradually.
Participants observed that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjustments on economic activity and inflation.
Given the outlook for slower growth in final demand, many businesses would not have to add significantly to capacity.
Foreign inflation appeared to have moderated a bit in the third quarter, reflecting declines in energy prices.
Late in the period, investor focus appeared to turn to the U.S. debt ceiling and the potential for delayed debt service payments by the Treasury Department, the possibility of a downgrade of U.S. sovereign debt, and the prospects for significant long-term fiscal consolidation.
Emerging market currencies were generally resilient in recent weeks, reportedly benefiting from investors' anticipation of stronger global economic growth, after depreciating significantly against the dollar during the previous intermeeting period.
The sharp decline in oil prices weighed on inflation compensation and left a mixed imprint on other asset markets.
Spending was supported in recent months by the sizable boost to disposable personal income from tax cuts as well as by levels of wealth and confidence that were considerably above their values earlier in the year.
The monthly step-up in exports was also broadly spread across categories of goods.
Strains in global financial markets continued to pose significant downside risks to economic activity.
Market participants attributed some of the recent decline in market repo rates to a reduction in the supply of Treasury bills in advance of the reinstatement of the statutory debt limit on March 16.
Tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation.
A number of businesses continued to report that they were holding back on hiring and capital spending because of uncertainty about future taxes, health-care costs, and regulations.
Inflation has picked up in recent months, mainly reflecting higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the recent supply chain disruptions.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that economic activity was expanding at a more moderate pace than in the first half of the year.
The staff projection pointed to a contraction of real GDP in the first half of 2008 followed by a modest rise in the second half of this year, aided in part by the fiscal stimulus package.
In October, nominal new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft moved up a little, but shipments of these capital goods edged down and the level of orders remained below that of shipments.
Consumer prices excluding food and energy increased moderately in January and February.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it is instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
Vote against this action: Mr. McTeer.
In contrast, yields on nominal 10-year Treasury securities edged higher on balance.
Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate.
In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, participants generally noted that incoming information pointed to a somewhat weaker outlook for spending than at the time of the October meeting.
Moreover, some participants noted that the specifics and effectiveness of some government programs to support financial markets and institutions remained unclear.
Participants agreed that the inflation data that were received since the December meeting had been disappointing.
Inflation remained subdued despite very tight labor markets.
Should market conditions appear to warrant the resumption of Schedule 1 TSLF or TOP auctions, the Account Manager is to consult with the Chairman and, if possible, the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee."
Auto loans increased, consistent with significant declines in auto loan interest rates this year.
While the tests of ON RRPs had been informative, the staff suggested that additional testing could further improve understanding of how this supplementary tool could be used to achieve greater control of the federal funds rate during policy normalization.
The Committee agreed that it was important to acknowledge, in the statement to be released following the meeting, that economic growth remained slow and that indicators pointed to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions.
Nonetheless, they saw some pickup in inflation as a distinct possibility under anticipated economic conditions and concluded that the directive should indicate that prospective developments were more likely to warrant an increase than a decrease in the funds rate objective in the near term.
Consumer price inflation was subdued, and measures of long-run inflation expectations remained stable.
The decline in spending for other types of nonresidential buildings appeared to be slowing, and there were a few signs that financial conditions in commercial real estate markets, though still difficult, were stabilizing.
Credit card balances contracted at a slower rate in June and July than in the spring.
The implications of continued robust growth for the inflation outlook depended critically on judgments about the supply side of the economy.
Surveys indicated that households’ expectations of inflation over the next year were little changed in February while households’ and professional forecasters’ longer-term inflation expectations edged lower.
The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth.
One-month-ahead option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index--the VIX--rose appreciably in mid-April, reflecting in part increased investor concerns about geopolitical factors and foreign political developments, but ended the period slightly lower, as investor concerns appeared to ease after the first round of the French presidential election.
However, larger or prolonged disruptions in commodities markets could interfere with other markets and real activity more broadly.
Participants generally agreed that such steps to return the Federal Reserve's liquidity provision to a normal footing would be technical adjustments to reflect the notable diminution of the market strains that had made the creation of new liquidity facilities and expansion of existing facilities necessary and emphasized that such steps would not indicate a change in the Committee's assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy or the proper time to begin moving to a less accommodative policy stance.
The dollar also gained slightly on average in relation to the currencies of the other G-10 currencies.
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
The Committee continues to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further.
Members commented that the market unsettlement that had in large measure prompted the Committee's easing actions during the fall had now lessened appreciably.
Housing activity softened somewhat over the summer but has remained at a high level.
Vacancy rates continued to rise, property prices fell further, and, as indicated by the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, financing for nonresidential construction projects became even tighter.
But some other participants were uncertain that a period of tight labor utilization would yield lasting labor market benefits or were concerned that it risked a buildup of inflationary pressures.
The labor force participation rate increased in February, as did the employment-to-population ratio.
However, a number of participants noted that it could be difficult to communicate the reason for such sales to the public, and, in particular, that the announcement of such sales would risk an outsized market reaction, as the public could view the sales as a signal of a tighter overall stance of monetary policy than they had anticipated or as an indication that the Committee might be more willing than had been thought to sell longer-term assets.
However, in some theoretical frameworks, the connection between resource slack and inflation depends on the nature of the shock and its impact on marginal costs and markups.
Participants noted strong recent payroll growth, while the unemployment rate remained low.
Members judged that the implications of the war for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain.
Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace.
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased 3-1/4 percent over the four quarters of 2016, and average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2-3/4 percent over the 12 months ending in February.
Participants judged that moderate growth of investment outlays going forward was the most likely outcome.
Industrial production decreased slightly further in September, and available weekly information pointed to another reduction in output in October.
The Committee's action and its announcement that the risks were weighted in the direction of rising inflation were widely anticipated and had little immediate effect on market yields.
Foreign economic growth appeared to have slowed significantly in recent months.
In their discussion of current conditions and the economic outlook, meeting participants observed that incoming data over the intermeeting period hinted at possible upside risks for inflation and downside risks for economic growth.
While participants generally saw the risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced, they agreed that inflation developments should be monitored closely.
Participants generally expected the strength in household spending to continue, especially for durable goods and residential investment.
On net, U.S. equity prices declined, corporate bond spreads widened, and nominal Treasury yields rose.
The July trade data provided additional evidence that the levels of both exports and imports probably reached their trough in the second quarter.
Against that backdrop, longer-term Treasury yields declined somewhat while, in private debt markets, a sense of reduced concern about governance issues and perhaps some increased appetite for risk-taking led to a substantial decline in yields across the credit spectrum that further narrowed risk spreads.
Spreads on yields of both investment-grade and high-yield nonfinancial corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities declined somewhat to levels fairly close to their historical norms.
Several participants discussed the pickup in residential investment in the first quarter.
Longer-term sovereign yields in AFEs edged lower on net.
However, real private domestic final purchases (PDFP)—which comprises PCE and private fixed investment and which often provides a better signal than GDP of underlying economic momentum—posted a solid second-quarter increase that was in line with its first-quarter pace and only moderately slower than its average rate of increase in 2023.
Participants again exchanged views on the likely benefits and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase program.
In foreign exchange markets, the dollar appreciated against most major currencies over the intermeeting period, and it also gained against an index of the currencies of other major U.S. trading partners.
Other members indicated that if the labor market appeared to be tightening significantly more than anticipated or if inflation pressures appeared to be developing more rapidly than expected as resource utilization tightened, it might become necessary to adjust the Committee's communications about the expected path of the federal funds rate.
The possible downshift in the pace of high-tech spending also raised the possibility of an erosion of profit margins that could result from a slackening in the pace of technology-led productivity growth and the associated increase in cost pressures.
A couple of participants had received indications from contacts that business investment spending in their Districts might strengthen.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial conditions were affected by developments abroad over the intermeeting period but were little changed on balance.
Both imports and exports recovered from weak readings in February, with imports of consumer goods, automotive products, and capital goods rising significantly and exports of capital goods and industrial supplies showing particular strength.
The pace of economic expansion in the euro area softened somewhat further in the fourth quarter, as consumer spending remained weak.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed.
The drop in commercial real estate loans persisted, reflecting weak fundamentals that limited originations as well as charge-offs of existing loans.
Inference about the labor force participation rate was complicated by its long-run downward trend.
Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP that were available through the first part of July suggested that the pace of private employment gains had remained strong.
The upward pressure on consumer prices from the increases in commodity and import prices earlier in the year was expected to continue to subside in the current quarter.
Most forward-looking indicators of housing demand, including an index of pending home sales, pointed to a further deterioration in sales in the near term.
Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 2.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.
The manager pro tem next turned to a review of money market developments since early October.
Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was revised up somewhat in the near term, as an upward revision to households' real disposable income in the first half of the year led to a slightly higher second-half forecast for consumer spending.
These operations shall be conducted in addition to the authorized overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which remain subject to a separate overall size limit authorized by the FOMC."
Residential housing activity continued to display substantial strength in the fourth quarter.
According to third-quarter Call Report data, unused loan commitments shrank for the seventh consecutive quarter, though the rate of decline slowed, especially for commitments to lend to businesses.
Despite generally lackluster results for first-quarter earnings, corporate guidance for profits in coming quarters led to upward revisions in analysts' forecasts of year-ahead earnings per share for S&P 500 firms.
A couple of participants added that nonresidential construction activity was rising in their Districts.
Nevertheless, participants judged that aggregate demand and aggregate supply continued to come into better balance, as a result of the current restrictive stance of monetary policy and the continued normalization of aggregate supply conditions.
The U.S. trade deficit in goods and services reached another new high in February as the value of imports rose sharply further and the value of exports changed little.
Monthly changes in PCE prices since April had been smaller than those seen in the first three months of the year.
However, closed-end residential mortgage loans on banks' books increased modestly for the second month in a row.
The meeting was recessed briefly after this vote and the members of the Board of Governors left the room to vote on increases in the discount rate that were pending at several Federal Reserve Banks.
Inflation was expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further decline in energy prices.
Concurrently, however, weakness persisted in business capital expenditures, which members continued to view as the critical factor inhibiting the economic expansion.
In particular, in the absence of clear progress toward an agreement on further fiscal stimulus, the staff removed the assumption that an additional tranche of fiscal policy support would be enacted.
Moreover, primary issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was sporadic, and that of speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans virtually stopped after late February.
Consumer loans held by banks also shrank, amid heavy securitization.
With longer-run inflation expectations stable and significant slack anticipated to persist in labor and product markets, the staff continued to expect prices to rise at a subdued pace in 2012 and 2013.
At its meeting on August 22, 2000, the Committee adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 6-1/2 percent.
Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities declined over the intermeeting period while yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities were roughly unchanged, which left inflation compensation noticeably lower.
On net, foreign yields declined somewhat less than U.S. yields, contributing to a modest depreciation of the dollar against both the AFE and EME currencies.
At its meeting on May 18, 1999, the Committee adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets that would be consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 4-3/4 percent, but the directive also contained a bias toward a possible tightening of policy.
Accordingly, the Committee voted to incorporate the following statement regarding the 1999 and 2000 ranges in its domestic policy directive: The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
The manager also provided an update on staff work related to potential arrangements that would allow depository institutions to pledge funds held in a segregated account at the Federal Reserve as collateral in borrowing transactions with private creditors and which could potentially provide an additional supplementary tool during policy normalization.
Money market fund (MMF) net yields across all fund types rose notably, as increases in administered rates passed through to money market instruments.
Issuance of agency CMBS remained robust and issuance of non-agency CMBS strengthened notably in June.
However, the recent decrease in energy prices had already led to a reduction in drilling activity and was likely to reduce some investment in alternative fuels.
Participants agreed that cumulative policy firming to date had reduced demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing.
Yields on longer-dated Treasury securities rose late in the period following comments by Federal Reserve officials.
During their discussion of economic conditions and monetary policy, participants also commented on different concepts of the equilibrium real federal funds rate--that is, a reference value of the inflation-adjusted federal funds rate consistent with the economy achieving, over a specified time horizon, maximum employment and price stability.
In light of the recent economic data and anecdotal information, the Committee agreed that the statement to be released after the meeting should acknowledge that economic growth had slowed in the first part of the year.
The proposed changes were intended to allow the Committee to obtain additional information about the potential usefulness of ON RRP operations for affecting market interest rates when that step becomes appropriate.
Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting was a little weaker, on balance, than the one prepared for the July FOMC meeting.
While market commentary suggested that a number of factors contributed to the decline, a clear catalyst was difficult to identify.
The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate."
Members agreed that the Committee's evaluation of progress on its objectives would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.
Meanwhile, broad equity prices also increased notably.
A few participants noted that they already viewed the costs as likely outweighing the benefits and so would like to bring the program to a close relatively soon.
However, the effects of these factors were offset to some extent by actual and expected easing of monetary policy in the United States and abroad and by better-than-anticipated profits at some S&P 500 firms.
A straight read of OIS (overnight index swap) forward rates implied that the federal funds rate would decline about 60 basis points in 2019 and about 35 basis points in 2020.
The incoming information on inflation over the intermeeting period was largely in line with participants' expectations.
The average workweek and aggregate hours worked by nonfarm employees increased significantly, and the average level of nonfarm employee hours in October and November was noticeably above the average in the third quarter.
Overall, credit quality remained strong, al­though there was some deterioration for credit card and auto loan borrowers and some predictors of future credit quality worsened a bit further.
A number of participants commented that the counterparties at such a facility should include depository institutions.
In particular, if that pressure intensified, at some point further gains in productivity would not be able to offset rising wage increases.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods edged higher in May after posting large increases in earlier months of the year.
Expenditures on a wide range of other consumer goods and services expanded briskly.
Seasoned equity offerings in October and November were similar to the typical volumes observed in previous years, though equity raised through initial public offerings moderated somewhat from the robust rate of issuance in September.
Activity in the commercial real estate sector continued to be weak.
In China, retail sales and fixed-asset investment rose strongly.
Several also noted the possibility of larger-than-anticipated near-term cuts in federal government spending.
Some participants pointed to reports from contacts that firms could not as easily pass on price increases to consumers or were making less frequent price adjustments than they had in recent years.
The rise in longer-term real interest rates and some widening of private credit spreads in recent months were seen as perhaps having a little restraining effect on the investment outlook.
While liquid deposits rose rapidly, small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds continued to contract.
The decrease in exports was mainly in civilian aircraft and other capital goods.
Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.3 percent over the same 12-month period.
The incoming information on inflation over the intermeeting period showed that the earlier declines in energy prices and falling prices of non-energy imports were still contributing importantly to low headline inflation.
With respect to the statement to be released following the meeting, members agreed that only small changes were necessary to reflect the modest improvement in the near-term economic outlook.
Early in the intermeeting period, conditions in short-term wholesale funding markets appeared to deteriorate somewhat.
Some participants commented that trade policy developments remained a source of uncertainty for the outlook for domestic growth and inflation.
Persisting strength in manufacturing output was accompanied by brisk increases in mining activity and sizable declines in utilities services associated with cooler-than-normal temperatures.
Over the 12 months ending in March, total consumer prices as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) rose 2-1/2 percent, while core CPI inflation was 2 percent.
Important factors influencing this assessment were that foreign economic and geopolitical developments still seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed.
By contrast, District reports regarding the construction sector were mixed, al­though here, too, some contacts reported that supply constraints were acting as a drag on activity.
This view reflected their expectations that the current expansion, even if it did moderate to a pace approximating the economy's trend potential growth, would do so at a level of resource use that based on the historical record exceeded the economy's sustainable capacity--perhaps by even more than at present, given the evident strength of aggregate demand.
Motor vehicle purchases bounced back in late 2005 and early 2006 from the sluggish pace that followed the end of the past summer's "employee pricing" programs.
Another possibility might be for the Committee to express the inflation goal as a range centered on 2 percent and aim to achieve inflation outcomes in the upper end of the range in periods when resource utilization was high.
He felt that policymakers should instead focus their attention on improving the monetary policy transmission mechanism, particularly with regard to the activity of community banks, which are vital to small business lending and job creation.
Foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, as troubles in the property sector weighed on economic activity in China and monetary policy restraint contributed to the slowing in economic growth in Europe.
In the Manager's opinion, secondary market transactions would provide a helpful addition to the current range of assets that the System normally purchased, especially in a period of little or no increase in Treasury debt.
Recent information continued to indicate that consumer price inflation had picked up, while producer price inflation was essentially unchanged.
The staff assessed that leverage in the financial sector remained moderate.
Measures of labor compensation increased a little faster than consumer prices.
Excluding food and energy, core consumer price inflation picked up in April and May, pushing the 12-month change in the core consumer price index through May above its level of a year earlier.
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months ending in March.
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were generally unchanged over the intermeeting period.
The reversal was driven in part by a tighter spread between Treasury bill yields and repo rates.
The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A.
The participants' discussion was preceded by staff presentations that reviewed the principal channels through which asset purchases exert effects on financial conditions and the economy, with a focus on the implications of these channels for the Committee's deliberations regarding future adjustments to the Federal Reserve's asset purchases.
The S&P 500 index rose about 1-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period, as earnings reports from a range of companies appeared to indicate that profits in the second quarter had increased modestly relative to the first quarter.
Modest production increases in most manufacturing categories in December, including high-tech, consumer goods, and business equipment, outweighed production declines in the motor vehicles and parts sector.
The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted in April indicated that, on net, bank lending standards and terms had eased somewhat further during the first quarter of the year and demand for C&I loans, commercial mortgages, and auto loans had increased, while demand for residential mortgages continued to decline.
Implied rates on interest rate futures initially rose following the meeting but subsequently retraced, and expectations regarding the path of the target federal funds rate over the next few years ended the period only modestly changed.
Outlays on drilling and mining structures continued to climb in the first quarter, and available data pointed to ongoing growth.
Still, projected resource utilization was lower over the next two years than in the previous forecast.
Growth in business fixed investment slowed further in the first quarter, and new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft continued to decline in March, pointing to weakness in capital goods shipments in the near term.
Growth in consumer spending declined in recent months from the already modest pace in the first quarter.
Nominal Treasury yields rose in line with the shift in the outlook for monetary policy.
One member was persuaded, however, that such a policy move should be implemented at this meeting in order to avert the need for a stronger and probably more disruptive policy adjustment that would be needed later to head off rising inflation.
If instead deposit rates moved up in line with net yields on alternative investments, ON RRP takeup could remain relatively steady.
The expansion of domestic nonfinancial debt increased in November and December (latest data), reflecting greater business borrowing, perhaps to finance growing inventories and smaller contractions in the amount of federal debt outstanding.
While assessments by individual members of the likely pace of the expansion going forward differed somewhat, they generally expected growth to run at a rate that would trim slack in labor and goods markets over the forecast period, assuming no major shocks to the economy.
Sales of new homes edged up to a record level in September, and sales of existing homes continued to be brisk, though a little below the exceptional pace of the first half of the year.
But as suggested by the rise until recently in profit margins, businesses had been able to realize productivity gains that tended to offset the faster increases in compensation costs.
In this regard the risks of rising inflation could not be dismissed, and while those risks appeared to be quite limited for the nearer term, excessive monetary stimulus had to be avoided to avert rising inflation expectations and added inflation pressures over time.
Indeed, the severe ongoing financial market strains, the large reductions in household wealth, and the global nature of the economic slowdown were seen by some participants as suggesting the distinct possibility of a prolonged contraction, although that was not judged to be the most likely outcome.
Given recent developments, members anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time.
The available data suggested that consumer spending was supported by gains in personal income in the fourth quarter of 2010.
Members noted that inflation had picked up in recent months; however, they also noted that inflation had continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports.
In light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak, how much the economy would weaken, and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast.
Participants observed that the recent partial federal government shutdown had presented a significant hardship for many families.
The component of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE edged down in May, but light motor vehicle sales moved up briskly.
Some members also noted that any adjustment of these ranges to align them more fully with projections of money growth consistent with the Committee's expectations for expansion of the economy and prices in 1996 could be misinterpreted.
Imports from China were especially weak, which may in part reflect seasonal adjustment issues related to the timing of the Chinese New Year.
Retail stocks continued to climb in January, but sales rose by more; the sector's inventory-sales ratio also edged lower, but it remained near the top of its range for the past twelve months.
Equity prices also rose in most emerging market economies, with the stock market in China outperforming.
Aggregate delinquency rates on CMBS backed by office properties continued to be elevated in November.
In making these judgments, most policymakers emphasized the primacy of maintaining monetary control in setting the appropriate capacity of the ON RRP facility for the time being; participants indicated that the Committee's future decisions regarding the size and ultimate longevity of the facility should be largely driven by considerations of monetary control, although other factors, such as financial stability, should also be taken into account.
A number of policymakers were concerned that such an assertion could unduly constrain future adjustments to the stance of policy should the evidence emerging in coming months suggest that an appreciable firming would be appropriate.
Several meeting participants observed that, although the economy's sustainable potential output could not be observed directly or estimated with precision, historical patterns and recent data suggested that current levels of labor and product market resource utilization were in a zone consistent with little or no remaining economic slack.
Real residential construction contracted in November and December.
Both the share of workers employed part time for economic reasons and the rate of long-duration unemployment edged down in recent months, although both measures were still high.
As a result, financial conditions generally eased appreciably early in the intermeeting period.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Wednesday, November 12, 1997.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose in the third quarter in Japan, the euro area, and Canada, and the pace of contraction in the United Kingdom moderated substantially.
Although the price of natural gas had fallen because of continued plentiful inventories, retail gasoline prices surged, leading to a jump in overall energy prices for the month.
With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary policy, all participants saw some further firming of the stance of monetary policy as likely to be warranted.
However, they judged that purchases of longer-term Treasury securities would only modestly improve conditions in private credit markets at present, and that completing already-announced plans to purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and to support certain asset-backed securities markets was, in current circumstances, likely to be a more effective way to employ the Federal Reserve balance sheet to support credit flows to, and spending by, households and businesses.
Interest rates on intermediate-term Treasury securities rose in response to the revision to policy expectations, but longer-term yields were little changed over the intermeeting period.
Financing conditions for commercial real estate generally remained tight.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded in April and May at a faster rate than the average monthly pace during the previous two quarters.
The recent data on consumer price inflation were a little above staff expectations, but still indicated a slower increase in core prices compared with those of earlier in the year.
Estimates of such equilibrium real interest rates were highly uncertain, but some participants reported that their estimates were currently unusually low by historical standards, reflecting, for example, factors weighing persistently on aggregate demand.
The external sector continued to represent a major source of downside risk; the economies of several industrial countries seemed to be weakening, and the outlook for several key emerging market economies remained in doubt, with a further loss of confidence and contagion from the latter a continuing threat.
Moreover, the additional monetary policy tightening that would be necessitated by higher or more persistent inflation, and the potential for a greater tightening of financial conditions, represented a downside risk to the projection for real activity.
Against this background, all the members supported a proposal to maintain an unchanged policy stance and to adopt and announce an asymmetric directive that was tilted toward tightening.
Given that the balance of risks was seen as pointing to rising inflation over time, the members agreed that it was desirable to retain the tilt toward restraint in the directive.
Manufacturers added slightly to their stocks after two quarters of inventory liquidation.
Over 2025 and 2026, real GDP growth was expected to rise about in line with potential, leaving the output gap roughly flat in those years.
Sales increases were particularly large at furniture and appliance stores and apparel outlets.
The Committee's decision was widely anticipated and elicited little reaction in financial markets.
Reports from homebuilders in many parts of the country were encouraging.
Members also agreed that the statement should convey that "the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks" and that it "does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent."
Meeting participants noted that real consumer spending had been weakening through the summer, responding to lower employment and tighter credit.
They favored a stronger action to better address the stubbornly low inflation rates of the past several years, recognizing that the apparent low sensitivity of inflation to levels of resource utilization meant that a notably stronger real economy might be required to speed the return of inflation to the Committee's inflation objective.
Core PCE price inflation had also moved up moderately over the past year, and, over the 12 months ending in October, it was 1.7 percent for a third consecutive month.
In addition, participants reported hearing from contacts in a broad range of industries that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges were limiting the ability of firms to keep up with demand.
And fourth, asset sales would be implemented within a framework that had been communicated to the public in advance, and at a pace that potentially could be adjusted in response to changes in economic or financial conditions.
However, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real GDP growth would outpace growth in potential output over most of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels.
Although output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—had increased in January, available data indicated that output in this sector would decrease in February; the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices pointed to a reduction in mining-sector production over at least the near term.
The staff observed that the uncertainty related to the future course of the pandemic, the measures to control it, and the associated economic effects remained elevated.
Several European banks announced large declines in third-quarter profits, in part reflecting write-downs of their holdings of Greek sovereign debt.
Under these circumstances, the Committee judged that the costs of growth turning out to be weaker than anticipated could be relatively high.
They noted that the surge in prices of oil and other commodities associated with Russia's invasion of Ukraine was boosting gasoline and food prices and putting additional upward pressure on inflation.
Participants commented that recent inflation data generally had come in above expectations and that, correspondingly, inflation was declining more slowly than they had previously been anticipating.
Moreover, many of the factors that have been restraining the recovery, such as the large overhang of vacant houses, tight credit conditions, and elevated risk premiums, remained in place.
However, rates on high-yield private debt obligations fell only a little, and banks further tightened standards and terms on business loans, given the weakening outlook for profits.
In the multifamily sector, starts plunged in October to the slowest pace in almost six years.
In contrast, spreads on commercial paper not eligible for purchase under the CPFF remained elevated.
For 2000, the Committee agreed on a tentative basis in June to retain the same ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1999 to the fourth quarter of 2000.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the May 2-3 meeting indicated that the labor market strengthened further in March but that growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) slowed in the first quarter, with the slowing likely reflecting transitory factors.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September generally suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace.
There was limited evidence of increased strains in unsecured, short-term dollar funding markets over the intermeeting period despite heightened concerns about the situation in Europe.
An apparent consequence of reduced income growth and of lower equity prices was a change in the mix of single-family homebuilding, with less emphasis on construction of high-priced homes.
CRE loan growth at banks was weak, on net, through February, consistent with tight bank lending standards.
According to the staff projection, growth in the debt measure would be near the midpoint of the existing range over the period through 1997.
The votes to renew the Federal Reserve's participation in these arrangements were taken at this meeting because provisions in the arrangements specify that the Federal Reserve provide six months' prior notice of an intention to terminate its participation.
The expected path of the federal funds rate moved down following the June FOMC statement and the Chair's postmeeting press conference.
In contrast, some other participants continued to express concern that a substantial undershooting of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, if it was to occur, posed a significant upside risk to inflation, in part because of the possibility that the behavior of inflation could differ from that in recent decades.
The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was a little stronger, supported by the effects of a higher projected path for equity prices and a lower trajectory for interest rates.
Moreover, participants expressed concern that a failure of inflation to moderate as expected could entail significant costs if an upward drift in inflation expectations ensued.
Members believed that the economy probably would continue to operate with significant margins of slack in both labor and product markets.
Moreover, some noted a risk that expected inflation might actually increase to an undesirably high level if the public does not understand that the Federal Reserve's liquidity facilities will be wound down and its balance sheet will shrink as economic and financial conditions improve.
At its meeting on June 24-25, the Committee adopted a directive that called for lowering the target for the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 1 percent.
Nonetheless, with the significant under-utilization of resources expected to persist through 2011, the staff forecast core inflation to slow somewhat further over the next two years from the pace of the first half of 2009.
Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12‑month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained near 2 percent in June.
Investors took particular note of the statement's indication that inflation was below the levels consistent with the FOMC's dual mandate for maximum employment and price stability.
In early November, market concerns about the fiscal outlook and ongoing federal budget negotiations seemed to intensify, prompting a notable reduction in equity prices and yields on Treasury securities.
Rates moved lower immediately after the policy easing action, and most fell still more on balance over the remainder of the intermeeting interval in response to incoming information about the economy and the prospects for fiscal policy, at least in the near term.
Conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed and generally remained accommodative.
As experience had shown, at times of economic and financial market stress the specific policy tools used would depend on circumstances.
Higher equity prices appeared to result not only from generally better-than-expected corporate earnings, which seemed largely to reflect aggressive cost cutting, but also from a reduction in the perceived risk of extremely adverse outcomes and a consequent increase in investors' appetite for riskier assets.
Some participants noted the importance of clearly communicating to the public the conditions that would warrant an increase in the policy rate.
Leveraged loan issuance was also strong in July and August.
Moreover, with both core and headline inflation having been somewhat elevated, participants expressed some concern that inflation expectations might become less firmly anchored.
The statement also reiterated the Committee's intention to extend the average maturity of its securities holdings as announced in June.
Recent increases in house prices and equity prices were positives, but participants generally expected no more than moderate growth in consumer spending over the near term.
Conditions in the agricultural sector reportedly improved somewhat, but contacts were concerned about the effect of potentially higher tariffs on their exports.
The Committee anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
A vast majority of participants revised up their projections for real GDP growth this year compared with the projections they had submitted in March, citing stronger consumer demand and improvements in vaccination rates as the primary reasons for these upgrades.
Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices were up modestly over the November- December period and for all of 1995 advanced slightly more than in 1994.
The near-term forecast for core PCE price inflation was essentially unrevised.
On November 17, the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the maximum maturity of loans available under the discount window's primary credit program from 90 days to 28 days, effective January 14, 2010.
Additionally, all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS would be reinvested in agency MBS.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that, in light of further weaker-than-expected incoming economic data, the expansion of economic activity would be relatively muted for some time.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit remained about unchanged in June before narrowing in July.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, Committee members agreed that no changes to the Committee's asset purchase program or to its target range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this meeting.
Business-sector debt was increasing briskly, as the expansion of business loans remained robust.
Participants' Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2024 through 2026 and over the longer run.
Several participants remarked that the Committee's balance sheet plans indicated that it would slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level judged consistent with ample reserves.
Another view was that financial stability risks at present are moderate and that the largest banks would continue to maintain very substantial capital cushions in light of a range of regulatory requirements, including rigorous stress tests.
Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range of 0 to 1/4 percent for the federal funds rate.
Members noted the considerable uncertainty about the outcome of the vote and its potential economic and financial market consequences.
Some important measures of price inflation, after adjustment to exclude their volatile food and energy components, had shown a flat or even a declining trend in recent quarters.
Some modest year-end pressures were observed in repurchase agreement markets, but they dissipated by early January.
Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline for a time, reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities, until the Committee judges that reserve balances are at an ample level.
In China, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a higher-than-expected annual rate in the first quarter as the economic recovery remained broad based, with industrial production, investment, and domestic demand continuing to grow briskly.
After being roughly flat over most of the intermeeting period, initial claims for unemployment insurance rose moderately toward the end of the period but remained at a level consistent with further moderate job gains in the coming months.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its December projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years.
However, they noted some loosening of terms for both securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives transactions, on net, over the previous three months for certain classes of clients--including hedge funds, institutional investors, and nonfinancial corporations--and intensified efforts by those clients to negotiate more-favorable terms.
Most participants judged that long-term inflation expectations either were already below the Committee's 2 percent goal or could decline below the level consistent with that goal should there be a continuation of the pattern of inflation coming in persistently below 2 percent.
Consumer spending, however, showed some signs of weakening.
Members observed that price inflation had remained subdued, and by some measures had declined, in recent months despite very tight labor markets and indications of somewhat faster increases in labor compensation.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, September 18, 2007.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday, May 4, 2004.
In April, the deficit widened as imports recovered somewhat, but it remained narrower than its first-quarter average.
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Delinquency rates for consumer debt edged down further in recent months, with delinquency rates on some categories moving back to pre-crisis levels.
All agreed that the path of short-term rates going forward would be dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook.
In part, worker willingness to accept compara- tively limited increases in compensation could be attributed to the apparent rise in insecurity about the permanence of jobs or the availability of alternative jobs, but the reasons were not fully understood.
The U.S. trade deficit in goods and services widened significantly over the October-November period from its average for the third quarter.
The expansion of broad measures of money had moderated in recent months.
The unemployment rate was 7.6 percent in March, a little below its average in the fourth quarter of last year.
The decline in imports was led by lower imports of non-oil industrial supplies, capital goods, and automotive products, although these declines were partly offset by an increase in the value of oil imports.
The contraction was reflected in widespread declines in payroll employment and industrial production.
The staff analysis suggested that further strong gains in income, along with the surge in household net worth over the past several years, would support brisk, though gradually diminishing, gains in consumer spending.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 25–26, 2023.
For the year through April, both aggregates expanded at rates appreciably above the upper bounds of their respective ranges for the year.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests a return to moderate economic growth following a pause late last year.
In addition, all but one member agreed to replace the date-based guidance with economic thresholds indicating that the exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate would remain appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
Manufacturing production was unchanged in June.
The intermeeting averages of the effective federal funds rate and the Secured Overnight Financing Rate remained unchanged from the previous intermeeting period averages, at 9 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively.
Starts for new single-family homes decreased in March, but the average pace in the first quarter was little changed from the fourth quarter.
Participants generally reported that their business contacts were optimistic about the economic outlook.
Inflation had been subdued in recent months, there was little evidence of wage or cost pressures, and longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 3-1/2 percent.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed sharply in February, as imports fell more than exports.
A substantial majority now viewed the near-term risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced, with several of them indicating the risks from Brexit had receded.
Other forward-looking indicators, such as subdued readings from surveys of business conditions and capital spending plans, also pointed toward roughly flat real expenditures for business equipment in the near term.
In November, the euro-area and U.K. purchasing managers indexes for services were well below their level over the first half of the year; nevertheless they pointed to moderate expansion.
Moreover, they were concerned that, despite the improvement in labor market conditions, the new language might be misinterpreted as indicating increased concern about underutilization of labor resources.
In the ensuing discussion, participants considered the advantages and disadvantages of alternative approaches to reinvestment.
Manufacturing activity continued to generally outperform activity in the services sector, and manufactured exports from China and some other Asian economies remained strong, especially to the United States.
On net, the U.K. 10-year sovereign yield increased, though by less than the comparable yield in the United States, while the yield on German bunds was little changed.
The members also believed that the balance of risks remained weighted toward conditions that could generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.
Some forward-looking indicators of investment in E&S improved, suggesting that conditions had become less adverse than earlier in the year.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in 1998, and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead.
Going forward, participants expected a deceleration in house prices to contribute to an increase in the household saving rate and to weigh on consumption growth.
Even so, the outlook for jobs and income and the buildup of financial wealth constituted favorable home affordability factors that appeared likely to support a continuing high level of housing demand, especially in the single-family sector.
U.S. real GDP was forecast to show a historically large decline in the second quarter of this year, and the unemployment rate was expected to be sharply higher than in the first quarter.
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period.
In this regard, members referred to earlier unsustainable rates of investment by many high-tech firms that were now obliged to retrench despite still high rates of growth in the demand for their products and services.
Yields on nominal U.S. Treasury securities moved down in the early part of the intermeeting period but later retraced their declines.
Business sector debt advanced more slowly in the second quarter, although the expansion of business loans remained brisk and net issuance of corporate bonds was solid.
The staff also noted that the sustained growth of lending by banks to nonbank financial firms represented an increase in financial interconnectedness.
In addition, retail investors evidently placed redemptions from equity and bond mutual funds into bank deposits and retail money market funds.
Equity prices had varied widely and were substantially lower, on net.
Spreads on most types of longer-tenor commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed, reportedly reflecting reduced market concerns about the effects of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, although some of the spreads remained slightly wider than those seen earlier this year.
Many participants noted that although the economic recovery had slowed recently and the August increase in payrolls had fallen short of expectations, the labor market had continued to show improvement since the Committee's previous meeting.
Consistent with the decision made at the March meeting, the vote did not formally encompass the wording of the press statement to be released shortly after this meeting.
Developments in the banking sector later in the period were met with sharp reductions in Treasury yields, particularly at shorter tenors.
Although some stabilization in housing markets was likely needed to help underpin an economic recovery in coming quarters, there was little indication that that process had yet begun.
However, several participants pointed out that the 3-month change in that index had firmed recently, signaling some improvement in the inflation outlook.
Another area of uncertainty was the outlook for fiscal and trade policies.
Core consumer price inflation remained subdued in October, although it was up from even lower levels in the first part of the year, when it was depressed by transitory factors.
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. Dudley, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, Charles I. Plosser, Jerome H. Powell, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid pace in July and August.
Measures of hourly labor compensation continued to increase moderately with no sign of acceleration.
Real GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023 but still outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels, as monetary policy was assumed to remain highly accommodative.
Consumer price inflation moved further below the FOMC's longer-run objective of 2 percent, held down by continuing large decreases in energy prices.
Yields on nominal Treasury securities were little changed on net.
Labor markets continued to be very tight, but there were few signs of any acceleration in labor costs.
In addition, some market participants pointed to heightened demand for federal funds at month end by some banks in connection with their efforts to meet liquidity coverage ratio requirements as contributing to upward pressure on the federal funds rate.
The Committee's action at the January 30 meeting had been viewed by market participants as the most likely outcome, but near-term futures rates declined a few basis points as investors had placed some probability on a smaller policy move.
Consumer credit continued to grow on a year-over-year basis, but the expansion of credit card and auto loan balances appeared to slow from the rapid pace that was evident through the end of last year.
The expansion in economic activity was anticipated to lead to a slow reduction in resource slack over the projection period, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline gradually to the staff's estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
Over the intermeeting period, market yields fluctuated in response to news about developments abroad, including Greek debt negotiations.
Moreover, despite further declines in mortgage interest rates in recent months, other factors continued to restrain housing demand, including consumer pessimism about the outlook for jobs and income, the depressed rate of household formation, and tight underwriting standards for mortgages.
Readings on economic activity in Latin America were more mixed.
With respect to the economic outlook and its implications for monetary policy, members continued to expect that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators would strengthen somewhat further.
He did not believe that providing more monetary accommodation was the appropriate response to those changes in the economy, given the current policy framework.
The fair value of banks' longer-term fixed-rate assets, including loans, increased in the fourth quarter as longer-term interest rates decreased, though banks remained vulnerable to significant increases in longer-term interest rates.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:15 p.m.: "Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April suggests that the pace of economic contraction is slowing.
Accordingly, a steady policy would not incur an unacceptable risk of a seriously deteriorating economic performance.
One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—increased moderately, on balance, remaining elevated relative to its historical distribution and significantly above average pre-pandemic levels.
In addition, there was not complete consensus within the Committee that headwinds were the only explanation for the low expected future path of policy rates.
The upward pressure on consumer prices from increases in import and commodity prices earlier in the year, along with the temporary boost to motor vehicle prices from low inventories, were expected to recede further in the coming quarters.
Most participants described labor market conditions as strong, noting that payroll gains had remained well above the pace regarded as consistent with absorbing new labor force entrants over time, the unemployment rate had stayed low, job openings had been high, or that initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had been low.
Except for oil, most sensitive commodity prices have risen only slightly after years of decline, the dollar remains strong, real short-term interest rates are near historical norms, and productivity growth has accelerated in recent quarters.
For many emerging market economies, the recent slowing in growth of economic activity was most evident in exports, industrial production, and other indicators of manufacturing activity.
On September 19, it announced the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF), which extends nonrecourse loans at the primary credit rate to U.S. depository institutions and bank holding companies to finance the purchase of high-quality asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) from money market mutual funds.
Although spending on high-tech capital goods and software expanded at a robust pace in the third quarter, data on new orders and shipments in October pointed to more moderate growth in the fourth quarter.
Progress in reducing unemployment over the projection period was expected to be relatively slow.
Most long-term interest rates changed little over the intermeeting period, but Treasury bond yields moved up slightly on balance, apparently in response to incoming data suggesting stronger-than-expected economic growth.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the expansion in economic activity had slowed considerably after a very rapid advance in the first quarter.
Bond issuance by domestic corporations generally stayed strong, commercial and industrial loans on banks' books increased by a notable amount late in the fourth quarter, and issuance of leveraged loans and collateralized loan obligations generally continued apace.
These participants cited, for example, the still-elevated levels of long-term unemployment and workers employed part time for economic reasons as well as low labor force participation.
Participants agreed that falling prices for energy and other commodities and diminished economic activity had resulted in an appreciable reduction in inflationary pressures.
However, the average effective federal funds rate was modestly higher than in the previous intermeeting period.
Explanations tended to focus on the concerns about job security felt by many workers, the muted rise in the costs of worker benefits, notably for health care, and the increased use of innovative and highly targeted methods of compensation.
The deterioration in CRE credit quality sparked investor concerns about the health of a few small U.S. and foreign banks over the intermeeting period.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Greenspan and Geithner, Ms. Bies, Messrs. Ferguson, Guynn, Kohn, Lacker, and Olson, Mses.
These positive factors were partly offset in the staff's medium-term GDP projection by higher projected paths for both longer-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
A couple of participants noted the need to continue to monitor and evaluate the effects of balance sheet normalization on long-term interest rates and economic performance.
Results from the Desk's July Survey of Primary Dealers, conducted shortly before the July FOMC meeting, indicated that market participants' expectations for the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate and the subsequent policy path were largely unchanged from those reported in the survey taken just before the June meeting.
As German yields fell to new record lows, spreads of most euro-area peripheral bonds over those yields narrowed.
Nevertheless, many firms evidently remained slow to expand hiring, in part because of rising benefit costs.
Although labor markets already were tight, inflation had remained relatively subdued, and there were no signs in price data that it was picking up.
However, members underscored that the pace of asset purchases was not on a preset course and would remain contingent on the Committee's outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of purchases.
On net, financial conditions eased modestly over the period but remained substantially tighter than at the start of the year.
Industrial output strengthened for the fourth quarter as a whole, largely reflecting a surge in the production of motor vehicles and parts that more than offset sizable reductions in mining and utility output.
To be sure, the economy's potential output appeared to be expanding briskly, with much of the impetus provided by accelerating productivity.
Although financial market conditions had improved, credit was still quite tight in many sectors.
In particular, leverage and maturity transformation in the financial sector were subdued relative to historical levels, and growth of aggregate private nonfinancial-sector credit was modest.
In the Committee's discussion of possible intermeeting adjustments to policy, all the members indicated at least some preference for retaining a symmetric directive.
The moderation in core PCE prices was widespread across categories of goods and services.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting continued to suggest that the expansion would gradually moderate from its currently elevated pace to a rate around, or perhaps a little below, the growth of the economy's estimated potential.
A number of factors continued to be seen as likely to limit the economic expansion to a moderate pace in the near term; these included slow growth or even contraction in some major foreign economies, ongoing and prospective fiscal tightening in the United States, modest growth in household income, and--despite some recent signs of improvement--continued weakness in the housing sector.
Although many of those economies recently experienced sharp declines in equity prices and widening credit spreads amid deepening concerns about credit quality, these developments occurred too late in the intermeeting period to have any apparent effect on incoming data.
A few participants, however, highlighted factors other than weather that had likely contributed to the slowdown during the first quarter, including slower growth in net exports following its unusually large positive contribution to growth in the fourth quarter of 2013.
At the same time, the persistence of very strong competitive pressures, including those arising from foreign competitors, was preventing most business firms from passing on higher costs by raising prices, and this lack of pricing power did not appear to be diminishing.
Net issuance of bonds was particularly strong, supported by heavy issuance in both the speculative- and investment-grade sectors.
Book-value inventory-to-sales ratios in April were similar to their pre-recession norms, and survey data also suggested that inventory positions generally remained in a comfortable range.
Producer prices for both core and total finished goods posted unusually large increases in October, reflecting in part a sizable advance in the prices of motor vehicles.
In these circumstances, she believed it appropriate to gradually increase the target range for the federal funds rate, consistent with the Committee's recent communications.
Among the other sources of risk noted by participants were that fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might prove to be insufficient and that foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad.
The allotment limit was subsequently increased to $10 billion per counterparty in early April.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that economic activity continued to expand very slowly in the first quarter.
The current regime was therefore effective both in providing control of the policy rate and in ensuring transmission of the policy stance to other rates and broader financial markets.
Nevertheless, the staff continued to forecast that economic activity would increase more rapidly in the second half of this year than over the first half, as supply chain disruptions in the motor vehicle sector eased.
Growth of M2 moderated somewhat in January and February from a brisk pace in late 1996, while expansion of M3 remained rapid in both months.
M2 was estimated to have increased for the year through June at a rate somewhat above the Committee's annual range and M3 at a rate near the upper end of its range.
Inflation rebounded in many foreign economies, reflecting rising energy prices and other temporary factors.
In the nonresidential sector, building activity remained soft in October.
Partly as a consequence, they lack the flexibility for use to drain reserves late during the business day, a flexibility that might be particularly desirable to have in place during the upcoming year-end period.
Several others indicated that they did not anticipate making adjustments to the program before its intended completion.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion.
In addition, economic activity appeared to have decelerated in many developing countries in the third quarter but remained solid in most of those nations.
Although payroll employment remained below its pre-pandemic level, the shortfall was concentrated in a few sectors and reflected a shortage of workers rather than insufficient demand for labor.
However, yields remained high even after these announcements and moved up subsequently, notwithstanding the ECB's purchases of government debt.
Consistent with lower mortgage rates, home-purchase mortgage originations increased, reversing a yearlong decline.
In October, the producer price index for core intermediate materials moved up only slightly for a second month, and the twelve-month increase in these prices was considerably below that of the year-earlier period.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods posted further large gains in July and August, with outlays for high-tech machinery and transportation equipment particularly strong.
The disruptions to economic activity here and abroad had significantly affected financial conditions and had impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses.
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose modestly over 2012, and, with small increases in productivity, unit labor costs also advanced only modestly.
The staff forecast for overall and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation over the next two years was revised down slightly.
Nevertheless, recent data on foreign industrial production and trade seemed to be stronger than private analysts had anticipated and were consistent with moderate economic growth abroad.
The staff's forecast for inflation was little changed from the projection prepared for the previous FOMC meeting.
International trade in emerging market economies picked up, supported by Chinese demand, while demand from advanced economies still appeared weak.
Downside risks included the possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may have edged lower or that the run of soft core inflation readings this year could prove to be more persistent than the staff expected.
Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting, the near-term forecast for real GDP growth was a little weaker, on net, than in the previous projection.
The German economy continued to perform strongly, while recent data showed weakness in the peripheral euro-area countries.
As a result, the announcement of the decision elicited little market reaction, as did the subsequent publication of the minutes of the meeting.
Growth of M2 and M3 picked up somewhat in the first quarter from already robust rates in the fourth quarter.
This acceleration in economic activity was expected to be supported by an easing in the effects of fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, increases in consumer and business sentiment, continued improvements in credit availability and financial conditions, a further easing of the economic stresses in Europe, and still-accommodative monetary policy.
Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) funding consumer loans was robust in recent months, and ABS spreads were about unchanged over the intermeeting period.
In addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage‑backed securities.
The slowing in loan growth was concentrated mainly in real estate credits and was due partly to heavy securitizations.
The Federal Reserve is facilitating the extension of credit to households and businesses and supporting the functioning of financial markets through a range of liquidity programs.
In such an environment, households' saving behavior was an important source of uncertainty in the outlook.
The intense strains across a range of short-term funding markets that emerged in March had subsided.
Nonetheless, home construction was still below the trend that would appear consistent with population growth, sales remained at low levels, and credit availability was still relatively tight.
With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally anticipated that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would most likely be consistent with a sustained economic expansion, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near 2 percent over the medium term.
In the meantime, nonresidential construction and energy-related investments were a source of some support to investment spending, but they provided only a very partial offset to widespread weakness in other business spending.
However, the pace of job gains so far this year was slower than last year, even after accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics' benchmark revision to payroll employment, which will be incorporated in the published data in February 2020.
Moreover, participants noted that employment in the leisure and hospitality sector was still down substantially from its pre-pandemic level despite a sharp rebound in February.
Business fixed investment remained soft even as the drag from the sharp contraction in drilling rigs over the first half of this year appeared to be fading.
A few participants also suggested that the Committee should solicit additional information from the public regarding the possible effects of an ON RRP facility, but some others pointed out that the Committee would continue to receive such feedback informally in response to its ongoing communications regarding normalization.
With regard to nominal GDP growth in 1998, the forecasts were mainly in a range of 3-3/4 to 4-1/2 percent, with an overall range of 3-1/2 to 5 percent.
But the dollar depreciated, on net, over the remainder of the intermeeting period, reflecting concerns about an escalation of trade frictions prompted by the U.S. imposition of import quotas on Chinese textiles, the ability of the United States to continue to finance its current account deficit, and risks stemming from developments in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Turkey.
However, business sentiment appeared to remain strong for some industries, particularly those most closely connected with consumer goods.
They acknowledged that the timing and extent of a potential rise in inflation were subject to considerable uncertainty.
In support of the Committee's longer-run planning for improvements in the implementation of monetary policy, the Desk report also included a briefing on the potential for establishing a fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility as an additional tool for managing money market interest rates.
A few participants commented that the Committee's accommodative policies were intended in part to promote a more balanced approach to risk-taking, but several others expressed concern about the potential for excessive risk-taking and adverse consequences for financial stability.
With the increase in the caps on redemptions to be implemented beginning in October, reinvestment of Treasury securities would occur almost exclusively in the middle month of each quarter in connection with the Treasury's midquarter refunding auctions.
Twelve-month inflation remained elevated but declined further in Mexico and Brazil.
On this issue, participants judged there to be a great deal of uncertainty and expressed concerns about the possibility that an early reopening would contribute to a significant increase of infections.
As a result, growth of spending on consumer durables was expected to be appreciably below the rapid pace in the first half of last year, and housing demand would increase only a little from its recent level.
The prices of a number of intermediate goods, including a wide range of petrochemical products and building materials, were subject to upward pressure, reflecting high crude oil prices, production disruptions in the energy sector, and elevated demands for materials in anticipation of rebuilding in the Gulf Coast region.
Several participants cited statistical evidence for the United States that inversions of the yield curve have often preceded recessions.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services continued to widen in April.
Rates also moved up on a broad array of fixed-income securities, including investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds, municipal bonds, both agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), and agency residential mortgage-backed securities.
Members concurred that the statement should note that the expansion remained solid despite elevated energy prices and hurricane-related disruptions.
Bank lending to businesses surged in August, apparently because some banks funded leveraged loans that they had intended to syndicate to institutional investors and perhaps because some firms substituted bank credit for commercial paper.
ON RRP usage was also likely supported by typical month-end dynamics.
Nonetheless, the cutbacks in both defense and nondefense federal outlays, as well as state governments' budget restraint, continued to weigh on jobs and income in some parts of the country.
Households' debt-to-GDP ratio remained relatively low, and there were few signs of increased stress among lower-income households.
Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. real GDP growth prepared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting was revised up a little for the second half of 2019 relative to the previous projection.
Participants generally continued to judge that a tightening in credit conditions spurred by banking-sector stress earlier in the year would likely weigh further on economic activity, but the extent remained uncertain.
Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector was strengthening, but mortgage rates had risen somewhat and fiscal policy was restraining economic growth.
Real personal consumption expenditures had shown essentially no growth in September and October, suggesting that tighter credit conditions, higher gasoline prices, and the continuing housing correction might be restraining growth in real consumer spending.
The improvements were concentrated in the advanced foreign economies and China, supported by vaccine rollouts, the unwinding of public health restrictions, economic adaptation to the virus, and the reopening of the services sector.
However, factory output has changed little on balance in recent months.
Regarding inflation, members agreed to update the language in the statement to acknowledge that inflation had recently moved somewhat closer to the Committee's longer-run objective and to convey their judgment that the likelihood of inflation running persistently below 2 percent had diminished somewhat.
However, the staff's medium-term projection for real GDP growth in the April forecast was little changed from the one presented in March.
In light of the improved conditions, the staff proposed that the Desk no longer be required to increase agency CMBS holdings or reinvest principal payments for agency CMBS.
The improvement was reflected not only in a pickup in payroll employment gains and a noticeable decline in the overall unemployment rate, but also in reductions in broader measures of underutilization such as long- duration joblessness and the number of workers with part-time jobs who would prefer full-time employment.
Consumer price inflation picked up in recent months, while measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained stable.
For the second quarter as a whole, both total IP and manufacturing output declined, while mining output rose notably, supported by a strong gain in crude oil extraction.
Members noted that one broad measure of wages had picked up and that there was a small rise in the number of anecdotal reports indicating that labor shortages were contributing to higher wages in some parts of the country.
Several other participants pointed out that the largest contributors to the recent elevated measures of inflation were a handful of COVID-related, pandemic-sensitive categories in which specific, identifiable bottlenecks were at play.
The available information on economic activity abroad in the third quarter indicated that economic expansion remained moderate in the United Kingdom and sluggish in the euro area.
Available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was slowing somewhat in the third quarter as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending.
He saw the costs of delaying action at this meeting as likely to be small relative to the gains from promoting a faster return of both elements of the Committee's dual mandate to their longer-run objectives.
In considering any adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.
Moreover, the unusually large fraction of those individuals with jobs who were working part time for economic reasons, as well as the uncommonly low level of the average workweek, pointed to only a gradual decline in unemployment as the economic recovery proceeded.
Imports rose a bit, with increases in imports of consumer goods and automotive products, but imports of capital goods declined sharply from September's elevated level.
The 12‑month change in the headline PCE price index moved up further to 1.4 percent in October, as the rise in energy prices since the spring offset much of the decline earlier in the year.
Real goods exports edged down in May after growing robustly in March and April.
The civilian unemployment rate fell to 5.7 percent in August despite advances in claims for unemployment insurance.
Housing activity was well sustained in April, with the run-up in mortgage rates that began in February having had little perceptible effect to date.
The added clarity in that regard might help forestall the development of expectations that inflation would decline below desired levels, and hence keep real interest rates low and support aggregate demand.
Credit remained generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to reduce the demand for credit, resulting in lower financing volumes in some markets.
Recent statistics supported by widespread anecdotal reports pointed to persisting strength in housing activity, though there were indications of softness in high-priced homes in at least some parts of the country.
On the other hand, slowing job gains might also be indicative of some cooling in labor demand, which may be consistent with an observed decline in the rate of job openings and decreases in other measures of labor market tightness.
Sales of existing single-family homes held steady in November and rose in December, while sales of new homes inched up in both months.
All the members favored or could support the retention of the current ranges for this year and their extension on a provisional basis to 1999.
With sales and profits projected to grow more slowly, and with utilization of existing capacity having eased considerably, business investment in new equipment and structures was expected to expand at a more moderate rate.
It was noted that credit conditions had eased further, although nonfinancial corporations continued to hold very high levels of cash.
Growing market perceptions that monetary policy would remain stimulative for a longer period than previously anticipated appeared to have contributed to significant declines in interest rates across maturities and risk classes, and to rising prices in equity markets.
Looking ahead, a number of factors seemed likely to undergird consumer spending, including the positive effects on permanent incomes of robust ongoing growth in productivity, the possibly accelerated phase-in of tax reductions stemming from earlier legislation, the prospects for additional reductions in federal taxes affecting household incomes, and more generally the continued favorable effects of low interest rates and widely available financing on consumer purchases of motor vehicles and other durables.
Corporate bond spreads narrowed modestly, and corporations continued to tap credit markets at a solid pace.
Because such firms tend to be more dependent on commercial banks for financing, participants saw limited credit availability as a potential constraint on future investment and hiring by small businesses, which normally are a significant source of employment growth in recoveries.
Information received since the Committee met in January indicated that the labor market remained strong through February and that economic activity rose at a moderate rate.
Late in the period, equity prices retraced some of their gains, as concerns about the spread of the coronavirus weighed negatively on risk sentiment.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance were little changed over the intermeeting period.
Reflecting investor concerns about the conditions of financial institutions, spreads on credit default swaps for U.S. banks widened sharply, and those for insurance companies remained elevated.
At the producer level, core price inflation for finished goods over the twelve months ended in October was at a very low rate.
Participants discussed the implications of the economic outlook for the likely future path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
Foreign economic growth continued to be subdued, as fiscal retrenchment and financial stresses in the euro area continued to weigh on economic activity in Europe and elsewhere.
The staff provided its latest report on vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system.
Real GDP growth in the first quarter had moderated relative to the second half of last year, but PDFP growth maintained a strong pace.
However, some areas that were affected by the slowdown in the energy sector experienced house price declines or increases in mortgage delinquency rates.
Average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2 percent over the 12 months ending in February.
The stock market's rise was viewed as somewhat puzzling, given indications of some slowing in the growth of profits and the potential for earnings disappointments as the expansion in spending moderated and profit margins narrowed in the context of more rapid labor cost increases.
The amendments also removed the central banks of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland, and the Bank for International Settlements from the list of institutions with which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was authorized to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements (swap facilities).
The current ranges set in February for the period from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter of 1997 were unchanged from the ranges for 1996 and included expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for M3.
Investors also focused on the state of negotiations over Brexit and the Italian government budget deficit.
Given the substantial ongoing slack in resource utilization, some slight downward pressure on core consumer price inflation was anticipated in the staff forecast.
In November, however, the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE stepped down, possibly reflecting some holiday sales having been pulled forward to October.
The median respondent to the Desk surveys expected the three-month bill yield to increase slightly relative to the similar-maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rate and to remain above it into the fourth quarter.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the June 17-18 meeting indicated that real gross domestic product (GDP) had dropped significantly early in the year but that economic growth had bounced back in recent months.
Some participants saw the risks to inflation as tilted to the downside in the near term, reflecting the quite elevated level of economic slack and the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to decline in response to the low level of actual inflation.
Moreover, the downward revision to first-quarter GDP growth and the slow growth reported for the second quarter indicated that the recovery was quite sluggish in the first half of this year.
Even so, corporate bond spreads remained extremely high by historical standards.
With inflation still high, most major foreign central banks, while keeping their policy rates unchanged, indicated their intentions to hold these rates at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to target rates.
For borrowers with lower scores, credit availability tightened slightly in April but remained close to pre-pandemic levels.
Incoming data for foreign industrial economies were generally favorable and pointed to continued expansion.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 30-May 1, 2019.
Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.
A number of the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions were oversubscribed, as was the auction of options for 13-day Schedule 2 TSLF loans straddling the end of the year.
Business expenditures were also likely to be held back by a weaker sales outlook and tighter credit conditions.
In these circumstances, the members recognized the need to monitor with special care price movements in the stock market and asset markets more generally for their implications for consumer and other spending.
House prices were largely stable, on balance, in recent months.
In contrast, some other participants were more worried about risks arising from a labor market that had already reached full employment and was projected to tighten further or from the easing in financial conditions that had developed since the Committee's policy normalization process was initiated in December 2015.
The members also viewed business inventory investment as likely to provide some support to the economic expansion over the year ahead.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation The market-implied path for the federal funds rate moved down over the intermeeting period.
Even so, favorable prospects for employment and incomes and the large gains that had occurred in financial wealth suggested that consumer expenditures were likely to be well maintained over the projection horizon.
And the recent firming in oil prices, if sustained, was anticipated to boost domestic energy production.
A few participants remarked on the decline in energy prices and the associated reduction in activity in the energy sector.
Corporate bond issuance by nonfinancial firms remained fairly robust in February; commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfinancial CP also continued to expand.
Other downside risks included the possibility of sizable spillovers from a greater-than-expected economic slowdown in Europe and China, persistence of the softness in spending, or a sharp falloff in fiscal stimulus.
In particular, these participants preferred forward guidance in which the target range for the federal funds rate remained at the ELB until inflation had moved above 2 percent for some time.
He believed that holding rates artificially low would invite the development of new imbalances and undermine long-run growth.
Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased, on net, in February and March.
Many participants, including some of those who were focused on the increasing risks, expressed the view that continued solid improvement in the outlook for the labor market could prompt the Committee to slow the pace of purchases beginning at some point over the next several meetings, while a few participants suggested that economic conditions would likely justify continuing the program at its current pace at least until late in the year.
The March increase in payrolls had been smaller than expected, and the unemployment rate had remained steady.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: "Effective January 28, 2016, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
With regard to inflation, a number of participants saw a risk that it could run persistently below their 2 percent objective, with some expressing concern that such an outcome could undermine the credibility of the Committee's commitment to that objective.
Job gains were strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate stayed low.
In the aftermath of the hurricanes, higher prices for gasoline and some other items were likely to boost inflation temporarily.
The increase in exports primarily reflected higher exports of services and agricultural products.
The rates of private-sector job openings and of hires increased over June and July, and the rate of quits was unchanged.
At earlier stages of production, producer prices of core intermediate materials moved down, on net, during July and August while most indexes of spot commodity prices increased.
Participants noted disappointing readings on inflation over the first quarter and indicators pointing to strong economic momentum, and assessed that it would take longer than previously anticipated for them to gain greater confidence that inflation was moving sustainably toward 2 percent.
Despite the sharp liquidation of inventories in the manufacturing sector in February and March, the aggregate inventory-shipments ratio for that sector edged higher in March to a level well above that of a year ago.
Regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at least at the current pace.
Delinquency rates on consumer loans remained high in recent months.
Credit market conditions for small businesses remained relatively accommodative despite sluggish credit growth among these firms.
Moreover, because a policy action was not currently anticipated, some commented that a tightening could produce an outsized and undesirable response in financial markets.
Business debt, which appeared to be high compared with fundamentals before the coronavirus outbreak, seemed poised to rise further as businesses borrowed to maintain their capacity to restart operations.
The Committee agreed that that the statement to be released after the meeting should take note of the substantial policy easing to date and the ongoing measures to foster market liquidity.
All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken under paragraph 1A.
The unemployment rate edged down to 5.8 percent in October and remained at that level in November.
Participants noted that, in light of conditions in the business sector, business investment spending continued to be subdued.
In combination with a decline in government spending, the weakness of private spending had led to a substantial slowing in economic growth in the first quarter.
The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations was stable over the intermeeting period, and the ratio of aggregate debt to assets remained near multidecade highs.
In their discussion of economic developments across the nation, a number of Committee members noted some slippage in business and consumer confidence from the high levels reached late last year.
Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio moved up slightly, and both measures had recovered only partially from their lows during the pandemic.
However, a number of participants anticipated that the return to 2 percent would take longer than previously projected even with an assumed path for the federal funds rate that was lower than in their previous projections.
Participants also discussed whether to communicate to the public additional details regarding the approach they intend to take when it becomes appropriate to begin the normalization process, including the width of the target range for the federal funds rate, the settings of the IOER and ON RRP rates, and the use of supplementary tools.
Investor sentiment was strongly influenced by prospects for Europe, as market participants remained highly attuned to developments regarding possible steps to contain the fiscal and banking problems there.
No decision was made at this meeting to change the Committee's policy strategy or communications.
He also discussed the developments in connection with the bankruptcy filing of MF Global Holdings Ltd. and its finance subsidiary, MF Global Finance USA Inc., and with the termination of MF Global Inc. as a primary dealer.
Most measures of the increase in nominal wages from a year earlier continued to trend down, including the 12-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees, which was 4.1 percent in May, 0.2 percentage point lower than at the end of last year.
Votes against this action: Mr. Lindsey and Ms. Yellen.
(Data on compensation per hour that reflected the comprehensive revision of the national income and product accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) were not available at the time of the meeting.)
Several participants noted the possibility that there may be limits to the amount of additional accommodation that could be provided through increases in the Federal Reserve's asset holdings in light of the low level of longer-term yields, and they expressed concerns that a significant expansion in asset holdings could have unintended consequences.
Total real government purchases looked to be roughly flat, on balance, in the third quarter.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low.
Private nonfarm employment rose at a solid pace in June, as in recent months, while total government employment decreased further.
The aggregate inventory-sales ratio outside of motor vehicles likely edged up in the fourth quarter but remained within the range that had prevailed since the middle of last year.
In January, the trade deficit was little changed.
First, the Committee could consider halting all reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing securities.
Outside of those sectors, spending declined a bit further in the third quarter, although not as steeply as it had earlier in the year.
Net equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was negative again in the first quarter as the solid pace of gross public issuance was more than offset by equity retirements from both cash-financed mergers and share repurchases.
In addition, indicators of business sentiment were upbeat in recent months.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its meeting in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established in January for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996.
Nevertheless, some participants observed that portions of the labor market, such as the health-care sector and in less urban areas, remained very tight.
Recent data on the book value of inventories, along with readings on inventories from national and regional manufacturing surveys, did not point to significant inventory imbalances in most industries except in the energy sector, where inventories appeared unusually low after having been drawn down during the winter.
Commercial mortgage markets continued to show tentative signs of stabilization.
Another problem related to certain tax proposals under consideration in the Congress, notably the exclusion of dividends from income, that could have adverse consequences for the revenues of numerous state and local governments that linked their taxable incomes to those reported on federal returns.
Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations--including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk's Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants--were little changed on balance.
Business fixed investment increased at an unusually rapid rate in the third quarter.
Nonetheless, significant structural vulnerabilities remained at entities such as prime money funds, and new financial arrangements such as stablecoins appeared to have the same structural maturity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities but with less transparency and an underdeveloped regulatory framework.
The Chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, System Open Market Account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chairman.
Against this backdrop, and in consideration of the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting.
Most participants continued to anticipate that, based on their assessment of current economic conditions and their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, the conditions for policy firming had been met or would likely be met by the end of the year.
The positive vaccine news also supported risk sentiment abroad, leading many global equity price indexes to advance and the U.S. dollar to depreciate further.
Still, they recognized that incoming data on core inflation continued to be favorable, and they generally were a little more confident that the decline in inflation earlier this year would be sustained.
In fact, recent orders and shipments data suggested an upturn in spending for new equipment, but the improvement was still quite limited, unevenly distributed across industries, and not yet firmly indicative of a sustained advance.
Available information suggested that growth in business spending on capital goods likely would slow further in the months ahead.
Participants commented on how the Committee's communications in its postmeeting statement might need to be revised in coming meetings if the economy evolved broadly as expected.
With the uncertainties in the outlook for both economic activity and inflation elevated, members noted that appropriately calibrating the stance of policy was difficult, partly because some time would be required to assess the effects of the substantial easing of policy to date.
However, more recently, expectations of future credit quality for businesses deteriorated slightly, and delinquency rates rose for some types of credit owed by households with low credit scores.
A couple of participants remarked that activity in the energy sector continued to be weak, and a few noted that financial conditions in the agricultural sector would likely remain challenging for many despite farm subsidies from the federal government and recent optimism surrounding trade prospects.
Over the next couple of years, the economy seemed poised to expand at a moderate rate in the neighborhood of its sustainable pace.
A concern in this regard was that the apparent upturn in final demand, particularly if it proved to be somewhat stronger than currently expected, and related business optimism about sales prospects might well result in a further buildup of inventories at a relatively rapid rate.
That said, contacts recognized that some potentially sizeable downside risks remained.
Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined in July, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation--an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector--held about steady in recent weeks.
In their discussion of the balance-of-risks sentence in the press statement to be issued shortly after this meeting, all the members agreed that the latter should continue to express, as it had for every meeting earlier this year, their belief that the risks remained weighted toward rising inflation.