The global economy continued to soften and downside risks increased since the last MPC meeting due to the lack of clear resolution of the euro area’s debt crisis.
Nevertheless, the extension of government cost-of-living relief measures by four months would delay, if only partly, pressure on core inflation.
Meanwhile, border trade has been expanding well, commanding a rising share of total exports.
The Committee would continue to closely monitor developments in the financial market and volatilities in the Under the monetary policy framework with objectives of maintaining price stability, supporting sustainable and full-potential economic growth, and preserving financial stability, the Committee judged that the Thai economic recovery would be on track, albeit with risks to inflation.
The global economic recovery was better than expected in the third quarter but significant risks remained regarding new waves of COVID-19 infections going forward.
The baht had depreciated against the US dollar mainly due to the strengthening of the US dollar following concerns about the global economic slowdown and the Fed tightening.
In the Committee’s view, sluggish price dynamics in certain good categories may owe to changing market structure and competition rather than macroeconomic factors.
Headline inflation was expected to gradually rise and return to the target band in the first quarter of 2017, although the timing would depend largely on future developments in oil and fresh food prices.
The exceptions were due to country-specific reasons, such as the Philippines where monetary policy was eased in light of a decline in inflationary pressure on account of domestic factors.
Recovery is expected to be slow with subsequent slow recovery.
The Committee viewed that the global financial markets remain highly uncertain in the period ahead due to factors such as (1) directions of monetary policy in advanced economies and (2) trade protectionism that could further intensify and affect the global economy as well as capital flows, which would then put pressure on asset prices and exchange rates particularly in emerging markets with vulnerable economic fundamentals and high interconnectedness with China and Europe.
Meanwhile, consumer loan growth slowed down in almost all categories except for auto loans, which remained contracting albeit at a slower pace.
The value of merchandise exports would expand at a slower pace due to various factors including the global trade slowdown, trade protectionism measures between the US and China that affected trading partner economies, and the plateauing electronics cycle.
Key risk factors included inflationary pressures, monetary policy tightening by major central banks, as well as the global growth outlook.
- The Committee viewed that the most important issue for the Thai economy at present was to accelerate containment of the outbreak and prevention of the spread, especially the procurement and distribution of effective vaccines in a timely manner.
Countries worldwide continued to announce financial and fiscal measures to alleviate impacts from the COVID-19 outbreak.
This should thus help lift the private sector confidence.
The balance of risks to the global economy remained tilted to the downside, given the risks surrounding China’s economy and financial markets as well as monetary policy divergence among advanced economies.
2) Some pockets of risks in the financial system might pose vulnerabilities to financial stability in the future.
Core inflation edged up in line with the previous assessment.
The Committee thus voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 0.50 percent.
The annual average of headline inflation at 2.5 ± 1.5 percent was set as the medium-term monetary policy target and the target for 2017, as it was deemed conducive to economic growth and price stability as well as the country’s competitiveness.
(2) With heightened inflationary risks, delaying the policy normalization could entail greater costs on the economy going forward.
The Thai economy would contract more than the previous assessment.
Moreover, an additional reduction in the policy rate was unlikely to provide a meaningful boost to the economic recovery at the current juncture.
In addition, the committee expressed concerns over the potential negative impact arising from an extended period of slow economic recovery and weak private sector confidence.
The People’s Bank of China additional measures concurrently such as financial assistance for households or SMEs and wage subsidy schemes.
Price pressure moderated in line with the weaker global economic outlook, and inflation was forecasted to remain close to the midpoint of the target range going forward.
Furthermore, foreign tourist arrivals would increase due to the faster-than-expected relaxation of travel restrictions and the return of the ‘Test & Go’ scheme.
Merchandise exports were expected to achieve higher growth than previously assessed partly due to the relocation of production base to Thailand for some industries.
Short- and medium-term Thai government bond yields rose due to (1) recent economic and inflation outturns which were better than expected and (2) an Foreign investors continued to sell off emerging market short-term bonds.
Economic projection after the third wave of the outbreak Risks and uncertainties going forward Forecast period Vaccination benefits Monetary Policy Report March 2021 Case 1: Additional vaccines procured and distributed (100 million doses in 2021) reduced burden of fiscal relief measures Case 2: Planned procurement and distribution of • Sooner re-opening of the country to foreign tourists (“sandbox vaccines (64.6 million doses) Case 3: Delayed procurement and distribution of measure”) in time for the tourist season of 2021, which would vaccines (lower than 64.6 million doses in 2021) contribute to tourism recovery in Thailand Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 • Reduced long-term impact on businesses and employment ' by 3.0%-5.7% of GDP during 2021-22.
Inflation returned to the target band and continued trending upward.
Given the softening economic outlook and prolonged low interest rates, the Committee viewed that microprudential and macroprudential measures would need to play an increasing role in addressing financial stability risks.
Publication date: 27 July 2011 Transmission from the policy rate to commercial bank rates continued to be effective.
In addition, the ongoing financial and fiscal measures, with the focus on rebuilding and enhancing potential growth, would have an important role.
Moreover, banks would increase caution in extending loans during the economic downturn.
This would squeeze business liquidity and slow down employment in the services sector.
Most Committee members judged that a more accommodative monetary policy stance would contribute to the continuation of economic growth and should support the rise of headline inflation toward target.
The Committee assessed that sustained exchange rate appreciation could result in greater effects on exports and the overall economy amid the slowdown in trading partner economies and increased international competition.
Private consumption was projected to continue expanding but overall purchasing power was still recovering at a gradual pace due to elevated household debt.
The US and EU economies were expected to slow down due to rising inflation and tighter financial conditions as central banks accelerated the pace of policy normalization.
Businesses and the labor markets would be more fragile and recover slowly.
- The Committee expressed concerns over household debts which could cause vulnerabilities in the economy and hinder long-term growth, and deemed it important to press ahead with the implementation of sustainable debt solutions.
As a result, deleveraging could occur only slowly.
Nevertheless, some Committee members viewed that headline inflation might fall below the lower bound of the target in some period and saw the need to assess factors, both cyclical and structural, that might affect the inflation outlook in a comprehensive manner.
Nevertheless, loans extended to smallto-medium enterprises (SMEs) picked up and broadened to a broader range of businesses, which reflected ongoing economic growth.
This could impact Thai financial markets and thus warranted monitoring going forward.
Accommodative monetary policy and government stimulus measures continued to underpin economic growth.
Five members deemed maintaining the policy rate at 2.75 percent per annum as justified, with varying rationales.
The Committee anticipated that major central banks would maintain very accommodative monetary policy for a longer period of time (‘low for longer’), which could amount to additional capital inflows into emerging markets including Thailand.
Meanwhile, the Committee expected public expenditure to continue to play an important role in boosting economic growth, although public investment would likely moderate somewhat due mainly to limited budget disbursement by some state-owned enterprises.
The outlook for both the US and Europe improved from the services sector.
Advanced economies pursued accommodative monetary policy to safeguard economic recovery while emerging markets tightened to maintain price stability and are expected to accelerate the pace of interest rate normalization in 2011.
Second, regarding the impact on the global economy of the United Kingdom’s referendum on European Union (EU) membership, the Committee assessed that the vote to exit the EU (Brexit) would create significant volatility in global financial markets in the short run and would adversely affect the UK’s trade and investment in the longer run.
However, going forward, overall public spending was projected to expand at a slower rate for several reasons.
The Thai economy expanded less than expected in the third quarter of 2013 from both private and public spending.
These measures would foster quality growth despite headwinds from uncertainties pertaining to trade protectionist measures.
Credit rating agencies have also reaffirmed Thailand credit rating and deemed the Thai economic fundamentals to be strong.
One Committee member voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 percent.
It would therefore be essential that financial regulatory authorities coordinate more closely to ensure that macroprudential measures could be implemented in an appropriate and timely manner.
Nonetheless, there was a view that a potential escalation of the territorial dispute between China and Japan might pose a risk to the region’s growth momentum.
This would include further debt restructuring, as well as responsible lending measures to address persistent debt problems.
Risks to the global economy increased relative to the previous meeting as doubts about the ability of Greece to remain in the eurozone grew and the Spanish economy became increasingly affected by the growing fragility of its banking system.
Meanwhile, the current account balance was projected to register only a small surplus in 2021, declining significantly to 1.2 billion US dollars, due to (1) reduction in the number of foreign tourists, (2) increasing import prices in line with global crude oil prices, (3) increase in net gold imports given declining gold prices, and (4) higher transportation costs in the services balance caused by shipping container shortage.
Although, under the baseline scenario, the Omicron outbreak would not derail the overall Thai economic recovery, the outbreak situation remained highly uncertain and could have larger and more prolonged impacts than expected.
In addition, some Committee members noted that the impacts would be more pronounced in certain sectors such as manufacturing, construction, and services.
Nonetheless, recovery continued to be weighed by financial health of both real and financial sectors.
Likewise, central banks in several other countries also signaled policy rate increases, particularly where economies have returned to pre-COVID levels and inflation has been above the central bank’s target.
Risks to the global economic recovery increased.
The global economic recovery would be supported by the COVID-19 vaccination progress, additional large-scale economic stimulus measures in the US, and improving exports in accordance with the global economic recovery.
The Committee viewed that recent liquidity strains in the Thai financial markets, especially the bond markets, were partly due to tighter liquidity in global financial markets, despite overall stability of the Thai financial system.
Although risks to inflation have increased, the global economy maintained its recovery momentum as reflected by improvements in the global Purchasing Managers’ Index, particularly in the G3 economies where recovery had become more evident.
The Committee would therefore closely monitor the situation and its implications on capital flows and financial markets.
With monetary policy working by stimulating credit, policy easing could forestall the ongoing deleveraging process and keep debt levels elevated.
The momentum would come from domestic demand, especially private consumption that was driven by the continuation of favorable labor market conditions across almost all sectors.
Private consumption expanded at a gradual pace following more broad-based recovery in farm income across different regions in Thailand.
Nonetheless, this member saw a need to carefully assess incoming economic data in the months ahead to ascertain whether the slowdown in domestic demand and exports during the first two months were temporary or persistent.
Therefore, the Committee saw the need to monitor the income recovery and financial positions of the vulnerable groups.
The Committee would closely monitor the risks arising from corporate bonds especially those issued by businesses severely affected by the COVID-19, which could be downgraded to non-investment grade.
Some investors slowed their sell-off of Thai stabilize the Thai financial markets.
Exports of goods looked to recover at a rate close to the previous projection, but with higher downside risks from a slowdown in trading partners’ economies, notably China.
Private consumption and investment should recover on the back of improving private confidence and fiscal relief measures including repayments of overdue debts under the rice pledging scheme.
The increase in headline inflation was mainly driven by cost-push inflation, while signs of demand-pull inflation were not yet observed as the Thai economy was still in the recovery stage.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) had only depreciated by around 2 percent since the start of 2022, indicating that the baht movements were in line with those of trading partner currencies and thus did not affect Thailand’s competitiveness.
The Committee would thus closely monitor such development and its impact on corporate financing.
First, prices of energy and commodity, particularly chemical fertilizers, and animal feed, could remain elevated for longer than previously estimated due to prolonged sanctions against Russia.
In addition, overall financial conditions remained accommodative and conducive to economic growth.
In addition, potential trade retaliations from US key trading partners would have adverse implications for global trade going forward.
Fiscal measures should help alleviate the adverse impacts and support the economy by more actively addressing vulnerabilities in the labor market and business sector in an adequate and timely manner.
Looking forward, headline inflation was projected to slowly increase, given the recovery in domestic demand, higher oil prices, the excise tax increase, and the impacts of regulations on immigrant workers.
The Committee assessed that headline inflation in 2021 would increase to 1.2 percent mainly on account of the increase in crude oil prices, and would temporarily spike in the second quarter of 2021 due to the low base effect last year.
Consequently, asset prices in the global financial markets became less volatile.
Most members were also in agreement that the policy rate should be kept on hold to preserve the policy space for future use, while some members continued to see the need to monitor risks to economic and financial stability, which might arise from search for yield behavior under the prolonged low interest rate environment.
Overall, most Committee members assessed that the decline in headline inflation over the past two months was a result of temporary supply-side factors.
With regard to domestic demand, private spending was further driven by improved merchandise exports that increasingly lifted household income as well as government measures that were directly aimed at boosting private spending.
However, given low demand-pull inflation pressures, signs of acceleration in prices of goods had yet to be seen.
On the other hand, the postponement of the reinstatement of the oil excise tax would help lessen the effect of rising global oil prices on domestic inflation.
Going forward, the Committee concurred that sufficiently accommodative monetary policy remained necessary given that economic growth was still in the early stages and not yet broad-based.
The financial positions of some households remained fragile from the impact of COVID-19 as their incomes had yet to fully recover.
Benefits from the export expansion were limited to some business sectors and still did not lend support to income and employment in the broader economy.
These uncertainties subsequently impinged on economic activities, especially production and merchandise exports.
However, merchandise exports would later improve during the second half of 2019 due partly to (1) redirected orders from China as well as relocation of production base in some industries to Thailand, and (2) exports of Thai electronic parts benefitting from infrastructure investment pertaining to 5G technology in foreign countries.
The Thai baht depreciated and bond yields rose briefly after the major political change on 22 May 2014, before stabilizing following clearer direction in public policy management and measures to support the economy.
The Committee noted that rising public debt in the medium term would not pose a significant risk to fiscal sustainability.
The Committee viewed that, should economic expansion continue and inflation move within the target, the need for currently extra accommodative monetary policy would start to be gradually reduced, while the need to have policy space to cushion against possible risks to growth in the future would be increasing.
A few members noted that shortages of raw material and labor were constraining some sectors and, in the context of the elevated inflation expectations, would drive pass-through of costs to final goods and services prices in the period ahead.
Therefore, a broader range of indicators would be needed to reflect the recovery across sectors and income groups, particularly labor market indicators such as the number of unemployed and underemployed workers, as well as income loss.
Overall financial conditions remained supportive of fund mobilization, which should expand at a pace consistent with the economic recovery.
The real estate sector would experience a decline in both domestic and external demand.
In the monetary sector, private credit growth continued to accelerate.
However, there remained a need to monitor risks arising from higher production and living costs which could affect the Thai economic recovery.
Advanced economies were expected to expand mainly on the back of private consumption.
In addition, external and domestic uncertainties would remain high in the period ahead.
The Committee would thus monitor factors that could affect crude oil and fresh food prices, particularly a potentially intensified drought.
The committee saw failure to negotiate public debt resolution in the US as a key risk that could have implications for global financial market volatility going forward.
The Committee would closely monitor exchange rate developments as well as potential impacts on the economy going forward.
Commercial banks had robust capital fund and loan loss provision levels, capable of absorbing of relief measures to assist retail borrowers affected by COVID-19 and expedited commercial banks’ proactive debt restructuring for households and businesses, to the extent that the results are substantial, and credit extension under various measures previously announced.
For example, unemployed workers could take a long time to re-enter the labor force.
In the period ahead, the Committee viewed that inflation would face uncertainties from oil price fluctuations and weather conditions.
Looking ahead, exports of goods should gradually improve in line with a moderate recovery in major economies.
The Committee engaged in a discussion regarding monetary policy transmission after the policy rate cut.
In addition, this new ecosystem would allow Thai investors to invest abroad more easily and in a larger amount, increase flexibility in foreign exchange risk management for entrepreneurs, and promote more competitions among foreign exchange service providers.
This would increase debt rollover risks as financial conditions became tightened.
Transmission from the policy rate to commercial bank rates continued to be effective.
The euro area economy continued to recover driven by domestic demand that benefited from accommodative financing conditions, rising employment, reduced political uncertainties after the results of the French presidential election, and improved exports growth.
As global price pressure softened in line with weaker global demand, a few central banks, such as in South Korea, China, as well as the eurozone, eased policy with a view to containing downside risks to growth.
Furthermore, a program is established to resolve persistent debt by converting high-interest revolving personal loans into lower-interest installment loans with terms and conditions enabling debtors to repay within 5 years.
Risks associated with the US economic and foreign trade policies as well as China’s economic structural reform remained in line with the previous assessments but still warranted close monitoring.
Moreover, the prolonged low interest rate could affect savings going forward.
Merchandise exports were projected to contract slightly this year, weighed by subdued Chinese demand, global electronic cycle, and a severe El Niño episode.
First, foreign tourist figures were revised downward due to Thailand’s slower-than-expected reopening plan and the international travel restriction policy in source countries, particularly China.
As it became apparent that the rate lift-off would not occur in the October meeting, volatility in the global financial markets subsided.
While the Federal Reserve remained on the path of monetary policy normalization, concerns regarding low inflation led market participants to anticipate a more gradual hike in the federal funds rate.
Meanwhile, the promulgation of the Public Procurement and Supplies Management Act B.E.
The Committee assessed that the overall financial institution system remained sound.
The Committee noted that the decline in short- term yields had no bearing on the future monetary policy stance which would be primarily conditioned on the outlook of inflation, economic growth, and financial stability.
Demandpull inflationary pressures remained subdued given that income had just begun to recover.
The commercial banks’ lending and borrowing rates were lowered in response to the policy rate cut.
Thus, there was a need to monitor rollover risks especially for non-investment grade or unrated bonds.
Nevertheless, search-for-yield behavior that led to underpricing of risks still persisted in the prolonged low interest rate environment.
Given that the economic recovery would be restrained in the period ahead, monetary policy should be further eased at this meeting to benefit the economy in a timely manner as well as to reinforce the previously announced fiscal, financial, and credit measures.
The MPC therefore voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 2.75 percent per annum.
However, there remained a risk of the elevated global energy prices persisting longer than expected.
Over the long term, climate change would put pressure on raw food inflation, making it higher and more persistent.
In addition, whenever appropriate, as at this meeting, a policy rate increase would help build policy space.
The MPC will closely monitor evolving developments, and stand ready to implement appropriate policy as warranted.
Nevertheless, the Fed funds rate lift-off was likely to have limited impact on domestic financial markets under a gradual normalization path.
Additional economic indicators, such as incomes of self-employed workers in non-agricultural sectors, should thus be monitored for better insights.
Second, the labor market was more severely and extensively affected than expected.
Market confidence improved temporarily before declining from concern over sovereign debt problems in Spain and Italy.
Private consumption would thus have to be monitored going forward, particularly after the effects of this year’s government measures dissipated.
Meanwhile, loans extended by specialized financial institutions (SFIs) and non-banks were projected to rise.
However, government consumption would increase due to the budget restructure with an increase in the share of current expenditure for fiscal year 2020.
The depreciation of the baht against the US dollar was rapid and continuous due to the strengthening of the US dollar but was still in line with regional currencies.
The Thai economy would continue to recover at 3.3 percent in 2022 and 3.8 percent in 2023, down from 3.3 percent and 4.2 percent previously projected.
Nevertheless, the rise in oil prices had a small impact on consumption given government measures to mitigate the adverse impact in many countries.
Nevertheless, merchandise export volume, after excluding gold, still contracted from the same period last year due to the slowdown in trading partners’ economies and prevailing structural problems.
The MPC assessed that the surge in oil and commodity prices resulted in increased inflationary pressure but would not impede continued growth of the global and Thai economies going forward.
Core inflation was projected to remain largely unchanged at low levels.
Demand-pull factors include: 1) a diminishing output gap as output growth neared potential while producers have revised their inflation expectations upwards for some time.
In this regard, the Committee would closely monitor Thailand’s economic and financial developments and stand ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery, while maintaining economic and financial stability.
Second, regarding shock absorption capacity and the global recovery outlook, the global economy would likely enter into a recession given that the COVID-19 outbreak affected behavior and lifestyle of the population.
Headline inflation would remain at a high level throughout 2022, largely unchanged from the previous forecast.
This upward revision was due to the better-than-expected outturn in the first quarter, as well as better-than-expected improvements in merchandise and service exports, which partly offset the impact of delays in public investment.
Looking ahead, the overall economic outlook remained uncertain.
- The Committee assessed that the Thai economy had bottomed out in the third quarter of 2021 and would continue to recover, but uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook remained high.
However, the Thai economy still encountered increased downside risks arising from impacts from trade protectionism that could be greater than expected as well as from geopolitical risks.
In addition, the Committee viewed that the extended period of subdued exports could negatively affect employment in some industries, while the ability of the service sector and other industries to provide employment cushion might be more limited should the economic recovery be slower than expected.
Hence, oversupply and time-togo still rose.
Exports of manufacturing goods expanded more than expected, partly due to special factors such as the consolidation of production location of certain products to Thailand and an increase in demand for some of Thailand’s export goods.
The Committee would closely monitor inflation developments and continue to communicate with public to anchor public’s inflation expectations within the target band going forward.
These would include, in particular, uncertainties in the direction of the US economic policies under the new administration, together with the timing of, or policy measures to be used for, further monetary easing by central banks in major advanced economies.
The majority of the committee saw further room to ease monetary policy in order to mitigate downside risks and support an economic recovery, given benign inflation outlook.
Private consumption picked up on the back of growth in income and employment in the service sector.
In addition, the new issuance of government bonds related to the 2-trillion -baht public investment was expected to be further delayed after parliament dissolution.
The overall growth outlook for Thailand’s trading partner economies improved.
Meanwhile, additional monetary policy easing by major central banks prompted investors to increase holdings of emerging market assets, including those of Thailand.
Meanwhile, despite some slowdown in the investment of saving cooperatives, there was an increase in the interconnectedness within the system of saving cooperatives.
The Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER), however, depreciated due to a rapid appreciation in the Japanese yen.
Driven by a strong post-flood economic recovery, foreign investment in equity and bond markets increased, pushing medium- and long-term government bond yields lower.
Meanwhile, overall growth in asset sizes of saving cooperatives slowed down relative to the previous period.
Real estate developers thus launched sales promotion for completed condominium projects as well as delayed opening new projects.
The Committee came to an agreement on the following considerations.
Overall sentiments in global financial markets remained sound on the back of the positive global economic outlook and gradual interest rate hikes of major advanced economies, although volatility heightened in some periods along with uncertainties from the appointment of the new Fed chairman and the progress in US tax reform.
Long-term Thai government bond yields declined in line with long-term US government bond yields as a result of more accommodative monetary policy stance.
Looking ahead to 2024 and 2025, growth was expected to become more balanced and reach 3.2 and 3.1 percent, respectively, excluding the estimated impact of the government’s digital wallet scheme.
In this circumstance, commercial banks’ ability to adjust their interest rates in line with official policy rate may have been limited.
This was evident in a persistently high asset growth among saving cooperatives, as some large saving cooperatives increasingly engaged in taking deposits and lending to other cooperatives, as well as increased investment in both equities and debt instruments.
This is attributable to (1) the 10-year US Treasury yield now exceeding 3 percent, a four-year high, thanks to increased US inflation expectations and stronger US economic performance relative to other countries especially Europe, (2) uncertainties surrounding US trade policies, and (3) geopolitical risks.
Inflation should pick up next year in line with stronger domestic demand, additional impetus from government economic policies and higher minimum wages, as well as higher food prices due to El Niño.
Nonetheless, upside risks to inflation remained from the possibility of higher oil prices resulting from unrest in the Middle East, as well as changes in the excise tax on oil and a higher contribution rate to the oil fund.
In addition, the economic policy of the new government, such as the minimum wage increase, will add to inflationary pressure.
This was due to low foreign participation in the long-term Thai government bond market compared with other regional countries, as well as the continuous underweighting of foreign investment in Thai equities over recent periods.
The global economy recovered at a slower pace than previously assessed, due mainly to a slowdown in the Chinese and Asian economies, and was subject to higher risks stemming from heightened volatility in China’s financial markets and uncertainty regarding the timing of Fed’s rate hike.
Headline inflation for the full year 2022 was expected to exceed the target range, reaching 4.9 percent, driven primarily by rising energy prices and the pass-through of food prices.
In addition, a pre-condition for macroprudential tools to be effective, is that the policy interest rate is first set at an appropriate level for maintaining macroeconomic stability; various studies found that interest rate differential was a less important determinant of capital inflows when compared to other factors such as investors’ assessment of the economic outlook and expectations of future currency movements and; the relatively low interest rate environment, investors can be induced to search for higher returns as well as speculate in riskier assets, especially in real estate and equity markets.
Coupled with lingering concerns over subdued inflation, the impacts might prompt additional monetary easing by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan in order to buttress the recovery of their respective economies.
Global inflationary pressure remained low.
However, looking ahead, commercial banks needed to prepare for the uncertain COVID-19 situation and a deteriorated debt servicing capability of businesses and households.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy continued to gain traction on the back of domestic demand despite a slowdown in external demand.
Inflationary pressure may edge up going forward due to supply constraints, higher labor costs, and greater cost pass-through given entrepreneurs’ diminishing ability to hold down prices.
Nevertheless, rising inflationary pressure prompted many countries, especially those in Asia, to pursue tighter monetary policy to anchor inflation expectations.
Also, some members reiterated the necessity of continued monitoring of the household debt situation, as the rate of new debt creation still outpaced income growth.
In contrast, accelerating inflation in the US and euro area would probably not give rise to significant second-round inflation given the degree of slack in these economies.
First, household leverage increased, driven particularly by auto-leasing and personal loans.
2) The Thai economy continued to expand, supported by robust private consumption and investment as well as fiscal stimulus measures, which were expected to help sustain growth momentum up to the first half of 2013.
Another was a potential deterioration in soil fertility following severe dry season.
The majority of market participants surveyed expected the current MPC meeting to result in a rise in the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points while some expected an overall rise of 0.50-1.00 percentage points in 2011.
Meanwhile, both equity and bond inflows into the region accelerated on the back of improving global economic outlook.
However, subsequently more subdued outflows and lower-than-expected government bond issuance announcement for the third quarter helped lower yields to some extent.
For agricultural households, although agricultural output expanded, purchasing power started to improve only in product groups that experienced higher prices, such as jasmine rice and cassava.
However, tourism was affected more than expected by recent measures to curb illegal tour operators.
Regarding exports of services, the number of foreign tourists would recover at a slower rate than the previous assessment due to new waves of outbreak in some countries and the highly uncertain protocols in admitting foreign tourists to Thailand.
Total corporate financing and household credits also continued to expand, although certain businesses faced limitations in gaining access to credit.
Most market participants expected the MPC to maintain the policy rate at this meeting, given lower downside risks to growth following the political resolution.
Private investment was expected to expand due to the relocation of production base to Thailand and PPP infrastructure investment projects which showed signs of continued progress.
Furthermore, there had not been an indication of broad-based increases in the prices of goods and services.
With the balance of risks tilting towards growth rather than inflation, the MPC saw further room to ease monetary policy and cushion the economy against downside risks to growth.
Nevertheless, the Committee remained concerned over financial positions of vulnerable households and businesses, and supported holistic and sustainable debt resolution.
The baht initially depreciated after the policy interest rate cut and the announcement of the relaxation of foreign exchange regulations.
Meanwhile, large corporates increased their fundraising in the prolonged low interest rate environment, representing a larger share of the bond market and commercial bank loans.
The committee noted a recent surge of bond inflows into Malaysia especially in the first two weeks of May, while there were net bond outflows from the Thai market.
This gradual policy rate hike would help facilitate a sustained economic recovery without creating upward pressures on inflation.
In particular, business model adjustments as well as the upskilling and reskilling of labor to suit the post-COVID environment should be facilitated.
The main exception was the manufacturing sector, where normal production levels were expected to resume in the third quarter, paving the way for a steady recovery in exports.
Three members voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 percent.
If the US economy exhibited robust recovery with rising inflation, US monetary policy could be normalized faster than expected.
Increased risks to the global economic recovery might affect Thai exports of goods.
The impact of the Omicron outbreak on economic activities was expected to be more contained than previous waves.
The Committee assessed that risks to trading partners’ growth were largely unchanged and would remain tilted to the downside due mainly to uncertainties pertaining to US trade protectionism and retaliatory measures by US trading partners that could be intensified, as well as geopolitical risks that could cause volatilities in financial and commodity markets, especially oil prices.
However, NPLs of overall consumer loans remained stable, except NPLs of mortgage loans which continued to increase.
Financial stability remained sound overall but there remained a need to monitor some pockets of risks that might pose vulnerabilities to financial stability in the future.
The ECB also announced a plan for additional liquidity injection into the financial system through targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs).
Meanwhile, fiscal stimulus measures should be expedited.
Risks to the inflation projection tilted to the downside consistent with the risks to economic projection.
Moreover, with the saving-investment gap, investment still had the potential to expand further.
While these measures were in a smaller scale than those in the past, they were designed to be more targeted and taken into account financial stability consideration.
Thailand’s trading partners performed as previously assessed.
Nevertheless, investment in the manufacturing sector would likely expand, as reflected in growing imports of capital goods in the manufacturing machinery category.
These included (1) a surplus in the services balance attributed to net tourism receipts following the Chinese government’s policy supporting Chinese outbound travels, (2) a surplus in the trade balance due to a decline in the value of imports on account of a significant fall in oil prices since late 2014, and (3) the low level of domestic investment.
The Bank of Korea also cut the policy rate, in order to shore up domestic demand.
The economy expanded in the fourth quarter by more than previously assessed largely from stronger-than-expected domestic demand, on the back of both private consumption and investment.
The Committee therefore voted 5 to 2 to cut the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from 1.75 to 1.50 percent.
Asian economies improved on the back of better export performance and a pick-up in the Chinese economy, as well as continued buoyant domestic demand.
The European Central Bank (ECB) would hold its policy rate at least through the end of 2019, which was longer than market expectations.
Most cases were from resulting in lower economic activities in all regions.
Core inflation increased mainly due to higher cost passthrough.
However, favorable labor market conditions would bolster private consumption and drive the economy going forward.
The Committee thus revised down the headline inflation forecast for 2016 from 0.8 percent to 0.6 percent, and lowered this year’s core inflation forecast slightly from 0.9 percent to 0.8 percent.
The Nominal Effective Exchange Rate baht’s movement was in line with the regional currencies.
The Committee will closely monitor the issue of China’s economic slowdown, global financial markets, and the impact of fiscal stimulus measures on the economic recovery.
The Federal Reserve was expected to hold its policy rate through the end of 2019.
On the one hand, some members took the view that the changing nature of the global supply chain had resulted in more intense price competition, as it gave the customers more bargaining power.
The Committee viewed that the economy would experience increased uncertainties from domestic and external factors that could affect economic growth in the period ahead.
The Committee therefore voted 5 to 2 to reduce the policy rate by 25 basis points from 1.75 to 1.50 percent.
Exports of goods were subjected to the more uncertain global economic outlook.
Furthermore, global factors such as ongoing Brexit negotiations and re-intensifying tensions between the US and China also affected investor confidence.
Under the worse scenario, the Omicron outbreak would be widespread despite efforts to accelerate vaccination rates.
The Committee expected the Thai economy in 2019 and 2020 to expand at a lower rate than estimated in June 2019 mainly due to merchandise exports contraction which started to affect domestic demand.
Thus, it was important to preserve policy space for extended by Specialized Financial Institutions (SFIs), maintaining a low policy interest rate for an extensive period could accumulate greater risks to financial stability.
These factors could continue to pressure the baht in the period ahead.
By reducing pressures on the baht and addressing structural problems in the Thai foreign exchange market through expediting the new foreign exchange ecosystem, capital flows would become more balanced.
Moreover, clarity and continuity of government policies should lend further support to private consumption and investment.
The MPC therefore voted 3 to 2 to maintain the policy rate at 3.0 percent per annum.
Regarding mortgage loans, the share of new mortgage loans with high loan-to-income (LTI) ratios was still rising.
The Thai economy would expand at a lower rate than previous projection and further below its potential due to the contraction in merchandise exports that increasingly affected the labor market.
In particular, labor upskilling and infrastructure investment to support the digital economy should be promptly pursued to help support sustainable economic recovery in the long term.
The deterioration in debt service ability was reflected by rising nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios, especially in the categories of SME loans and credit card loans.
The MPC will closely monitor developments in financial markets and implications for private sector’s financing conditions in the periods ahead.
However, risks to the growth forecast tilted more toward the downside with possibilities that growth outturns could be lower than the baseline projection mainly due to external factors.
Tourism and private consumption would continue to gain traction thanks to the return of Chinese tourists.
However, some additional policies should be expedited to distribute liquidity to those affected in a targeted and continuous manner.
Maintaining the policy rate at a low level for an extended period could also create financial stability risks in the long run.
Movements of the baht somewhat diverged from those of the yen and gold prices due to risk-on sentiments following better prospects in trade negotiations between the US and China as well as Brexit negotiation.
One member noted that interest rate differential played a part in affecting capital inflows, though the strength of this relationship varies over different phases of the business cycles and with financial market sentiments.
Going forward, some sectors would experience a rapid recovery, especially tourism-related businesses such as hotels, restaurants, and commerce.
External stability risks edged up somewhat, especially for those with a high reliance on exports of goods using medium or lower technologies.
There was also a need to monitor the growth outlook of Thailand’s trading partners as this could affect Thai exports, especially in 2023.
Nevertheless, the overall impact on the financial institution system and the bond markets would be limited, as financial positions of commercial banks remained robust and were capable of withstanding potential deterioration in loan quality in the future.
Meanwhile, domestic demand of Asian economies weakened in line with dampening consumer confidence.
In any case, the Committee assessed that trade protectionist measures between the US and China were a significant risk and remained highly uncertain, and deemed it necessary to closely monitor developments with a more comprehensive analysis of the impacts.
The minimum wage increase and changing structure of the Thai labor market should thus be monitored going forward.
The value of merchandise exports improved from the previous assessment mainly on the back of rising global crude oil prices, while export volume would expand at a slightly better pace than previously estimated.
This was owing to a smaller-than-expected impact of China’s containment measures on the Thai exporting sector, as well as gradual easing of supply chain disruptions.
These would result in higher costs of goods and living expenses, a dampened domestic purchasing power, as well as a slowdown in external demand.
Long-term Thai government bond yields rose in tandem with US Treasury yields.
The Committee assessed that these increasing risks to global growth could weigh on Thai exports, and that warranted close monitoring.
However, impacts in agricultural and household sectors were judged to be less, as most of immigrant workers in these sectors had already registered.
Public expenditure would likely grow at a slower pace than previously assessed due to (1) the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Expenditure Budget Act, B.E.
Inflationary pressure and their expectations were projected to remain stable in the short-run, but there are upside risks stemming from rising global oil prices, a pick-up in domestic demand in the latter half of this year, and government stimulus measures, especially the minimum wage hike which comes into effect in April 2012.
The financial system would be more vulnerable.
Furthermore, some saving cooperatives accepted deposits from associate members in addition to regular members.
The Chinese and Asian economies have expanded well on the back of strong domestic demand and improving prospects of exports, together with further support from Japanese government stimulus measures.
The Committee viewed that financial markets would remain highly uncertain going forward due primarily to (1) Thailand’s political uncertainties, (2) an unsettled outcome of trade negotiations between the US and China, and (3) the global economic slowdown.
(3) Agricultural products such as rice saw diminishing market shares, from 25 percent in 2003 to 13 percent currently.
However, the Committee viewed that uncertainties regarding highly volatile fresh food prices remained an important factor.
The global economy expanded at a slower pace compared with the assessment in the previous meeting due mainly to weaker Asian economies, in particular China.
Financial stability remained sound overall but there remained pockets of risks that warranted monitoring.
Private investment particularly in machinery and equipment continued to improve, as reflected in signs of increasing imported capital goods and domestic machinery sales across various industries.
The Committee expected volatility in international capital flows and exchange rates to persist in the period ahead.
Farm income was gradually improving, although some households were affected by declining agricultural prices.
Most central banks have kept their policy rates unchanged given steady improvement in domestic demand.
Asian exports should nonetheless rebound in the fourth quarter this year, lifted by an expected global electronic cycle recovery.
Despite moderating merchandise export growth attributable to impacts from trade protectionism measures between the US and China, tourism started to show signs of improvement thanks to a gradual rise in the number of Chinese tourists.
On exchange rates, the baht appreciated rapidly against the US dollar over the recent period on the back of improved investor confidence regarding the global economy and greater capital inflows reinvesting in the debt and equity markets.
SMEs were particularly affected more than large corporates.
In their policy deliberation, the Committee discussed key considerations underpinning policy decision.
Only midpoint of the target range.
The US economy, in particular, saw continued strengthening of labor market conditions towards full employment as well as a firmer recovery in investment.
The recovery of European economies remained weak, but continued monetary policy easing by the European Central Bank was likely to help sustain economic growth.
The present context of sustained economic expansion should provide an opportunity for building up policy space in readiness for uncertainties looking forward.
At the same time, the Committee also discussed the room to reduce the policy rate further (policy space), as going forward, there remained uncertainties in both the internal and external environment.
The Federal Reserve (Fed) was expected to delay its further rate hike due to growing concerns over the economic outlook and downward pressure of inflation.
In this case, herd immunity would be delayed to the end of 2022 and the Thai economy would return to the pre-COVID level at the beginning of 2023.
The Committee viewed that these developments reflected a stronger economic expansion.
The Committee nonetheless agreed to closely monitor the impact of the new government policies and assess their inflation implications, including through wages, firms’ price setting behavior, and the public medium-term inflation expectations.
Average lead time for advance order of Freight costs continued to rise, affected, resulting in delay in semiconductor would likely increase to reflecting a container shortage problem product deliveries.
Moreover, there remained the need to monitor trend of short-term financing by businesses, especially those in sectors with long term investment projects which could result in possible maturity mismatch.
The economy in the third quarter of 2014 was expected to expand less than previously assessed, on account of slow recovery in domestic demand and weak exports.
The Committee assessed the Thai economy to continue gaining traction on the back of domestic demand, while external demand slightly slowed down.
The numbers of tourist arrivals for 2022 and 2023 were revised upward by 1 million and projected to be at the tourists would come from ASEAN and other Asian nations.
The Committee viewed that the continued accommodative monetary policy would help support overall economic growth, and thus voted to maintain the policy rate.
Thus, policy normalization should be implemented at an appropriate timing and in a timely and gradual manner to avoid such tradeoff.
This was due particularly to virus mutations which could reduce vaccine efficacy.
- The Committee viewed that inflation risks were still substantial, mainly from the cost pass-through.
Nonetheless, fiscal policy implementation in several advanced economies could be constrained by smaller fiscal policy space as reflected in a historically high public debt-to-GDP ratio.
Consequently, the recovery of exports was expected to be gradual and would likely weigh on household income and spending as well as business investment.
Looking ahead, Japan’s economy should recover slowly given lingering domestic structural constraints.
The financial system remained sound despite increasing vulnerabilities given the economic conditions affected by the COVID-19 situation.
The Committee assessed economic expansion to have become more broad-based.
(3) Bond markets have been functioning normally.
AE central banks appeared set to be on a hiking cycle to curb rising inflation as their economies had returned to or exceeded the pre-pandemic levels.
Furthermore, the ability of businesses in certain sectors to absorb rising costs had diminished, particularly those with large shares of fuel and commodities in their cost structure, including transportation, petroleum and chemicals, and construction.
The Thai economy continued to recover at a gradual pace, mainly driven by effective disbursement of the fiscal budget as expected and a steady expansion in the tourism sector.
Stakeholder engagement New wave of COVID-19 outbreak Not as severe as the previous wave but exacerbated financial positions e.g.
Nevertheless, credit assistance measures partially relieved liquidity constraints of businesses and households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nevertheless, the Committee assessed that more accommodative monetary policy in the recent period would support the rise of the headline inflation toward target within the second half of 3) Some financial system risks had been partly addressed by the implemented macroprudential measures.
In addition, financial institutions should accelerate debt restructuring in a sustainable manner.
The Committee would stand ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery and ensure financial stability.
Macroprudential and microprudential measures could only address risks in connection with loans and financial institutions under loans.
Fiscal measures would play a crucial role in driving the economic recovery amid high uncertainties.
The MPC judged that growth momentum in the fourth quarter was stronger than expected and domestic demand outlook should continue to be strong, supported by a number of favourable factors.
In addition, the Committee viewed that raising the public debt ceiling to 70 percent of GDP would allow the government to continue expediting additional policies to support economic recovery.
However, it remained essential to monitor economic developments, especially the recovery of exports and government measures.
US dollar liquidity tightened in some instances but did not cause significant movements in global financial markets.
The Committee viewed that global financial markets would remain highly uncertain due primarily to (1) monetary policy direction of advanced economies, (2) progress on trade negotiations between the US and China, and (3) Brexit and political situation in the euro area that could intensify and affect the global economy as well as cross-border capital flows, which in turn could exert pressures on asset prices and regional exchange rates.
On balance, financial conditions remained supportive of fund mobilization by the private sector and ongoing recovery, as bank lending and corporate bond issuances continued expanding.
Trading partner economies continued to expand, with projected growth rates of 2.6 and 2.7 percent in 2024 and 2025, respectively.
Inflationary pressure has risen slightly in line with improving economic outlook and an increase in oil prices.
Next year’s global economic expansion was projected to be slightly higher than this year, and the probability of tail events had diminished thanks to additional policy measures undertaken by the G3 economies.
Although China’s slowdown might delay the recovery, the effect was expected to be marginal, especially for the US economy which was supported by improvements in the labor market and consumer confidence.
Meanwhile, many industries had planned to increase their business investment in Thailand, which would also support export growth in the period ahead.
The Committee would therefore closely monitor the impacts of these regulations especially on the private consumption outlook, as some immigrant workers had left the country, and the impacts on the inflation outlook due to a possible wage rise as labor market tightened.
The Committee viewed that the Thai economic growth would encounter uncertainties mainly from the external front that could affect the growth prospect going forward.
The MPC would continue to monitor both core and headline inflation as usual, and communicate its policy deliberations in terms of both measures with increasing emphasis on the headline inflation to foster public understanding from this point forward.
Meanwhile, several regional central banks further eased their monetary policy.
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy softened more than expected in the second quarter, pointing to more sluggish recoveries in other Asian economies than previously anticipated, especially as Chinese manufacturing inventories remained high.
Furthermore, the recovery of the global electronic cycle remains concentrated in high-tech products, leaving certain Asian countries yet to fully benefited from the export of electronic components.
Meanwhile, demand-pull inflationary pressures remained low and would be subject to structural changes.
The US economy expanded at a moderate pace on the back of private consumption.
The Committee viewed that the policy rate should be normalized to the level that is consistent with sustainable growth in the long term, and that monetary policy normalization should be done in a gradual and measured manner consistent with the growth and inflation outlook in the period ahead.
Inflation in the Global Economy and Domestic Economy Inflationary pressure increased in many regions in line with high oil and commodity prices.
Although the economy has continued to recover in the wake of the reopening, the speed of recovery has been held back by multiple structural headwinds such as (1) shifting global manufacturing supply chains, including China’s greater reliance on domestic production capacities, limiting Thailand’s gains from the global demand recovery, (2) technological progress that could alter the supply chains and negatively affect Thailand’s competitiveness, and (3) the relatively slow adjustments of domestic labor force amid rapid global shifts.
Accounting for the government’s digital wallet scheme, headline and core inflation in 2024 were projected to be - The Committee deemed the overall recovery to be intact, both including and not including the impact from the government’s digital wallet scheme.
Private investment would recover in line with domestic and external demand albeit at a lower rate than expected due to uncertainties surrounding the impact of mutations of the virus, which would affect investment decisions.
The Chinese economy moderated primarily from exports and investment, though domestic demand should be an important driver of growth going forward on the back of high employment, favourable household and corporate income, and government measures to support investment.
Nonetheless, downside risks remained given that economic growth might be lower than expected if domestic demand did not exhibit a strong recovery.
The Federal Reserve would therefore accelerate the pace of rate hikes to temper inflation arising partly from demand-pull factors.
The economic impacts were, nonetheless, expected to be less severe than the first lockdown since economic activities in several sectors, especially those related to manufacturing, continued to operate.
Given subdued domestic demand and stable world crude oil prices, inflation was not an immediate threat; (3) Improved global financial market sentiments helped contain capital flows and exchange rate risks; and exposed to economic slowdown, such as small and medium enterprises and households.
International Banks, (3) the Government Financial Institutions Association, (4) the Thailand Leasing Association, The Committee would stand ready to use additional policy tools in an appropriate and timely manner.
Hence, the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.50 percent at this meeting in order to maintain accommodative financial conditions which would facilitate the Given that economic growth in the period ahead remained susceptible to risks, the Committee saw the need for concrete structural reforms that would uplift the competitiveness of Thai businesses and help cushion the impacts of adverse shocks to the economy.
(2) Growth of the Thai economy moderated from domestic demand and exports, partly as a result of rising debt burden coupled with waning government consumption stimulus measures.
Such a situation is undesirable because households and businesses would have to endure adverse impacts on their income, cost of living, and debt burden.
However, merchandise exports continued to contract on account of weak demand from Asian economies, shifting global trade structure, and declining competitiveness in some product categories.
Yields on medium- and long-term Thai government bonds moved down by 19-48 bps following a reduction in US Treasury yields after the FOMC highlighted the consequences of weak global recovery on the US economy.
Adverse impacts of the global economy appeared to have been limited to export-related sectors, while exports should begin to pick up during the first half of 2013 on the back of anticipated improvement in the global economy.
For the real estate sector, the house price index continued to rise, although it did not pick up significantly.
gold 107.1 PII 100 99.9 PCI Import value excl.
The MPC agreed that the economy would continue to expand, and discussed potential risk factors that might undermine growth momentum going forward, including labour shortages, risks to financial stability in some sectors and sustainability of the tourism industry.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) index appreciated due to Thailand’s strong external stability, which was partly reflected by the sustained current account surplus.
Overall private investment remained low, with capacity expansion seen only in certain industries such as telecommunications and renewable electricity generation.
One member viewed the slowdown in the economy to have stemmed primarily from the fragile state of the global economy and, to a lesser extent, less support from fiscal policy.
The baht recently depreciated and thus did not hinder the economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Committee were of the view that heightened volatility in the global financial markets was likely to have limited impact on the Thai economy, as external stability remained sound and there was sufficient cushion against increased volatility.
However, the economies remain subject to the uncertainty surrounding Greece’s debt servicing ability.
Although headline inflation began to decelerate, price pressure continued to rise as reflected in the increase in core inflation and inflation forecasts that exceeded the target for many countries.
Meanwhile, Asian economies experienced more differentiated growth as the ASEAN economies slowed down slightly, while North Asian economies picked up on the back of better domestic demand and exports.
The risk-off sentiments stemmed in part from growth concerns in China and the prospect of a tighter-forlonger US monetary policy stance.
As a result, financial conditions in China could tighten further and potentially affect funding costs and corporate financing.
Nevertheless, most members viewed that risks remained tilted to the upside as foreign tourists could return in a greater number and earlier than expected.
Although pressures on the baht would abate in tandem with the projected current account deficit in 2021, the Committee would continuously expedite the new foreign exchange ecosystem to improve the structure of the Thai foreign exchange markets over the medium term.
Meanwhile, the recovery of the US economy might be moderated by the recent appreciation of the US dollar, which led to market expectations that the Federal Reserve would postpone further hikes in the federal funds rate.
Other members emphasized exchange rate expectation as the key driver of capital outflows from emerging markets in recent months, as economic fundamentals usually changed too slowly to justify large swings in market sentiments.
3) Headline inflation would be largely unchanged compared with the previous assessment.
Private consumption would remain an important growth driver thanks to employment in the services sector.
The Thai economy was projected to grow by sectors, while external demand was expected to play a larger role in the latter half of this year as the anticipated recovery in the global economy takes hold and exports return to their normal levels.
Hence, the Committee voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 1.50 percent at this meeting.
Given high level of competition in both credit and deposit markets, commercial banks were reluctant to lower their interest rates.
The Committee viewed that the new foreign exchange ecosystem should be expedited to address structural problems in the foreign exchange market and encourage more balanced capital flows.
Against this backdrop, maintaining the policy rate and monitoring the situation closely remained an appropriate strategy in safeguarding domestic financial stability; (2) the Thai economy was projected to recover at a gradual pace, subject to various constraints.
In addition, the search for yield, especially in unrated bonds, would be closely monitored because if investors do not have sufficient understanding of investment risks, it might lead to underpricing of risks and accumulation of financial fragilities going forward.
A low-for-long interest rate could contribute to a build-up of financial fragilities, for example in the form of elevated household debt and more widespread search-for-yield behavior leading to underpricing of risks in borrowing and investment activities.
However, if economic growth were to accelerate going forward, inflationary pressures might ratchet up and central banks in G3 economies might have to raise their policy rates earlier than previously expected.
The 2024 growth projection inclusive of the government’s digital wallet scheme was 3.8 percent, relative to the previous assessment of 4.4 percent.
With regard to the bond market, long-term government bond yields decreased owing to higher foreign demand.
This, however, might not lead to additional investment in the near term, as spare production capacity should remain in many industries.
As a result, investors did not significantly adjust their risky asset position.
In addition, the private sector resumed the issuances of unrated bonds in the fourth quarter of 2017, but most of these bonds were shortterm debts issued by large real-estate companies with sound financial positions.
Businesses should thus hedge against currency volatilities and promptly adjust their business models to enhance value-added competitiveness and rely less on price competitiveness.
- Long-standing structural impediments in the export and manufacturing sectors were having a more discernible impact on the economy.
Although the eurozone debt crisis and the US fiscal cliff remained major hurdles to global economic recovery, tail risks have declined significantly thanks to progress in policy resolution.
However, private investment going forward would be supported by planned relocation of production base to Thailand under the Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC) and investment in both large-scale infrastructure and infrastructure to support the digital economy that were likely to proceed continuously.
Most central banks have consequently kept policy interest rates unchanged since the last meeting.
Meanwhile, the baht experienced heightened volatility and appreciated against the US dollar since the previous meeting in the same direction as most regional currencies.
Global inflationary pressure remained low, and most central banks have consequently kept policy interest rates unchanged since the last meeting.
The Committee viewed that global financial markets would remain highly uncertain in the period ahead due primarily to (1) monetary policy direction of advanced economies, situation in the euro zone that could intensify and affect the global economy and crossborder capital flows, in turn exerting pressures on asset prices and exchange rates.
Medium-term inflation expectations remained anchored within the target.
Moreover, although domestic inflation remained high, short-run inflationary pressures from the government’s stimulus package may not be material given the implementation time lag and only a small disbursement was expected in the second half of the year.
Bond yields rose while the baht depreciated against the US dollar, driven by the US monetary policy outlook, and as market participants awaited clarity on the details and the funding sources for government policies.
Risks to the outlook also increased from uncertainties surrounding the global economy.
However, the core inflation projection for 2019 was slightly revised down from 0.9 percent to 0.8 percent due mainly to prepared food prices.
The Committee assessed that there was a probability of trading partner’s economic growth being lower than the previous assessment due mainly to (1) the coronavirus outbreak that could widely spread to other countries and their impacts could extend from private consumption and tourism to manufacturing sector and international trade, (2) high uncertainties of trade protectionist measures regarding the further actions of the US and China following the phase one trade deal, which warranted monitoring as it could affect international trade and trade negotiation going forward, (3) uncertainties pertaining to trade deal after Brexit, and (4) geopolitical risks that could be intensified and prolonged, particularly recurring protests in several countries.
- The Committee assessed financial conditions to be moderately tighter in line with previous policy normalization, and overall have not hindered the ongoing economic recovery.
Nonetheless, some positive developments would partially offset the negative factors.
1) The Thai economy was expected to expand at a lower rate than previously projected and below its potential due to (1) the contraction in merchandise exports in line with the slowdown in trading partner economies and global trade volume as a result of intensifying trade tensions and (2) a prolonged downturn in the electronic cycle.
Japan saw contraction in domestic demand as a result of consumption tax hike, but the market held off its expectation of further monetary easing by the Bank of Japan given accelerating inflation.
The Committee discussed the possibility of the economy regaining momentum in the second quarter of 2015.
Growth resumed for the euro area in the second quarter, the first expansion since the third quarter of 2011.
In addition, some members viewed that inflation would mainly be driven by developments in global oil prices.
Nevertheless, there were possibilities that the Thai economy would expand at a higher rate than the baseline projection owing to from government stimulus measures or in case of alleviated uncertainties and (2) higher-thanexpected domestic demand arising from public investment in infrastructure, PPP projects, quick acceleration of private investment following greater political clarity, as well as additional government measures to support private spending.
(2) Headline inflation was expected to rise gradually.
Nevertheless, the Committee stands ready to adjust the policy interest rate should there be significant changes to economic and inflation developments.
The global economic recovery was projected to continue at a rate close to the last meeting’s assessment.
Delaying an additional policy rate reduction, on the other hand, could hamper economic recovery.
There remained pockets of risks, though largely benign, that warranted monitoring as they might result in the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system going forward.
Increased risk in global financial markets from sovereign debt problems in the euro area contributed to a decrease in foreign investment in the Thai equity and bond markets.
As such, an accommodative monetary policy stance was deemed necessary and appropriate to sustain ongoing economic expansion.
However, such impact can be partly cushioned by economies; and (3) ongoing stimulus from public consumption and investment.
The Committee viewed that, despite a decline in geopolitical risks, the balance of risks to global economic growth was skewed to the downside due mainly to risks associated with US economic and foreign trade policies as well as possible retaliation from US trading partners.
At the same time, the lower-than-expected third-quarter GDP outturns continued to show a recovery of economic activity, notably in private consumption of services, despite merchandise exports having been muted.
Instead, it would reduce financial stability risks, and that would be conducive to sustainable economic growth in the long term.
Overall, members were in agreement that dynamic technological and productivity improvements would enable Thai exports to better respond to changing global demand, and therefore would truly reinforce the competitiveness of the exports sector in the long-run.
Investors accelerated selling of equities in the middle of March, resulting in sharp plummets of stock market indices in advanced economies which frequently triggered circuit breakers.
Advanced economies would expand at a moderating pace this year but would be stabilizing in 2020 due to improvements in the manufacturing sector and services employment, favorable private consumption, as well as more fiscal stimulus.
Consequently, the Committee decided to keep the policy interest rate unchanged at this meeting.
The government bond yields declined, driven by higher demand from domestic institutional investors and lower expected issuance of government bonds owing to delayed public investment.
With regard to domestic demand, the ongoing expansion began to be more broad-based.
Going forward, fiscal policy could focus on measures to restore income as well as measures to rehabilitate and raise long-term potential growth of the Thai economy.
Remaining policy space should be conserved as further policy easing would likely yield limited growth benefits amid lingering political uncertainties; (2) Maintaining the policy rate was conducive to safeguarding stability in the domestic financial markets; (3) Financial institutions continued to function normally in supporting the economy and assisting customers to manage short-term difficulties, despite some tightening in credit standards ; and financial stability, needed to be taken into account.
Volatilities have picked up since the last meeting in major and regional currencies, as well as for money and fixed income markets, from uncertainties about the timing of QE tapering and US public debt problem.
While spending on durable goods was growing driven by improved purchasing power of non-agricultural households with higher income, the underlying strength of consumption growth remained soft as income of some non-agricultural households, especially those with lower income, was affected by decreased hiring.
and (3) an acceleration of long-term unemployment.
Meanwhile, flood-related shortages could push prices of some goods up temporarily.
However, overall private investment remained subdued, while the total merchandise export values markedly contracted.
Despite signs of moderating external demand, domestic demand continued to expand.
In deliberating further policy rate increases looking ahead, the Committee will take into account economic and inflation outlook as well
First, although the household debt to GDP ratio gradually declined, it remained high relative to that of emerging markets.
Meanwhile, downside risks remained largely unchanged.
However, the spread of COVID-19 to various countries in Asia caused significant slowdown in Asian economic activities.
Lower interest rates might also induce medium- to high-income households, which mostly hold bank deposits, to enhance return by investing in riskier assets instead of increasing consumption.
Members viewed fiscal sustainability, consisting of a more balanced budget and greater emphasis on public investment, as a key factor to bolster market confidence; (2) the recent emergence of current account deficit could be explained in part by unusually high gold imports and repatriation of profits and dividends abroad.
Fiscal stimulus, especially the implementation of planned public investment, should be a key growth driver at this juncture.
Risks to global growth remained tilted to the downside.
The Thai economy should continue to expand, driven mainly by tourism and private consumption, with 2023 and 2024 growth projected to be 3.6 and 3.8 percent, respectively.
- The Committee saw increased risks to the global economy and financial system.
Monetary policy should therefore be sufficiently accommodative to support the ongoing economic recovery, while at the same time consistent with the safeguarding of long-term financial stability, against the backdrop of contained inflationary pressure and stable financial system.
Meanwhile, demand-side inflationary pressure remained low, as reflected by subdued core inflation which was consistent with a gradual economic recovery.
The Committee would also monitor the effectiveness of the relaxation of foreign exchange regulations to encourage capital outflows and consider implementing additional measures if necessary.
Some MPC members saw a need to closely monitor developments of public investment in large-scale infrastructure projects, as well as private investment as there could be further delay.
export recovery which was in line with the trading partners’ economic outlook and (2) the additional fiscal stimulus measures in the first half of 2021 to alleviate impacts of the new wave of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Nevertheless, headline inflation rate, currently below zero, was projected to rise gradually and turn positive during the first half of 2016, although the inflation outlook would largely depend on the trajectory of oil prices.
Nonetheless, a few MPC members viewed that constraints on the supply of key inputs, particularly shortages of labour in some industries, would limit growth of the country’s production capacity in the long run.
In particular, growth of the Chinese economy decelerated from the previous year, and could be adversely affected by the recent plunge in domestic stock prices.
However, financial stability risks were confined to the low‐income households and SMEs, and did not pose a systemic threat.
Moreover, a few members stressed the importance of close monitoring of geopolitical situations and the ongoing assessment of the ensuing impacts on the global economy.
Uncertain demand particularly from China would directly weigh on Thailand and the region given the tight trade linkages – China and ASEAN accounted for almost 40 percent of Thai goods exports.
Given uncertainties in fiscal outlook and tighter financial conditions, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to maintain the pace of asset purchases in their September meeting.
Some of these would be financed by (1) the Emergency Decree Authorizing the Ministry of Finance to Raise Loans to Solve Problems, to Remedy and Restore the Economy and Society, with the budget limit of 1 trillion baht, and (2) the revision of the 2020 budget according to the Budget Expenditure Transfer Bill.
However, the impact would be less severe than last year thanks to the less strict containment measures, the additional support from the timely and targeted government measures, and the continued export recovery.
Despite a limited impact on the overall economy, the consequence on the wellbeing of citizens in the affected areas were quite significant.
The Committee viewed that pursuing policies which would strengthen supervision of saving cooperatives was highly critical.
In the Committee’s assessment, volatility in the financial markets could potentially rise as a result of monetary policy divergence among advanced economies.
Private investment indicators improved across various sectors, while private consumption continued to expand in line with improvements in household purchasing power and consumer confidence.
Looking ahead, headline inflation was expected to gradually trend up toward target on account of domestic demand recovery and higher oil prices than in the previous year.
While demand for cash increased notably during the crisis, transaction volume in the interbank and foreign exchange markets decreased slightly.
The Chinese economy was projected to slow down due to its strict zero-COVID policy and fragile real estate sector.
- 4 Headline inflation was expected to be around the lower bound of the inflation target, while core inflation would be lower than previously assessed.
Prolonged political situation and delay in forming a functioning government will have repercussions for the enactment of the 2015 Budget Act and public spending.
However, the main impact on the Thai economy would be the indirect spillover effects on energy and commodity prices.
The euro zone economy entered recession and was projected to weaken further in the latter half of this year as a result of tighter government spending and markedly lower private sector confidence.
The weakened baht was consistent with market expectation of the forthcoming Fed rate hike and investors’ perception of higher downside risks to the Thai economic outlook, leading to sell-offs in domestic bond and stock markets.
Although the recovery process in the manufacturing sector has already begun, the restoration of production to normal capacity is expected to be more prolonged than previously assessed.
- The Committee remained concerned over the financial positions of the vulnerable groups, especially SMEs and low-income households.
The Committee viewed that in the context where (1) the economy is growing at potential and (2) inflation became less responsive to economic growth due partly to structural factors, with the annual average inflation expected to be within target, it would be important to monitor the build‐up of vulnerabilities in the financial system, which could be reflected in underpricing of risks and competition in the mortgage loan market.
In addition, some other risks still warranted close monitoring, including (1) trade tensions that could be more intensified and prolonged than previously assessed, especially trade negotiations between the US and China, as well as the likelihood that the US would increase tariffs on all auto imports in the future, (2) uncertainties regarding the timeline and outcome of Brexit, and (3) geopolitical risks that could become widespread and intensified, particularly recurring protests in several countries which exhibited common patterns.
Improving global economic outlook, slowing inflation, and contained banking stresses in the US and Europe helped alleviate investors’ concerns.
The Thai economy expanded well in the first quarter of this year from both internal and external demand.
The current account surplus was expected to sustain for some period.