Long-term US government bond yields rose in tandem with global financial market conditions.
The Committee also deemed it necessary to closely monitor growth in loans extended to small businesses and households as well as the credit quality of SME loans with small credit lines and mortgage loans.
The Committee stands ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery, while ensuring financial stability.
However, Asian merchandise exports should improve on the back of an anticipated recovery in the global manufacturing activity and an upturn in the global electronic cycle.
The Committee deemed that a very accommodative monetary policy would be less needed going forward.
The resulting risk aversion weakened the Thai baht, reversing appreciation pressures in July.
The outlook for private investment was further supported by greater certainty regarding the prospects of public investment projects with further progress on projects under the Eastern Economic Corridor monitored going forward.
Real interest rates remained negative and overall funding costs were still conducive for business financing, although government bond yields gradually increased in line with the outlook of policy normalization.
The Thai economy was projected to grow at 4.2 and 4.0 percent in 2018 and 2019, respectively.
The US dollar continued to depreciate due to confirmations that the second round of quantitative easing would continue as scheduled despite improvements in employment.
Looking ahead, support from domestic demand and government’s economic stimulus policies should continue to provide growth momentum.
This was in line with the survey result which indicated that most market participants expected the MPC to maintain policy rate until the second half of 2015 to support economic recovery given subdued inflation.
These included (1) the number of foreign tourists that could increase less than previously assessed due to risks that the second wave of the outbreak in many countries could result in changes in attitude and behavior regarding international travel, and (2) private consumption that could be dampened by deteriorated household incomes, elevated household debt, and low agencies to explore additional measures to restore the economy, particularly the appropriate travel protocols for foreign tourists.
At the same time, domestic risk factors, particularly the possible impact of the measures to curb zero-dollar tours, might cause the number of Chinese tourists to turn out lower than the previous projection.
Although foreign currency liquidity tightened in some periods as concerns over global economic conditions intensified, overall market adjustment was orderly.
Investors assessed that the Federal Reserve may need to tighten monetary policy earlier than expected to keep rising inflation in line with the long-term target.
Fiscal uncertainties continued to pose significant downside risks to growth.
Meanwhile, loan quality of some corporates affected by trade tensions also worsened.
However, - 6 safeguarding financial stability in the period ahead would remain necessary and could be done through a combination of tools, including the appropriate policy interest rate, macroprudential measures, and microprudential measures.
The Federal Reserve (Fed) would likely cut its policy rate once in 2019 with an additional cut in 2020.
The MPC therefore decided unanimously to raise the policy interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, from 2.75 to 3.00 per cent per annum, effective immediately.
Although government bond yields rose, EM risky asset prices also increased owing to the economic recovery underpinned by the improved pandemic situation.
Going forward, demand was expected to be robust from (1) an upward trend in domestic and foreign purchase orders, (2) continued expansion in planned private investment, (3) favorable credit conditions especially from lending by government-owned specialized financial institutions and (4) augmented fiscal spending after the formation of a new government.
This was because most businesses in Thailand at present decided not to adjust their prices and instead absorbed the higher costs themselves owing to weak purchasing power of Thai consumers.
The majority deemed the underlying economic fundamentals to be robust, which should help the economy weather short-term risks from political uncertainties.
Thus, most members voted to keep the policy rate unchanged.
Nonetheless, the MPC judged that the pressure would not be as severe as in 2008, since the conflict was expected to be contained and unlikely to result in war.
The US economy gained more traction from sustained improvement in the labour and housing markets as well as businesses’ greater willingness to resume investment after the resolution of fiscal policy impasse.
Second, households and businesses could be affected by higher living costs and higher production costs, particularly the vulnerable groups.
Thai government bond yields declined immediately after the policy rate cut.
Additionally, producers decided to bear the rising costs of production due to difficulties of price pass-through during an economic slowdown.
The Committee noted that domestic demand would be affected by (1) uncertainties pertaining to approval and implementation of key public-private infrastructure investment projects and (2) elevated household debt and declining household employment and income that could affect consumption prospects.
The Committee will closely monitor such developments and take into account growth and inflation outlooks in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
The Japanese economy continued to recover slowly, but going forward should receive additional boost from private consumption which was expected to pick up after the annual wage negotiation.
The US economy continued to expand on the back of domestic demand, while anticipated stimulus measures under the new administration and improved private-sector confidence would contribute positively to business investment in the period ahead.
But the slowdown in China could weigh on the exports of some consumption goods, including rubber and cassava.
Economic expansion in China was expected to continue on the back of recovery in exports and the implementation of stimulus measures, including targeted measures focusing on loans for small businesses.
Thai government yield curve steepened with the market expectations of imminent QE tapering.
Regarding public expenditure, government consumption expenditure, particularly compensation of civil servants, was projected to increase at a slower pace given policy to replace vacant job positions with contract workers.
The prospects of an economic downturn this year led to increased financial system vulnerabilities.
One member deemed maintaining the policy rate at 2.50 percent to be sufficiently accommodative as the Thai economy should be able to resume its normal growth next year.
The views of the Committee were as follows.
The upward revision was mainly on account of stronger-thanexpected growth in the external sectors, while domestic demand would likely expand at a slightly slower pace than previously assessed due to temporary postponement of some infrastructure investment projects.
These members nonetheless highlighted the need for policy to be flexible and attuned to the evolving growth and inflation outlook and associated assessments.
The government attempted at the same time to strike a balance between its economic growth and financial stability objectives, and this resulted in some improvements in market confidence.
Their conclusions were as follow.
Unemployment, while remaining low overall, recently saw some increases among the new entrants which might reflect structural unemployment.
The Committee thus voted unanimously to cut the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from 1.00 to 0.75 percent effective on 23 March 2020.
Regarding interest rate expectations prior to this meeting, continued increases in short-term money market rates and the short-end of the government yield curve showed that the market had already priced in a policy rate hike.
The Committee would stand ready to use additional appropriate monetary policy tools if necessary. '
Nonetheless, this would not pose a significant risk to fiscal sustainability if the budget were to be spent efficiently towards shoring up the economy that was facing high risks in the short run and supporting economic restructuring to raise potential growth.
Major advanced economies would continue to recover thanks to the significant progress of COVID-19 vaccination.
Growth was expected to be more balanced in 2024 and 2025.
Inflation in trading partner economies was increasing gradually thanks to the recovery in oil and fresh food prices, with signs of core inflation picking up in advanced economies.
Public expenditure continued to be an important growth driver.
The Euro area economies continued to recover, on the back of the domestic demand and exports.
The uneven growth of advanced economies and emerging markets has led to varied monetary policy responses.
The Committee viewed that the government measures and policy coordination among government agencies would be critical to support the economic recovery.
The Chinese economy expanded at a robust pace in the first quarter of 2023 following its reopening, though latest indicators suggested some moderation in economic activity.
Non-farm income was still below the pre-pandemic level.
However, there remained pockets of risks that still warranted close monitoring such as the deterioration in the quality of loans extended to households and businesses, especially low-income households and SMEs.
This could be achieved through the special loan facility for businesses and asset warehousing.
While economic indicators for the US economy pointed to a continued recovery and the Japanese economy was expected to gain further traction thanks to the announced postponement of the increase in sales tax, forward momentum from G3 economies was not sufficient to offset the impact from the slowdown in China on Asian economies’ exports.
However, given that deposit growth outpaced loan growth, saving cooperatives consequently increased their investment in long-term assets in search of higher yields.
the benefits for Thai exports from global demand recovery would partly depend on the sector’s competitiveness) and longer-run potential growth rate which may decline, but cannot be quantitatively assessed with precision at present, also depending on private sector adjustments and structural reform policies, (2) greater challenges in assessing economic conditions owing to a wider gap between expenditure-side and production-side national incomes, resulting in an unusual influence of changes in stock and statistical discrepancy on GDP.
In addition, the share of households sensitive to negative income shocks increased, and the Committee would thus monitor these households during the economic downturn.
The overall financial system remains resilient, however the Committee recognized initiatives to accelerate targeted measures, particularly Responsible Lending measures.
In addition, the Committee agreed with plans to relax foreign exchange regulations under the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan, which represented continuing efforts to achieve more balanced capital flows.
A significant portion of first-car loans has also been extended to car dealers rather than consumers, thus limiting wider impact.
This facilitated a comparison with forecasts of most other agencies which did not incorporate the effects of said scheme.
The Thai economy in 2020 would expand at a much lower rate than the previous forecast and much further below its potential due to the coronavirus outbreak, the delayed enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, and the drought, all of which would affect a large number of related businesses and employment.
The private sector continued to raise funds, while corporate and consumer loans expanded.
However, some central banks in advanced economies gradually raised policy rates given stronger economic growth and labor markets along with clearer signs of inflation rising toward the target.
Movements of regional currencies diverged, depending on the impact of oil prices on respective economies.
The recovery in the period ahead would remain highly uncertain, depending on (1) the continuity of fiscal support and (2) the recovery in tourist figures in line with COVID-19 vaccine efficacy and coverage.
The baht depreciated against the US dollar and underwent volatile movements in line with other regional currencies due to concerns over trade protectionism and demand for US dollar by some Thai firms for overseas investment in the recent period.
Private investment was expected to expand thanks to the relocation of production base to Thailand and a greater clarity on PPP infrastructure investment projects.
However, in India and Indonesia the policy interest rates were raised in response to elevated inflationary pressure and widening current account deficits; while in the euro area economies the policy interest rate was lowered in response to the economic slowdown amidst subdued inflationary pressure.
This could result in a faster‐ than‐expected pace of rate hikes in the US.
Meanwhile, some Committee members regarded the preservation of policy space as important given domestic and external uncertainties.
Adequate and targeted financial measures to assist businesses and households affected by the pandemic should be pushed forward, especially the special loan facility, asset warehousing, and debt restructuring.
Private consumption and investment continued to expand and, if sustained, should play a significant role in supporting the economic recovery.
Thus, monetary policy’s support to economic restoration efforts through lower cost of funds for the private sector has also been limited.
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy continued to be restrained by lingering problems in the property sector.
Manufacturing production and exports were affected by supply chain disruptions.
Financial stability became more vulnerable due to the weakened growth outlook in the near term.
In addition, some Committee members expressed concerns over the recent escalation of geopolitical risks.
Both private consumption and investment remained robust with continuing momentum.
Nevertheless, Thai financial markets remained attractive to foreign investors thanks to sound fundamentals and strong external stability.
The economy would continue to expand in 2022 and 2023 on the back of improving domestic demand and tourism.
China and Asian economies showed sustained growth, mainly on the back of exports, manufacturing production, and increased consumer confidence.
Private consumption has not gained traction due to subdued income growth and elevated household debt burden.
Furthermore, the medium-term inflation expectations were unaffected by the new inflation target specifying headline inflation within the range of 1-3 percent as it was well-anchored at around 2 percent.
The Thai economy continued to recover gradually, supported by effective disbursement of the fiscal budget as well as tourism that expanded more than anticipated on the back of a broad-based increase in the number of foreign visitors.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) depreciated slightly.
The Committee continued to monitor developments of certain factors that could affect the overall growth and inflation outlook.
In addition, the Committee would monitor key factors affecting the economic outlook, namely mutations of COVID-19 virus, adequacy of fiscal, financial, and credit measures, and higher cost pass-through.
Maintaining the policy rate at the current level, which is still low and supportive of economic growth, was thus deemed appropriate.
Thus, the Committee saw a need to closely monitor (1) developments in trading partner economies together with the aforementioned risks in order to evaluate their impacts on the Thai economy that could occur through various macroeconomic linkages, and the Thai baht.
The committee thus assessed that the global oil market had undergone a structural shift that would help limit the risk of oil price surge as seen during 2000-2011, and result in lower global inflationary pressure going forward.
The Committee viewed that the global financial markets remained highly uncertain in the period ahead due to factors such as (1) the monetary policy outlook in advanced economies, pertaining to Brexit as well as political issues in the euro area that could intensify and affect the global economy and cross-border capital flows.
Meanwhile, public expenditure might not provide sufficient momentum for the economy due to budget disbursement constraints and the delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
The committee thus voted 6 to 1 to maintain the policy interest rate at 2.00 percent per annum.
The Thai economy expanded well in the first quarter of this year.
The Committee viewed that headline inflation was expected to edge up in 2018 following a domestic demand recovery and an increase in excise tax.
The Committee considered the benefits and costs of policy alternatives and viewed that the current accommodative monetary policy stance remained conducive to the continuation of economic growth and should support the rise of headline inflation to target in a sustainable manner, although the process could take some time.
- The Committee assessed that upside risks to inflation increased.
Nevertheless, the low level of Thai government bond yields might somewhat discourage the inflows.
However, there remained a need to closely monitor developments of the pandemic going forward.
Financial stability became more vulnerable due to the modest growth outlook.
However, members differed in their assessment of risks going forward and thus the need for policy easing.
Private investment continued to improve particularly in machinery and equipment in line with increased capacity utilization among various industries such as automobiles, chemicals, and construction materials.
Third, the continued economic recovery of trading partners would benefit Thai exports.
While agreeing that the risk was not systemic, the MPC members saw the need to broaden surveillance to cover additional segments of credit markets.
The Committee viewed that structural factors partly contributed to inflation becoming less responsive to economic growth despite the economy growing at potential.
This was reflected in a rising share of new mortgage loans with the loan-to-value was an increasing share of mortgage loans extended to borrowers for a second or more homes with credit standards deteriorating.
The Committee would monitor worsening debt servicing capability of households and SMEs amid economic slowdown that could affect their incomes.
Some Committee members also saw the need for a close cooperation between various regulatory agencies to close any regulatory gap and to detect potential risks in order to address those risks in an appropriate and timely manner.
Meanwhile, real estate sector gained pace following a gradual recovery in domestic demand, with the general house price growth remaining close to the historical average rate.
Moreover, given the prolonged low interest rate environment, large corporates accelerated their funding through both commercial banks and the bond market in order to invest in both existing and non‐core businesses including some overseas businesses.
Among these workers, around 1.2 million could become unemployed or underemployed.
The Thai economy expanded in the second quarter of this year from domestic demand, supported by favorable farm income and employment conditions.
Inflation remains subdued from supply factors and is projected to gradually increase towards the target range by the end of 2024.
In particular, more relaxed personal loan underwriting standards could encourage households to increase vulnerabilities.
However, the financial positions of some SMEs and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden as incomes had yet to fully recover.
The latest downward revision of growth projection is due to weaker-than-expected GDP outturn in the first quarter and the recent softening of economic indicators.
Such resolutions included debt restructuring and the debt clinic, together with putting into practice guidelines for responsible lending and for building financial discipline and promoting household savings.
Advanced economies were expected to expand mainly on the back of private consumption as employment and consumer confidence continued to improve.
It is broadly in line with the targets of the trading partners, and thus should help maintain Thailand’s competitiveness.
However, long-term Thai government bond yields only slightly increased due to domestic investors’ demand for long-term bonds.
The slowdown was due to contracted merchandise exports that started to affect domestic demand.
In 2015, nevertheless, private investment was expected to pick up from last year as firms which had already obtained investment incentives from the Board of Investment should gradually carry out their investment plans.
The inflation outlook would still subject to upside risks.
However, the root cause of such issues stemmed from borrowers’ credit risks and lenders’ limitations in assessing the risks of smaller firms, all of which cannot be addressed solely through monetary policy.
With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Reserve (Fed) still gradually tightened its policy stance.
Tourist arrivals were expected to reach 28 million and 35 million for 2023 and 2024, respectively, an upward revision from the January assessment of 25.5 million in 2023 and 34 million in 2024.
The Committee viewed that the Thai economy would encounter uncertainties from both external and domestic factors going forward, including (1) the coronavirus outbreak that could intensify and be prolonged which would consequently affect the manufacturing sector and exports, particularly as a result of further delayed recovery of the electronics cycle, (2) uncertain trade tensions and geopolitical risks that could dampen the economic outlook of trading partners, the economy, including the progress of important public-private partnership infrastructure investment projects and their knock-on effects on private investment, (4) risks from drought which might be more severe than expected and affect agricultural output and farm income, as well as increasing costs of water supply management in some areas, and (5) lower-than-expected private consumption due to a decline in household income and employment.
Meanwhile, short‐term bond yields rose on account of market expectations of future policy rate increases.
As a result, household debt relative to income might not yet decline.
Risks to global economic growth have fallen.
Nevertheless, the growth of merchandise exports could decelerate in 2023 given a slowdown in global demand in tandem with trading partners’ economic growth outlook.
At the same time, uncertainties pertaining to the global economic outlook and formation of the new government posed downside risks to the Thai economy.
Supply-side shocks related to the El Niño phenomenon could also put upward pressures on food prices and inflation more than expected.
Nevertheless, the Committee would continue to closely monitor developments of unrated bonds and other parts of the financial system for signs of risk underpricing.
Nonetheless, after the US announced tariffs on Chinese imports and designated China as a currency manipulator, investors sold off assets in Asia due to the region’s high interconnectedness with China.
Consumers exercised more caution partly as a result of rising debt burden at a time when the impact of government consumption stimulus measures dissipated.
Meanwhile, there were risks of rising demand-side inflationary pressures.
Private consumption and investment was expected to expand in line with good prospects for both farm and non-farm income, improved confidence, expansion in credit, and rising investment trend in the automobile, electronics and electrical appliance industries.
This would address the debt overhang problem in a targeted and practical manner, lowering risk to economic growth in the medium term.
Nevertheless, large corporates increased their fundraising in the prolonged low interest rate environment through the bond and loan markets.
Second, search-for-yield behavior in the prolonged low interest rate environment could lead to underpricing of risks, especially by large corporates and saving cooperatives.
The baht weakened against the US dollar in line with regional currencies, primarily influenced by anticipations of Fed Funds rate cuts.
Two members voted to reduce the policy interest rate by 0.25 percent per annum for the following reasons: (1) Monetary policy should be eased further in order to lend more support to a weaker-thanexpected recovery, with growth staying below potential; (2) Higher downside risks to global economic recovery could undermine domestic economic growth, particularly at an early stage of recovery.
Going forward, the growth momentum would be sustained by the following factors: (1) expanding private consumption supported by strong farm income; (2) rising private investment due to the need to expand production capacity as reflected by accelerated corporate credit growth; (3) government spending; and (4) continued export expansion to meet demand from both developed and emerging markets as recovery takes hold.
Going forward, additional relocation of production base to Thailand, for some industries such as hard disk drives, would continue to lend further support to merchandise exports.
Despite continuous improvement in recent economic indicators in several countries, overall economic activities remained significantly lower than the pre- pandemic level.
The Committee voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 0.50 percent to help The Committee assessed that the Thai economic recovery would remain intact in 2022 and commodity prices as well as a slowdown in external demand.
The significant impact of the floods on the real economy led most market participants to anticipate that the MPC would reduce the policy rate at this meeting.
Such factors included, for example, uncertainties regarding trade negotiations between the US and China that could be prolonged, geopolitical risks, the potential slowdown of global and Thai economies, as well as the monetary policy outlook of advanced economies.
Some members were of the view that the decline in NPLs of SME loans in export-related sectors could be partly attributed to export growth seen in firms of various sizes.
The Thai economy would expand at a slower pace than previously estimated and below its potential.
The Committee would stand ready to use additional appropriate monetary policy tools if necessary.
The government was therefore expected to implement area-specific containment measures and suspend the Test & Go registration for foreign tourists only temporarily.
However, Thailand’s strong external positions at present could help support investors’ confidence.
The financial system remained sound overall, but vulnerabilities increased in some pockets given the sharp economic contraction that potentially led to income shocks, falling asset prices and tighter financial conditions.
The global economy recovered at a slower pace than previously assessed, as the impact of China’s economic slowdown further materialized.
Furthermore, lending under the previously announced measures should also be accelerated to address liquidity problems in a targeted and timely manner.
Meanwhile, the repercussions of the euro zone’s problem on Asia became more evident through trade-related channels, while its impact on the financial sector remained contained.
Meanwhile, the euro area exhibited slightly weaker momentum, with exports slowing down in line with global trade volume and further restrained by private sector confidence that was weighed down by political issues.
Fiscal measures must be adequate and should ensure the continuity of fiscal impulses by expediting the disbursements of relief and government support.
The economy would thus expand in 2021, albeit at somewhat a lower rate than the December 2020 projection.
The Committee assessed that Thailand’s growth outlook for 2017 improved further and that the economy would expand at a faster pace than previously projected.
The Japanese economy moderated as domestic demand fell short of expectation in the first quarter, with the increase in consumption tax impeding private consumption.
- The Committee expressed concern over elevated household debt and recognized the importance of debt deleveraging.
In the Committee’s judgment, the economy overall continued to recover.
A number of studies and experiences from other countries suggested that a prolonged period of low interest rates could lead to a build-up of financial imbalances in the economy.
The recovery would be supported by, first, the tourism sector gaining more traction as the number of foreign tourists continued to increase in line with rising travel demand, improving airline capacity, and easing international travel restrictions.
First, prolonged outbreak and virus mutations from existing and new variants would reduce vaccine efficacy.
Household debt serviceability thus remained an issue to be monitored, particularly among low-income households whose debt as a proportion of financial assets was higher than other income groups and was projected to rise.
However, the overall financial conditions remained conducive for business financing, as reflected in the growth in bank lending and corporate bond issuances.
The extension of the cost-of-living alleviation measures may slow the rise in measured inflation figures but other measures such as the prospective increases in the minimum wage and fiscal spending amid continued economic growth will likely add to inflationary pressure and may heighten inflation expectations.
This was consistent with total corporate financing that continued to expand but at a lower rate compared with the historical average and was still highly concentrated in larger firms.
As such, the risks to the baseline inflation forecast were largely symmetric.
Regarding leverage, the seasonally-adjusted household debt-to-GDP ratio slightly increased in the fourth quarter of 2018.
MPC members discussed the development of key factors affecting the economic recovery.
Third, financial measures, particularly the special soft loan facility that helped alleviate liquidity constraints for the affected groups and debt restructuring which helped address elevated debt problems, would be more effective and targeted than the reduction in the policy rate which was a blunt instrument.
Workers in Thailand could move quite easily across sectors in response to changing demand in different situations.
Regarding financial market conditions in Thailand, commercial bank lending rates and government bond yields remained low, whereas corporate bond spreads were still high.
One member viewed reducing the policy rate by 0.25 percent as appropriate given that: deteriorate since the last meeting, while core and headline inflation rates trended downward; economy; (3) exchange rate volatility has intensified and baht appreciation has begun to have an evident impact on exports.
Fourth, the default rates of businesses and households could rise substantially after the phase-out of the credit relief measures.
Members assessed that the Japan crisis would have limited impact on the growth of the Thai economy.
Merchandise exports were expected to contract more than the previous assessment due to the slowdown of trading partner economies and global trade volume owing to intensifying and expanding trade tensions as well as a longer-than-expected down cycle of electronic products.
The price-earnings ratio (P/E ratio) was thus largely unchanged.
However, two Committee members assessed that a rate hike in this meeting would complement the use of macroprudential measures in order to reduce financial stability risks.
Thus, - 2 volatility of the baht increased.
Financial institutions should expedite debt restructuring for retail borrowers and businesses to be in line with the income stream and debt servicing capability in the post-COVID environment.
Inflation should, however, rebound in the second half of this year with upside risks from higher food prices amid a more severe El Niño episode.
In the discussion of the monetary policy outlook the Committee would be data-dependent by closely monitoring the developments of the outlook for growth, inflation, and financial stability, together with associated risks in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
Moreover, increasing the policy rate would reduce financial stability risks and help to build up policy space.
Such risks included (1) the search-for-yield behavior that could lead to underpricing of risks, (2) a continued increase in assets and deposits of saving cooperatives despite slowing down somewhat compared with the previous period due to more stringent regulations, (3) debt serviceability of households and SMEs, and (4) the property market where businesses continued to increase their investment and financial institutions engaged in competition by extending mortgage loans with higher credit risks.
Under the monetary policy framework with objectives of maintaining price stability, supporting sustainable and full-potential economic growth, and preserving financial stability, the Committee continued to put emphasis on supporting the economic recovery.
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas increased the policy rate to stabilize inflation, while Bank Indonesia raised the rate to curb financial market volatilities.
Targeted measures such as these would likely be more effective and create less side effects than using the policy interest rate, a blunt instrument with much stronger and far-reaching effects on the macroeconomy.
There were also additional measures including facilitating debt settlement of unsecured personal loans under specified conditions (“debt clinic”), enhancing financial literacy and discipline of the public, as well as supporting relevant supervisory authorities to push forward the implementation of an upgraded supervisory standard for saving cooperatives in accordance with the Cooperatives Act (No.3) B.E.
Meanwhile, growth and inflation outlook did not change materially from the previous meeting.
Core inflation was expected to rise slowly broadly in line with the previous assessment given gradual improvement in demand‐pull inflationary pressures.
This was mainly attributable to aggressive rate hikes from the Federal Reserve and concerns over US economic recession.
Nevertheless, there remained downside risks stemming from the external front, such as US economic and foreign trade policies as well as geopolitical risks, and domestically from private demand that might not be as strong as expected should the recovery in purchasing power still not broaden out.
One member noted in addition that volatile exchange rate may put upward pressure on inflation in the periods head.
Third, risks in the real estate sector remained, including significant foreign demand for Thai properties, competition in the mortgage loan market, and the oversupply of property in some areas.
Meanwhile, the public’s short-term inflation expectations appeared to be more stable.
Looking ahead, the global financial markets would remain highly volatile.
In addition, uncertainty regarding the Brexit referendum results could add to global financial market volatility and weigh on the euro area recovery through trade and investment channels.
The MPC saw the need to monitor developments in China closely, including: (1) the ongoing high credit growth in China arising from shadow banking activities, which, if not addressed by appropriate measures, could undermine financial stability; (2) the potential impact of China’s slowdown on Thai exports and tourism, given a high share of Thai exports to China and the large number of Chinese tourists.
Liquidity in the financial system remained ample.
Consequently, China lowered its growth target for 2015.
Five members viewed that the continuation of the policy rate hike by another 0.25 percentage points was appropriate.
Inflation expectations remained stable.
Most market participants expected the MPC to keep the policy interest rate unchanged at this meeting.
Looking ahead, the global economy would continue to gain strength in tandem with the vaccination progress and large-scale US economic stimulus.
Second, workers in Thailand could move across sectors quite easily.
The Committee saw a need to closely monitor developments in trading partner economies together with the aforementioned risks and to assess their impacts on the Thai economy that could occur through various macroeconomic linkages.
In deliberating their policy decision, the Committee discussed the need for accommodative monetary policy taking into consideration costs and risks as summarized below.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the Thai economy continued to recover modestly, with the momentum of private consumption and investment being softer than expected due in part to weaker private sector confidence and less-than-expected public investment.
Financial institutions should continue to press ahead with debt restructuring to address debt problems in a sustainable manner for vulnerable groups.
The overall global economy showed signs of stabilisation and improving prospects.
Nevertheless, Thailand’s inflation would be subject to upside risks including higher global inflation and cost pass-through.
Advanced economies were expected to grow at a slower pace in line with exports, production, and investment that were affected by escalating international trade tensions.
In addition, the Committee saw the need to preserve policy space in order to cushion against possible risks in the future and deemed it necessary to monitor the impacts of the policy rate cut and fiscal stimulus measures on the economy.
Pent-up demand was expected to support the economic recovery throughout the rest of 2021, following the progress on vaccination and earlier-than-expected relaxation of containment measures.
Private investment would experience a downturn owing to domestic and external demand.
Meanwhile, inflation risk rose, as reflected in greater-than-expected price pressure in the processed foods category on the back of rising costs.
Regarding household debt, the household debt-to-GDP ratio remained elevated and would continue to edge up as a result of the economic slowdown as well as credit card and personal loan growth where household increasingly resorted to collateralized personal loans for liquidity.
Regarding the Thai financial market, short-term government bond yields declined partly due to higher demand.
Capital inflows were expected to continue, while risks to financial stability warranted close monitoring.
Meanwhile, the eurozone economy entered a recession and it would take time for the structural problems to be resolved.
In addition, new virus variants appeared to spread more easily and became harder to control.
Since the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting in February 2020, the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak continued to worsen and deteriorated rapidly.
The upside risk of inflation could come from two factors.
In this meeting, the Committee assessed that the economic recovery has continued to gain more traction, while the upside inflationary risks continued to increase.
Money market rates in Thailand as well as short to medium-term government bond yields edged lower following the MPC’s decision to reduce the policy rate at the previous meeting.
The baht fluctuated against the US dollar, initially depreciating due to weak Chinese economic outturns before appreciating in line with regional currencies amid expectations of slower tightening in US monetary policy.
There were isolated incidences of a few low-rated corporate bond issuers facing difficulty rolling debt, but these were largely firm-specific and did not constitute systemic problems.
However, headline inflation would gradually decrease and return to the target range in 2023 in the baseline scenario as energy prices were not expected to rise further and cost pass-through would gradually diminish.
Looking ahead, domestic demand should continue to be a key engine for economic growth, with private consumption holding up and private investment remaining on an upward trend backed by businesses’ shifts toward greater capital intensity given rising labor costs.
In their policy deliberation, the Committee voted 4 to 3 to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.50 percent.
Looking ahead, the baht would likely undergo volatile movements due mainly to uncertainties pertaining to the conduct of monetary, fiscal, and trade policies in advanced economies.
Headline inflation was softer than expected in May and June 2017 due mainly to supply-side factors.
The Committee decided to keep the policy rate on hold at 1.50 percent at this meeting.
Government bond yields and commercial bank lending rates remained low.
Moreover, the European Union delisted Thailand from the illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing (IUU) yellow-card status, which would support an increase in fishery exports.
Nevertheless, recent portfolio inflows to Thailand were smaller in size compared with inflows to other countries in the region.
Meanwhile, sectors with high recovery potential would need to adjust their business models in preparation for the post-COVID environment.
Nonetheless, a delayed recovery in merchandise exports remained a downside risk, not least given structural impediments and competitiveness issues which could limit the positive effects of global demand recovery on Thai exports.
The Committee viewed that the economy would continue to expand at the level around its potential, but would experience increased uncertainties from external and domestic factors that could affect economic growth in the period ahead.
2) The annual average of headline inflation was projected to be below the lower bound of the inflation target due to (1) energy prices declining at a fast pace and (2) core inflation being lowest in nine years and projected to slow down in line with subdued demand-pull inflationary pressures.
Given the recession concerns, investors expected the Federal Reserve and European Central Bank to slow down the pace of their interest rate hikes and might even have to cut the interest rates in 2023.
The government should also proactively implement public health measures and procure sufficient COVID-19 vaccines to limit adverse economic impacts of the new outbreaks.
In addition, there remained signs of weakened debt serviceability among SMEs and households, as reflected in rising non-performing loan (NPL) ratios over recent periods.
Thus, scenario analyses are needed to evaluate these risks and impacts on the Thai economic recovery.
On the domestic front, factors included (1) a greater clarity pertaining to political developments and factors attracted more equity as well as both short- and long-term bond inflows to Thailand.
The Committee thus deemed it necessary to closely monitor competition in the mortgage loan market as well as the oversupply of condominiums in certain areas and the existing stock of old condominiums.
not enough credit line / limited access to capital / 63 64 of some businesses and households terms and conditions on loans not sufficiently reflecting risks ' New assistance measures Flexible in dealing Comprehensive Inclusive for different needs of affected with uncertainties solutions borrowers in the near and long term  Asset warehousing program for businesses
Key risk factors included (1) prolonged sanctions against Russia, which would push up energy prices and costs in the long run, and (2) faster-thanexpected policy rate hikes by major central banks, particularly the Federal Reserve, in response to rising inflationary pressures.
Nevertheless, growth in private investment was still concentrated in certain business sectors, namely alternative energy, telecommunication, and manufacturing of electronic goods.
Regarding financial market conditions in Thailand, commercial bank lending rates and government bond yields remained low, whereas corporate bond spreads started to decrease for bonds with high credit ratings.
Despite the much stronger outturn in the first quarter, economic growth for 2012 was expected to remain at 6.0 percent.
Such polices included restructuring existing debt, standardizing DSR calculation, and establishing guidelines on responsible lending practice for financial institutions.
Meanwhile, public expenditure would decelerate more than previously estimated due mainly to the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
Given high growth rates in certain types of credit, close monitoring was warranted to guard against potential imbalances and a policy rate reduction may exacerbate such risks; and (3) the global economy remained susceptible to tail risks and it was important to preserve the room for monetary policy to act quickly should global economic conditions deteriorate rapidly.
Consequently, the projection remained close to the previous figures despite exports slowdown.
Meanwhile, short-term money market rates remained close to the policy rate and mediumto long-term Thai government bond yields were around the same levels as in the previous meeting.
On exchange rates, most regional currencies appreciated, especially currencies of those economies that benefitted from lower oil prices.
Domestic financial conditions were mostly unchanged from the previous meeting, as private sector funding costs via commercial banks and bond markets remained broadly unchanged.
Moreover, foreign investors also reduced holdings of emerging market assets, affecting Thai equity and bond markets.
Meanwhile, Asian economies came under pressure in the previous period as the spread of the Delta variant prompted governments in many countries to re-impose strict containment measures.
Tourism sector may also recover only slowly due to visiting countries’ security concerns.
In this regard, close coordination between regulatory bodies would be critical in closing such gaps as well as in monitoring and addressing risks in an appropriate and timely manner.
The US dollar would likely weaken, with the regional currencies appreciating against the US dollar.
The Thai baht depreciated since the last meeting, owing to the scaling down of asset purchase by the Federal Reserve (Fed) and domestic political situation.
Public expenditure would expand more than assessed.
With regard to the exchange rates, the baht depreciated against the US dollar to a greater extent than other regional currencies due to the accelerated US dollar purchases by gold-trading companies when gold prices dropped and the repatriation of profits and dividends by foreign businesses in Thailand.
However, there were more vulnerabilities in the financial system, especially related to debt servicing capability of households and SMEs due to the prospect of economic slowdown.
Second, private consumption was not sufficiently strong, attributable to household income in some agricultural sectors that were affected by lower agricultural prices as well as declines in hours worked observed in daily workers outside the agricultural sector and monthly workers in services and construction sectors.
The MPC assessed that the reduction in the policy rate over the last two meetings had helped to shore up the Thai economy, with good momentum evident in all major components.
Such conditions meant that there remained excess production capacity in the manufacturing sector and therefore growth in private investment was expected to remain low, despite benefiting partly from public investment stimulus.
The Thai economy would expand by 1.8 and 3.9 percent in 2021 and 2022 respectively, down from the March projection.
Financial stability remained sound overall, but there were pockets of risks that might lead to the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system going forward.
In addition, financial institutions should assess the efficacy of financial and credit measures.
According to the Committee’s preliminary assessment the latest US safeguard measures, such as the tariffs on steel and aluminum, would have a limited direct impact on the US and trading partner economies in the short term.
In addition, most central banks kept the policy interest rates unchanged over the intermeeting period except for the Federal Reserve (Fed) which raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.00–1.25 percent at the meeting on 13-14 June 2017.
There were outflows from both the bond and equity markets, with rising bond yields and baht depreciation against the US dollar.
Asian economies continued to recover, driven by exports to G3 economies and growth in exports of technological products especially electronics.
The shift was consistent with a survey of market participants which indicated expectations of a 0.25 percentage point hike this meeting.
Consequently, most major currencies appreciated against the US dollar except the yen which depreciated due to expectation that the newly elected government would implement additional monetary stimulus measures.
The Committee projected the Thai economy to expand at a rate close to the previous assessment but with greater downside risks from increased uncertainties in the global economy.
Four members voted to maintain the policy rate at 2.25 percent per annum, with the following rationales: (1) Monetary policy stance remained accommodative and appropriately supportive of economic recovery, as reflected by ample liquidity in the financial system and negative real policy rate; (2) Further easing of monetary policy was unlikely to provide a meaningful boost to private consumption and investment at the current juncture, given that political uncertainties were the main headwind to domestic demand at present.
The Committee would thus closely monitor factors that could affect crude oil prices, including those relating to the financial markets and oil supply, particularly from the Middle Eastern countries.
Hence, the Committee saw a need to closely monitor developments of those risks and the impacts on the growth outlook of trading partners, in particular economic activities as reflected in labor market indicators.
Regarding the euro area, labor market conditions improved, while most member countries recorded higher growth than long-term averages.
Inflation thus was not an immediate threat; (3) Risks to financial stability decreased somewhat, reflected by decelerating private credit growth amid economic slowdown.
Safe-haven asset prices increased in August in line with rising volatility in the global financial markets due to risk-off sentiments after the US and China announced additional retaliatory tariff and non-tariff measures.
The Committee assessed that downside risks to economic growth of trading partners increased given US trade protectionism measures and retaliatory measures by US trading partners, which were increasingly intensified and unlikely to be resolved in the near future.
The Committee voted unanimously to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from The Committee judges the economy to expand toward the potential level driven mainly by tourism and private consumption, while merchandise exports contracted in the short term, but should pick up looking ahead as the global economic activity gathers momentum.
The Japanese economy exhibited incipient signs of improvement in the manufacturing sector, while private sector confidence and inflation expectations were boosted by more concrete plans for further stimulus measures.
Other economies in the region also experienced increased capital inflows.
The Committee assessed that the government should address vulnerabilities in the labor markets in an adequate and continuous manner to reduce long- term scarring effects after the COVID-19 outbreak subsided.
Most members viewed that financial measures would be more effective than a further reduction in the policy rate which was already low and thus voted to maintain the policy rate.
However, the financial positions of some SMEs and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden.
Overall, risks to the recovery were judged to be skewed more to the downside compared with the previous assessment.
Headline inflation would rise toward target in inflation expectations remained anchored within the target.
These could cause asset prices and exchange rates to fluctuate.
The global financial market sentiment had been more risk-on.
The Committee viewed that, despite growth moderating, the overall economy performed in line with its potential.
Meanwhile, public expenditure would likely grow at a slower rate than the previous assessment due to Expenditure Budget Act for fiscal year 2020 and (2) delay in some state-owned enterprise investment projects.
The baht subsequently corrected and stabilized due to higher demand for the US dollar from domestic businesses.
- Development and widespread distribution of the vaccines were vital for the Thai economic recovery next year.
The Thai economy in the second quarter expanded more than previously projected.
Public expenditure would grow at a slower pace than previously assessed partly because of budget disbursement constraints as well as the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
The Committee deemed that gradual and measured policy normalization remained an appropriate course for monetary policy and thus voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point at this meeting.
The slowdown in China, coupled with its ongoing structural shift resulting in lower reliance on imported goods, contributed to sluggish export performance of Asian (excluding Japanese) economies, aggravating the already-weak domestic demand.
Continued robust domestic demand should help sustain growth momentum in ASEAN, however.
The details were as follows.
Global inflation remained stable relative to the previous meeting, though pressure from an elevated oil price level persisted.
Headline inflation was expected to slowly rise in most economies.
Moreover, exports are subject to downside risks from softer-than-assessed recovery of the global economy particularly the Chinese and Asian economies.
Even though the proportion of domestic goods and services with significant price increases picked up, this remained concentrated in energy- and food-related product groups.
Meanwhile, several regional central banks, such as the Bank of Korea and Bank Indonesia, further cut their policy rates.
The annual averages of headline inflation in 2019 and 2020 were projected to be lower than the previous projection and below the lower bound of the inflation target due to lower- than-expected energy prices in tandem with the global economic slowdown as well as a sooner-than-expected return to the normal level of crude oil production in Saudi Arabia after the attack on production plants.
The committee agreed that the global economic outlook has improved, though several risks in major economies should be monitored: (1) Deleveraging process in the euro area has not completed and there has been limited progress in the resolution of fiscal and financial sector issues.
Consequently, economic activities would be directly affected in the first half of 2022 via dampened confidence and domestic spending.
These developments resulted in continued capital inflows into regional financial markets, although the size of inflows into the Thai bond market was smaller relative to regional peers.
Growth in commercial bank loans increased mainly on the back of business loans, in particular loans extended to real estate and export-related sectors.
Despite the Omicron’s high transmissibility, its mild symptoms helped shore up sentiment which lessened the impact on economic activities.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy would continue expanding and achieve a higher growth than the previous assessment.
Recovery in exports of goods should be more evident in the latter half of the year, as trading partners’ demand strengthens.
Supply-side inflationary pressures had gradually dissipated along with a decline in global energy and commodity prices, as reflected by the proportion of goods and services with continuous price increases that had fallen throughout the fourth quarter of 2022.
This was due to investor concerns about the outlook of Thai economy caused by both external and domestic factors, especially the COVID-19 outbreak which became more severe and widespread.
The annual averages of headline inflation in 2019 and 2020 were projected to be lower than the previous forecast and below the lower bound of the inflation target.
COVID-19 containment policies in Thailand and abroad must also be monitored, as they would impact the prospects of foreign tourist arrivals and the recovery of tourism in Thailand.
However, the global economic outlook grew more uncertain from persistently high inflation and tighter global financial conditions following episodes of banking stresses in some AEs.
The baseline assessment has already incorporated, to a certain extent, factors that could give rise to inflation remaining elevated for a prolonged period of time.
This resulted in (1) sustained net capital inflows to the Thai bond market and (2) a relatively - 2 smaller amount of net equity outflows compared with other emerging markets.
Looking ahead, the Committee would monitor developments of economic growth, inflation, and financial stability, together with associated risks, including external risks, the impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak, and the adequacy of fiscal, financial, and credit measures in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
In addition, an ongoing recovery of G3 economies remained dependent on unconventional policy support of central banks, which eventually will need to be withdrawn.
Hence, further monetary policy accommodation in response to low inflation in this context deemed unnecessary.
In this light, the Committee unanimously voted to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.
Second, some saving cooperatives reported strong growth in assets and deposits and in some instances where deposits grew faster than loans invested their surplus liquidity in riskier assets.
These two factors would matter more than the economic growth of travelers’ country.
Volatile global crude oil prices continued to pose uncertainty to the headline inflation projection.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy would expand at a slower rate in 2020 than previous projection and much further below its potential.
Moreover, investors would search for higher yields across almost all asset classes, which could lead to underpricing of risks.
Short-term measures to accelerate the procurement and distribution of appropriate vaccines would prevent the outbreak from being prolonged and reduce economic costs.
Meanwhile, domestic demand expanded close to potential and inflationary pressure subsided.
The MPC saw the need to closely monitor the development of credits extended by both commercial banks and specialized financial institutions to ensure a smooth transition towards a more balanced financial condition, consistent with a sustained economic recovery.
The Committee therefore voted to maintain the policy rate at this meeting to preserve the limited policy space to act at the appropriate and most effective timing to maximize its effectiveness.
Some regional central banks such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and Bank Indonesia additionally cut their policy rates.
Meanwhile, exports were expected to grow but would soften somewhat due partly to (1) the slowdown in China’s production of electronics, following prior acceleration, which might affect exports of Thailand that was part of the supply chain, (2) slowing rubber exports to China as the country pared down its elevated rubber stock and as rubber prices started to decline, and (3) structural difficulties faced by exporters in some industries, in particular automotive given production capacity expansion currently underway in regional countries.
Softer private consumption, particularly of durable goods, was an adjustment from the previous extraordinary growth.
Thai exports are also not in direct competition with Japanese goods due to largely different products.
Japan’s economy contracted from the previous quarter following the slowdown in exports, domestic consumption and investment.
The MPC thus voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 2.00 percent per annum.
On the other hand, two Committee members viewed that such a policy rate cut given the already accommodative monetary policy stance might not lend additional support to economic growth, compared with potentially increased financial stability risks.
Were geopolitical risks to materialize, risky assets in global financial markets might experience a sharp correction in prices.
- The Committee viewed that the depreciation of the baht against the US dollar had been rapid and continuous due to the strengthening of the US dollar but was still in line with regional currencies.
- The Committee assessed that headline inflation would increase temporarily in accordance with projected global energy prices.
As such, the Committee deemed it necessary to closely monitor developments on these fronts given that they might affect household purchasing power in the period ahead.
Financial stability had already been addressed to some extent but there remained pockets of risks that warranted monitoring.
The Committee would thus closely monitor the progress of vaccine development and distribution.
Financial and credit measures should accelerate the distribution of liquidity to and reduce debt burden for businesses and households additionally impacted by the new outbreak in a targeted manner.
On the development of risks related to recent defaults of unrated bonds issued by certain companies, the event appeared to have limited impacts on financial conditions, as most unrated bond issuers that did not default were still able to roll over their debt or to obtain financing from alternative sources.
With the recovery of the Thai economy only just beginning and considering potential implementation delays in government stimulus measures, an accommodative monetary policy stance was deemed appropriate in supporting economic growth in the period ahead.
While overall financial system was resilient, some businesses and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden.
In Japan, economic growth was expected to rebound in the fourth quarter of 2014, while the Japanese yen depreciation would benefit exports.
Corporate bond markets became more stabilized but corporate bond spreads remained high, reflecting credit risks and financing costs.
The MPC agreed that uncertainties surrounding the global economic outlook remained, while the Thai economy continued to expand on the back of strong domestic demand.
The Committee assessed Thailand’s growth outlook to have improved further from the previous assessment mainly due to merchandise exports and tourism as well as continued domestic demand expansion.
These developments prompted investors to continually reduce their holdings of risky assets including investments in emerging market economies, particularly countries with vulnerable economic fundamentals such as Argentina and Turkey.
Exports of goods would decline in line with trading partner economies and the potential impacts of regional supply chain disruptions.
This would be driven mainly by improving domestic demand as well as a resurgence in foreign tourist arrivals, which were expected to reach 19 million in 2023.
This was partly due to high vaccination rates which allowed for more relaxation of containment measures.
Merchandise exports improved due to the recent relocation of production capacity of certain products to Thailand.
Exchange rates of emerging market economies recovered from the previous drop triggered by QE tapering, partly due to credible policy responses in countries such as India, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brazil.
The level of the neutral rate varies according to the economic outlook at each point in time and is thus difficult to pin down precisely.
On exchange rates, the baht exhibited more volatile movements owing to monetary policy in AEs and uncertainties surrounding the Thai economic outlook.
The success of those projects would thus depend on understanding the property market and the ability to meet the needs of highincome and foreign customers.
The Committee thus held a special meeting on 20 March 2020 to assess the rapidly changing outbreak situation and its impacts on the economic outlook and the functioning of financial markets, particularly during the week prior to the special meeting, to consider necessary measures in a timely manner.
However, other members stressed that alternative policy measures cannot substitute for the interest rate as the main instrument of monetary policy in targeting price stability.
Sentiments in the global financial markets improved in the short term due to the prospects of an agreement between the US and China over the phase one trade deal, greater clarity on Brexit, as well as stabilizing economic data in advanced economies.
Additionally, some Thai workers had switched to self-employed jobs with better pay in line with growth of e-commerce sector, which could cause labor shortages and wage pressures to continue for some time.
Merchandise exports would gradually improve in several categories.
Merchandise exports would contract more significantly and would recover at a slower pace than the previous assessment due to (1) the slowdown in trading partner economies and global trade as a result of trade tensions and (2) indirect impacts of increasing Chinese merchandise exports redirected to the region.
Some members saw the need to closely monitor the potential implications of gold exports and imports for current account deficits and Thai baht.
As such, the Committee would monitor and assess these developments closely.
The US economy was expected to gain further traction on the back of private consumption that was supported by labor market conditions, which was approaching full employment, and strong household financial positions.
The impact of high oil prices would therefore not have a significant impact on continued economic expansion.
The baht depreciated against the US dollar, primarily influenced by the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy outlook and domestic developments.
One member deemed a reduction of the policy rate by 0.25 percent per annum as appropriate to support the continuity of growth next year, mainly through boosting labour income and helping reduce household debt burden.
(1) The overall Thai economy gained further traction, with domestic demand improving but not sufficiently strong.
Nonetheless, there were notable risks to this outlook, particularly as the Thai exports might not fully reap the benefits of the global demand recovery and the electronic cycle upturn due to multifaceted structural hurdles.
Meanwhile, core inflation was projected to edge up in tandem with the economic outlook.
The Committee saw urgency in providing a lift to the economy’s long-term potential growth, for example via infrastructure investment, labor upskilling programs, and policies to promote business adaptation to rapidly changing global trends.
The euro area expanded more slowly than expected as a result of higher inflation and the end of stimulus packages in some member countries.
However, it would remain at a level exceeding the historical average.
Growth of saving cooperative assets subsided following moderation in deposits and their members’ equities.
While the overall liquidity in the banking system remained ample, the main challenges were about distributing liquidity in a broad-based manner to businesses and households additionally affected by the new outbreak.
Most economies recorded stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter of 2017, with indicators of manufacturing production and global trade volume reflecting a continued recovery.
The Thai economy would contract in 2020 slightly less than the previous forecast but would expand in 2021 at a lower rate than previously forecasted mainly due to the slow recovery of foreign tourist figures.
Overall monetary policy of trading partners in both advanced and regional economies would be more accommodative to shore up the weakening economic outlook.
The Committee also expected that the Fed’s balance sheet normalization would likely proceed at a gradual pace, which would help facilitate expectations formation and orderly adjustments in financial markets.
The Committee voted 6 to 1 to maintain the policy rate at 2.50 percent.
One member voted to reduce the policy interest rate by 0.25 percent per annum.
However, SMEs in some sectors had yet to fully recover and some low-income households were sensitive to the rising living costs.
The committee therefore revised growth projection for 2014 down, from around 4 percent to around 3 percent.
Moreover, the Committee viewed that household debt was a critical and urgent risk that would require a multi-dimensional resolution.
Core inflation increased slightly mainly due to supply-side pressures—in particular, a gradual rise in fresh food and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) prices.
The direct impacts on the Thai economy were limited since the value of exports to Russia in 2021 was only 0.4 percent of total exports and Russian tourists accounted for only 4 percent of total foreign tourists before the pandemic.
Members discussed the neutral rate that will mark the end of the normalization cycle.
Overall financial conditions remained accommodative and conducive to economic growth as reflected in low levels of real interest rates.
There remained risks surrounding the Chinese economy and financial stability, notwithstanding government measures to support growth including tax reduction for businesses and households, a lower reserve requirement ratio, and some financial stability measures to curb debt in the economy recently.
During the policy discussion, the committee evaluated: (1) The need to maintain accommodative monetary policy given the current economic backdrop; (2) The effectiveness of further monetary policy easing, against potential costs and risks; and (3) The appropriate timing for additional monetary policy easing amid the prevailing high degree of uncertainties.
Some Committee members viewed that macroprudential measures were appropriate for mitigating risks to financial stability.
Nonetheless, the period at which headline inflation was expected to turn positive might be delayed as a result of more subdued demand-side pressure and slower-than-projected global oil price recovery.
Developments in the eurozone economy weighed heavily on investor confidence, prompting a flight to safety, which pushed yields on US, Japanese, and German government bonds to historical lows.
Two members voted to cut the policy rate.
Public spending rose modestly from the previous period, though the magnitude of fiscal stimulus remained smaller than anticipated.
The MPC would remain vigilant in monitoring developments in the global economy as well as progress on domestic restoration efforts and stands ready to take appropriate policy actions.
The risk of a prolonged elevation in global energy prices increased primarily from geopolitical factors.
Furthermore, better-than-expected outturns in the first quarter of 2022 and the likelihood of additional stimulus measures by the Chinese authorities further suggested that the Chinese economy would expand in line with the previous projection.
NPL of some SMEs decreased slightly, especially in exports and services sectors, in line with economic recovery.
Exports could be more negatively affected by weakening global demand in the period ahead, but Thai economy would continue to expand on the back of strong domestic demand under benign inflation outlook.
Examples of such measures could include provision of soft loans for businesses and households with the potential to repay their loans as well as credit guarantees so that loans could be allocated to SMEs more efficiently.
However, there remained downside risks from weaker-than-expected growth in trading partners and fragility in the private sector’s sentiments.
Domestic demand continued to recover and started to be more broad-based.
Meanwhile, downside risks receded on account of the accelerated vaccination progress.
The Thai economy overall continued to recover with a 2023 projected growth of 2.4 percent.
In the bond market, the Thai government bond yields were volatile.
Many members viewed that the real minimum wage in recent history had not changed significantly.
Tighter government regulations led to slowing activity in the real estate sector.
Most dismissed workers in the services sector could not reallocate to the manufacturing sector with improving prospects due to their skill mismatch.
This was because inflation was still expected to continue rising, prices of most goods and services did not fall, and consumption and investment continued to expand.
In addition, the recent upward trend in oil prices reflected underlying global demand due to economic expansion, particularly in the emerging markets.
Meanwhile, the public’s inflation expectations appeared to be more stable given recent improvements in inflation outturns.
The Committee assessed that the Omicron outbreak would affect the economy in early 2022.
Headline inflation rose in August 2018 on account of fresh food prices falling only slightly, given damages to agricultural supply caused by heavy rainfall and given a less severe meat oversupply problem.
Furthermore, the Committee saw the need of supply-side policies to restructure the Thai economy in the post-COVID environment that could change business structures in many industries.
Meanwhile geopolitical risks could affect the fragile economic recovery and warranted close monitoring.
First, the household debt remained at a high level, partly due to structural problems stemming from households’ leveraging behavior and financial institutions’ business practice.
In this regard, the Committee saw the need to closely monitor developments and assess impacts of trade protectionism measures between the US and China—both the negative effects on export and domestic markets as well as the positive effects due to investment diversion that could have a bearing on the manufacturing sector and the labor market in Thailand going forward.
In addition, uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 situation remained.
Up to the date of this meeting, the effect on the Thai financial markets was not evident, but the development, particularly in the exchange rate market, warranted close monitoring in the periods ahead.
The Committee viewed that targeted and timely fiscal measures would be vital to support employment and SMEs and facilitate the economic recovery and preserve potential growth going forward.
This was mainly due to the result of the British referendum (Brexit) that negatively impacted confidence in and stability of global financial markets and consequently economic activities going forward.
The Committee assessed that, despite the recent better-than-expected outturns, the Thai economy would recover slowly and need support from the continued low policy rate.
Such vaccination progress, along with continued financial and fiscal support, would help bolster the global economic recovery.
However, there were still risks from the impact of US trade protectionism measures, particularly from US tariffs on imported cars and auto parts.
Several countries announced measures to cool the real estate sector after a recent acceleration in real estate prices.
Government consumption growth was largely stable, while public investment was expected to grow at a slower pace due to problems related to budget disbursement capabilities as well as potential delays in some state‐owned enterprise (SOE) investment projects.
Moreover, debt servicing capability worsened in those industries exacerbated by exports.
The growth forecast for 2017 was revised up from 3.4 percent to 3.5 percent.
Nevertheless, some Committee members viewed that there remained risks associated with declines in the global oil prices, which could affect exports of petroleum and petro-chemical products, together with risks stemming from uncertainties in US trade policies that continued to warrant close monitoring going forward.
Global inflationary pressure generally remained subdued.
The MPC, however, was satisfied that the BoT’s current exchange rate management framework already entailed systematic steps of policy responses, with specific measures ready to be implemented if and when warranted by the circumstances.
Meanwhile, SMEs had limited access to credits due to higher credit risks.
In addition, some central banks employed additional tools to maintain economic and financial stability, such as macroprudential measures to address risks in the real estate sector, and the accumulation of foreign reserves as a buffer against future shocks, especially if advanced economies were to increase policy rates faster than expected.
Nonetheless, they could not fully offset the weaker momentum of domestic demand and exports of goods amid two main factors restraining economic recovery: (1) the slowdown in the Chinese and other Asian economies which should subject exports of goods to further contraction, although the recent weakening of the baht might help buoy exports to some extent, and (2) domestic drought which could weigh down the already-weak recovery of private consumption through a decline in farm income and private confidence.
In contrast with domestic demand performance, external demand was weaker than previously assessed, as reflected by more-than-expected contraction in exports and export production.
Advanced economies (AEs) would continue to recover in line with the previous projection.
The baht against the US dollar had appreciated owing to expectations of a dovish Fed tightening as well as China’s relaxation of international travel restrictions which would benefit the Thai tourism sector.
Market expectations about the gradual monetary policy normalization in G3 economies and the improved global economic outlook led to capital inflows to bond and equity markets in the region including Thailand.
In this regard, maintaining the current level of monetary policy accommodation would be conducive to returning inflation to target over the medium term, although this process might take some time.
Meanwhile, the Committee would continue to closely monitor the impact of higher interest rates, particularly on vulnerable groups.
Inflation could exceed 5 percent in the second and third quarters, mainly attributed to the low-base effect of crude oil prices and government assistance measures in 2021.
Asian economies would gain further traction on account of domestic demand that was partly driven by the public sector.
Most members thus viewed that more accommodative monetary policy would help alleviate the negative impacts.
Delta variant with more severe symptoms.
Tourism activity was solid and was expanded going forward.
The global economy recovered at a pace close to the previous assessment, with the US economic recovery remaining intact despite being temporarily affected by the unusually cold weather.
These included the rebalancing toward consumption in place of investment as a driver of growth, urbanization policy to expand developments to the inner cities, as well as the promotion of labor mobility to support domestic demand growth.
A slowdown in China’s industrial production resulted in a decline in merchandise export growth of other Asian economies (excluding Japan) through strong manufacturing and trade linkages.
In addition, some Committee members viewed that risks to financial stability had receded somewhat after the implementation of targeted measures and regulatory upgrade by supervisory authorities over the recent periods.
Moreover, deteriorating debt serviceability of SMEs must be monitored.
The government’s Oil Fund would partially mitigate the impact of higher global energy prices on domestic oil prices.
Headline and core inflation were slightly below the previous assessment but remained stable.
Public expenditure would expand, albeit at a slower pace than the previous assessment from the impacts of the delayed Annual Budget Expenditure Act.
For one member, the crisis in Japan called for an interest rate pause.
However, there is a need to monitor financial condition and debt serviceability of certain groups of SMEs.
Global financial conditions remained accommodative as overall government bond yields were still lower than historical averages despite some spike during market correction.
- The Committee noted that monetary policy divergence could cause volatilities in global financial markets.
The search-for-yield behavior in the prolonged low interest rate remained present as reflected in (1) the continued expansion in foreign investment funds (FIFs), although risks were limited as most funds invested in countries with investment grade credit rating, and (2) the increase in the asset size of saving cooperatives following expansion in deposits.
In their view, the current level of monetary policy accommodation would foster the return of headline inflation to target, although the (3) Financial stability remained sound overall, but there were pockets of risks that might lead to the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system.
The appropriate level of real interest rates would be one relevant consideration for monetary policy deliberation looking ahead.
Government spending also picked up following the implementation of the Budget Act.
There remained a risk of inflation staying elevated for longer than expected, as firms could pass on higher costs absorbed in the past and demand-side pressures could pick up with the recovery gaining traction.
This was partly attributable to a resumption of capital inflows into Malaysia following a general election on 5 May.
In addition, political developments, such as the future stability of the EU and the US presidential election, could affect confidence and the economic outlook of Thailand’s trading partners going forward.
Meanwhile, the US economic recovery strengthened thanks to improving economic fundamentals.
This was because most corporate bond issuers raised funds in the short maturity and could still do so as usual.
At the same time, income of agricultural households started to improve as a result of higher agricultural commodity prices, especially rubber, while concerns pertaining to the impact of the drought subsided.
Three members voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points.