Long-term US government bond yields rose in tandem with global financial market conditions.
The Committee also deemed it necessary to closely monitor growth in loans extended to small businesses and households as well as the credit quality of SME loans with small credit lines and mortgage loans.
The Committee stands ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery, while ensuring financial stability.
However, Asian merchandise exports should improve on the back of an anticipated recovery in the global manufacturing activity and an upturn in the global electronic cycle.
The Committee deemed that a very accommodative monetary policy would be less needed going forward.
The resulting risk aversion weakened the Thai baht, reversing appreciation pressures in July.
The outlook for private investment was further supported by greater certainty regarding the prospects of public investment projects with further progress on projects under the Eastern Economic Corridor monitored going forward.
Real interest rates remained negative and overall funding costs were still conducive for business financing, although government bond yields gradually increased in line with the outlook of policy normalization.
The Thai economy was projected to grow at 4.2 and 4.0 percent in 2018 and 2019, respectively.
The US dollar continued to depreciate due to confirmations that the second round of quantitative easing would continue as scheduled despite improvements in employment.
Looking ahead, support from domestic demand and government’s economic stimulus policies should continue to provide growth momentum.
This was in line with the survey result which indicated that most market participants expected the MPC to maintain policy rate until the second half of 2015 to support economic recovery given subdued inflation.
These included (1) the number of foreign tourists that could increase less than previously assessed due to risks that the second wave of the outbreak in many countries could result in changes in attitude and behavior regarding international travel, and (2) private consumption that could be dampened by deteriorated household incomes, elevated household debt, and low agencies to explore additional measures to restore the economy, particularly the appropriate travel protocols for foreign tourists.
At the same time, domestic risk factors, particularly the possible impact of the measures to curb zero-dollar tours, might cause the number of Chinese tourists to turn out lower than the previous projection.
Although foreign currency liquidity tightened in some periods as concerns over global economic conditions intensified, overall market adjustment was orderly.
Investors assessed that the Federal Reserve may need to tighten monetary policy earlier than expected to keep rising inflation in line with the long-term target.
Fiscal uncertainties continued to pose significant downside risks to growth.
Meanwhile, loan quality of some corporates affected by trade tensions also worsened.
However, - 6 safeguarding financial stability in the period ahead would remain necessary and could be done through a combination of tools, including the appropriate policy interest rate, macroprudential measures, and microprudential measures.
The Federal Reserve (Fed) would likely cut its policy rate once in 2019 with an additional cut in 2020.
The MPC therefore decided unanimously to raise the policy interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, from 2.75 to 3.00 per cent per annum, effective immediately.
Although government bond yields rose, EM risky asset prices also increased owing to the economic recovery underpinned by the improved pandemic situation.
Going forward, demand was expected to be robust from (1) an upward trend in domestic and foreign purchase orders, (2) continued expansion in planned private investment, (3) favorable credit conditions especially from lending by government-owned specialized financial institutions and (4) augmented fiscal spending after the formation of a new government.
This was because most businesses in Thailand at present decided not to adjust their prices and instead absorbed the higher costs themselves owing to weak purchasing power of Thai consumers.
The majority deemed the underlying economic fundamentals to be robust, which should help the economy weather short-term risks from political uncertainties.
Thus, most members voted to keep the policy rate unchanged.
Nonetheless, the MPC judged that the pressure would not be as severe as in 2008, since the conflict was expected to be contained and unlikely to result in war.
The US economy gained more traction from sustained improvement in the labour and housing markets as well as businesses’ greater willingness to resume investment after the resolution of fiscal policy impasse.
Second, households and businesses could be affected by higher living costs and higher production costs, particularly the vulnerable groups.
Thai government bond yields declined immediately after the policy rate cut.
Additionally, producers decided to bear the rising costs of production due to difficulties of price pass-through during an economic slowdown.
The Committee noted that domestic demand would be affected by (1) uncertainties pertaining to approval and implementation of key public-private infrastructure investment projects and (2) elevated household debt and declining household employment and income that could affect consumption prospects.
The Committee will closely monitor such developments and take into account growth and inflation outlooks in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
The Japanese economy continued to recover slowly, but going forward should receive additional boost from private consumption which was expected to pick up after the annual wage negotiation.
The US economy continued to expand on the back of domestic demand, while anticipated stimulus measures under the new administration and improved private-sector confidence would contribute positively to business investment in the period ahead.
But the slowdown in China could weigh on the exports of some consumption goods, including rubber and cassava.
Economic expansion in China was expected to continue on the back of recovery in exports and the implementation of stimulus measures, including targeted measures focusing on loans for small businesses.
Thai government yield curve steepened with the market expectations of imminent QE tapering.
Regarding public expenditure, government consumption expenditure, particularly compensation of civil servants, was projected to increase at a slower pace given policy to replace vacant job positions with contract workers.
The prospects of an economic downturn this year led to increased financial system vulnerabilities.
One member deemed maintaining the policy rate at 2.50 percent to be sufficiently accommodative as the Thai economy should be able to resume its normal growth next year.
The views of the Committee were as follows.
The upward revision was mainly on account of stronger-thanexpected growth in the external sectors, while domestic demand would likely expand at a slightly slower pace than previously assessed due to temporary postponement of some infrastructure investment projects.
These members nonetheless highlighted the need for policy to be flexible and attuned to the evolving growth and inflation outlook and associated assessments.
The government attempted at the same time to strike a balance between its economic growth and financial stability objectives, and this resulted in some improvements in market confidence.
Their conclusions were as follow.
Unemployment, while remaining low overall, recently saw some increases among the new entrants which might reflect structural unemployment.
The Committee thus voted unanimously to cut the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from 1.00 to 0.75 percent effective on 23 March 2020.
Regarding interest rate expectations prior to this meeting, continued increases in short-term money market rates and the short-end of the government yield curve showed that the market had already priced in a policy rate hike.
The Committee would stand ready to use additional appropriate monetary policy tools if necessary. '
Nonetheless, this would not pose a significant risk to fiscal sustainability if the budget were to be spent efficiently towards shoring up the economy that was facing high risks in the short run and supporting economic restructuring to raise potential growth.
Major advanced economies would continue to recover thanks to the significant progress of COVID-19 vaccination.
Growth was expected to be more balanced in 2024 and 2025.
Inflation in trading partner economies was increasing gradually thanks to the recovery in oil and fresh food prices, with signs of core inflation picking up in advanced economies.
Public expenditure continued to be an important growth driver.
The Euro area economies continued to recover, on the back of the domestic demand and exports.
The uneven growth of advanced economies and emerging markets has led to varied monetary policy responses.
The Committee viewed that the government measures and policy coordination among government agencies would be critical to support the economic recovery.
The Chinese economy expanded at a robust pace in the first quarter of 2023 following its reopening, though latest indicators suggested some moderation in economic activity.
Non-farm income was still below the pre-pandemic level.
However, there remained pockets of risks that still warranted close monitoring such as the deterioration in the quality of loans extended to households and businesses, especially low-income households and SMEs.
This could be achieved through the special loan facility for businesses and asset warehousing.
While economic indicators for the US economy pointed to a continued recovery and the Japanese economy was expected to gain further traction thanks to the announced postponement of the increase in sales tax, forward momentum from G3 economies was not sufficient to offset the impact from the slowdown in China on Asian economies’ exports.
However, given that deposit growth outpaced loan growth, saving cooperatives consequently increased their investment in long-term assets in search of higher yields.
the benefits for Thai exports from global demand recovery would partly depend on the sector’s competitiveness) and longer-run potential growth rate which may decline, but cannot be quantitatively assessed with precision at present, also depending on private sector adjustments and structural reform policies, (2) greater challenges in assessing economic conditions owing to a wider gap between expenditure-side and production-side national incomes, resulting in an unusual influence of changes in stock and statistical discrepancy on GDP.
In addition, the share of households sensitive to negative income shocks increased, and the Committee would thus monitor these households during the economic downturn.
The overall financial system remains resilient, however the Committee recognized initiatives to accelerate targeted measures, particularly Responsible Lending measures.
In addition, the Committee agreed with plans to relax foreign exchange regulations under the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan, which represented continuing efforts to achieve more balanced capital flows.
A significant portion of first-car loans has also been extended to car dealers rather than consumers, thus limiting wider impact.
This facilitated a comparison with forecasts of most other agencies which did not incorporate the effects of said scheme.
The Thai economy in 2020 would expand at a much lower rate than the previous forecast and much further below its potential due to the coronavirus outbreak, the delayed enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, and the drought, all of which would affect a large number of related businesses and employment.
The private sector continued to raise funds, while corporate and consumer loans expanded.
However, some central banks in advanced economies gradually raised policy rates given stronger economic growth and labor markets along with clearer signs of inflation rising toward the target.
Movements of regional currencies diverged, depending on the impact of oil prices on respective economies.
The recovery in the period ahead would remain highly uncertain, depending on (1) the continuity of fiscal support and (2) the recovery in tourist figures in line with COVID-19 vaccine efficacy and coverage.
The baht depreciated against the US dollar and underwent volatile movements in line with other regional currencies due to concerns over trade protectionism and demand for US dollar by some Thai firms for overseas investment in the recent period.
Private investment was expected to expand thanks to the relocation of production base to Thailand and a greater clarity on PPP infrastructure investment projects.
However, in India and Indonesia the policy interest rates were raised in response to elevated inflationary pressure and widening current account deficits; while in the euro area economies the policy interest rate was lowered in response to the economic slowdown amidst subdued inflationary pressure.
This could result in a faster‐ than‐expected pace of rate hikes in the US.
Meanwhile, some Committee members regarded the preservation of policy space as important given domestic and external uncertainties.
Adequate and targeted financial measures to assist businesses and households affected by the pandemic should be pushed forward, especially the special loan facility, asset warehousing, and debt restructuring.
Private consumption and investment continued to expand and, if sustained, should play a significant role in supporting the economic recovery.
Thus, monetary policy’s support to economic restoration efforts through lower cost of funds for the private sector has also been limited.
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy continued to be restrained by lingering problems in the property sector.
Manufacturing production and exports were affected by supply chain disruptions.
Financial stability became more vulnerable due to the weakened growth outlook in the near term.
In addition, some Committee members expressed concerns over the recent escalation of geopolitical risks.
Both private consumption and investment remained robust with continuing momentum.
Nevertheless, Thai financial markets remained attractive to foreign investors thanks to sound fundamentals and strong external stability.
The economy would continue to expand in 2022 and 2023 on the back of improving domestic demand and tourism.
China and Asian economies showed sustained growth, mainly on the back of exports, manufacturing production, and increased consumer confidence.
Private consumption has not gained traction due to subdued income growth and elevated household debt burden.
Furthermore, the medium-term inflation expectations were unaffected by the new inflation target specifying headline inflation within the range of 1-3 percent as it was well-anchored at around 2 percent.
The Thai economy continued to recover gradually, supported by effective disbursement of the fiscal budget as well as tourism that expanded more than anticipated on the back of a broad-based increase in the number of foreign visitors.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) depreciated slightly.
The Committee continued to monitor developments of certain factors that could affect the overall growth and inflation outlook.
In addition, the Committee would monitor key factors affecting the economic outlook, namely mutations of COVID-19 virus, adequacy of fiscal, financial, and credit measures, and higher cost pass-through.
Maintaining the policy rate at the current level, which is still low and supportive of economic growth, was thus deemed appropriate.
Thus, the Committee saw a need to closely monitor (1) developments in trading partner economies together with the aforementioned risks in order to evaluate their impacts on the Thai economy that could occur through various macroeconomic linkages, and the Thai baht.
The committee thus assessed that the global oil market had undergone a structural shift that would help limit the risk of oil price surge as seen during 2000-2011, and result in lower global inflationary pressure going forward.
The Committee viewed that the global financial markets remained highly uncertain in the period ahead due to factors such as (1) the monetary policy outlook in advanced economies, pertaining to Brexit as well as political issues in the euro area that could intensify and affect the global economy and cross-border capital flows.
Meanwhile, public expenditure might not provide sufficient momentum for the economy due to budget disbursement constraints and the delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
The committee thus voted 6 to 1 to maintain the policy interest rate at 2.00 percent per annum.
The Thai economy expanded well in the first quarter of this year.
The Committee viewed that headline inflation was expected to edge up in 2018 following a domestic demand recovery and an increase in excise tax.
The Committee considered the benefits and costs of policy alternatives and viewed that the current accommodative monetary policy stance remained conducive to the continuation of economic growth and should support the rise of headline inflation to target in a sustainable manner, although the process could take some time.
- The Committee assessed that upside risks to inflation increased.
Nevertheless, the low level of Thai government bond yields might somewhat discourage the inflows.
However, there remained a need to closely monitor developments of the pandemic going forward.
Financial stability became more vulnerable due to the modest growth outlook.
However, members differed in their assessment of risks going forward and thus the need for policy easing.
Private investment continued to improve particularly in machinery and equipment in line with increased capacity utilization among various industries such as automobiles, chemicals, and construction materials.
Third, the continued economic recovery of trading partners would benefit Thai exports.
While agreeing that the risk was not systemic, the MPC members saw the need to broaden surveillance to cover additional segments of credit markets.
The Committee viewed that structural factors partly contributed to inflation becoming less responsive to economic growth despite the economy growing at potential.
This was reflected in a rising share of new mortgage loans with the loan-to-value was an increasing share of mortgage loans extended to borrowers for a second or more homes with credit standards deteriorating.
The Committee would monitor worsening debt servicing capability of households and SMEs amid economic slowdown that could affect their incomes.
Some Committee members also saw the need for a close cooperation between various regulatory agencies to close any regulatory gap and to detect potential risks in order to address those risks in an appropriate and timely manner.
Meanwhile, real estate sector gained pace following a gradual recovery in domestic demand, with the general house price growth remaining close to the historical average rate.
Moreover, given the prolonged low interest rate environment, large corporates accelerated their funding through both commercial banks and the bond market in order to invest in both existing and non‐core businesses including some overseas businesses.
Among these workers, around 1.2 million could become unemployed or underemployed.
The Thai economy expanded in the second quarter of this year from domestic demand, supported by favorable farm income and employment conditions.
Inflation remains subdued from supply factors and is projected to gradually increase towards the target range by the end of 2024.
In particular, more relaxed personal loan underwriting standards could encourage households to increase vulnerabilities.
However, the financial positions of some SMEs and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden as incomes had yet to fully recover.
The latest downward revision of growth projection is due to weaker-than-expected GDP outturn in the first quarter and the recent softening of economic indicators.
Such resolutions included debt restructuring and the debt clinic, together with putting into practice guidelines for responsible lending and for building financial discipline and promoting household savings.
Advanced economies were expected to expand mainly on the back of private consumption as employment and consumer confidence continued to improve.
It is broadly in line with the targets of the trading partners, and thus should help maintain Thailand’s competitiveness.
However, long-term Thai government bond yields only slightly increased due to domestic investors’ demand for long-term bonds.
The slowdown was due to contracted merchandise exports that started to affect domestic demand.
In 2015, nevertheless, private investment was expected to pick up from last year as firms which had already obtained investment incentives from the Board of Investment should gradually carry out their investment plans.
The inflation outlook would still subject to upside risks.
However, the root cause of such issues stemmed from borrowers’ credit risks and lenders’ limitations in assessing the risks of smaller firms, all of which cannot be addressed solely through monetary policy.
With regard to monetary policy, the Federal Reserve (Fed) still gradually tightened its policy stance.
Tourist arrivals were expected to reach 28 million and 35 million for 2023 and 2024, respectively, an upward revision from the January assessment of 25.5 million in 2023 and 34 million in 2024.
The Committee viewed that the Thai economy would encounter uncertainties from both external and domestic factors going forward, including (1) the coronavirus outbreak that could intensify and be prolonged which would consequently affect the manufacturing sector and exports, particularly as a result of further delayed recovery of the electronics cycle, (2) uncertain trade tensions and geopolitical risks that could dampen the economic outlook of trading partners, the economy, including the progress of important public-private partnership infrastructure investment projects and their knock-on effects on private investment, (4) risks from drought which might be more severe than expected and affect agricultural output and farm income, as well as increasing costs of water supply management in some areas, and (5) lower-than-expected private consumption due to a decline in household income and employment.
Meanwhile, short‐term bond yields rose on account of market expectations of future policy rate increases.
As a result, household debt relative to income might not yet decline.
Risks to global economic growth have fallen.
Nevertheless, the growth of merchandise exports could decelerate in 2023 given a slowdown in global demand in tandem with trading partners’ economic growth outlook.
At the same time, uncertainties pertaining to the global economic outlook and formation of the new government posed downside risks to the Thai economy.
Supply-side shocks related to the El Niño phenomenon could also put upward pressures on food prices and inflation more than expected.
Nevertheless, the Committee would continue to closely monitor developments of unrated bonds and other parts of the financial system for signs of risk underpricing.
Nonetheless, after the US announced tariffs on Chinese imports and designated China as a currency manipulator, investors sold off assets in Asia due to the region’s high interconnectedness with China.
Consumers exercised more caution partly as a result of rising debt burden at a time when the impact of government consumption stimulus measures dissipated.
Meanwhile, there were risks of rising demand-side inflationary pressures.
Private consumption and investment was expected to expand in line with good prospects for both farm and non-farm income, improved confidence, expansion in credit, and rising investment trend in the automobile, electronics and electrical appliance industries.
This would address the debt overhang problem in a targeted and practical manner, lowering risk to economic growth in the medium term.
Nevertheless, large corporates increased their fundraising in the prolonged low interest rate environment through the bond and loan markets.
Second, search-for-yield behavior in the prolonged low interest rate environment could lead to underpricing of risks, especially by large corporates and saving cooperatives.
The baht weakened against the US dollar in line with regional currencies, primarily influenced by anticipations of Fed Funds rate cuts.
Two members voted to reduce the policy interest rate by 0.25 percent per annum for the following reasons: (1) Monetary policy should be eased further in order to lend more support to a weaker-thanexpected recovery, with growth staying below potential; (2) Higher downside risks to global economic recovery could undermine domestic economic growth, particularly at an early stage of recovery.
Going forward, the growth momentum would be sustained by the following factors: (1) expanding private consumption supported by strong farm income; (2) rising private investment due to the need to expand production capacity as reflected by accelerated corporate credit growth; (3) government spending; and (4) continued export expansion to meet demand from both developed and emerging markets as recovery takes hold.
Going forward, additional relocation of production base to Thailand, for some industries such as hard disk drives, would continue to lend further support to merchandise exports.
Despite continuous improvement in recent economic indicators in several countries, overall economic activities remained significantly lower than the pre- pandemic level.
The Committee voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 0.50 percent to help The Committee assessed that the Thai economic recovery would remain intact in 2022 and commodity prices as well as a slowdown in external demand.
The significant impact of the floods on the real economy led most market participants to anticipate that the MPC would reduce the policy rate at this meeting.
Such factors included, for example, uncertainties regarding trade negotiations between the US and China that could be prolonged, geopolitical risks, the potential slowdown of global and Thai economies, as well as the monetary policy outlook of advanced economies.
Some members were of the view that the decline in NPLs of SME loans in export-related sectors could be partly attributed to export growth seen in firms of various sizes.
The Thai economy would expand at a slower pace than previously estimated and below its potential.
The Committee would stand ready to use additional appropriate monetary policy tools if necessary.
The government was therefore expected to implement area-specific containment measures and suspend the Test & Go registration for foreign tourists only temporarily.
However, Thailand’s strong external positions at present could help support investors’ confidence.
The financial system remained sound overall, but vulnerabilities increased in some pockets given the sharp economic contraction that potentially led to income shocks, falling asset prices and tighter financial conditions.
The global economy recovered at a slower pace than previously assessed, as the impact of China’s economic slowdown further materialized.
Furthermore, lending under the previously announced measures should also be accelerated to address liquidity problems in a targeted and timely manner.
Meanwhile, the repercussions of the euro zone’s problem on Asia became more evident through trade-related channels, while its impact on the financial sector remained contained.
Meanwhile, the euro area exhibited slightly weaker momentum, with exports slowing down in line with global trade volume and further restrained by private sector confidence that was weighed down by political issues.
Fiscal measures must be adequate and should ensure the continuity of fiscal impulses by expediting the disbursements of relief and government support.
The economy would thus expand in 2021, albeit at somewhat a lower rate than the December 2020 projection.
The Committee assessed that Thailand’s growth outlook for 2017 improved further and that the economy would expand at a faster pace than previously projected.
The Japanese economy moderated as domestic demand fell short of expectation in the first quarter, with the increase in consumption tax impeding private consumption.
- The Committee expressed concern over elevated household debt and recognized the importance of debt deleveraging.
In the Committee’s judgment, the economy overall continued to recover.
A number of studies and experiences from other countries suggested that a prolonged period of low interest rates could lead to a build-up of financial imbalances in the economy.
The recovery would be supported by, first, the tourism sector gaining more traction as the number of foreign tourists continued to increase in line with rising travel demand, improving airline capacity, and easing international travel restrictions.
First, prolonged outbreak and virus mutations from existing and new variants would reduce vaccine efficacy.
Household debt serviceability thus remained an issue to be monitored, particularly among low-income households whose debt as a proportion of financial assets was higher than other income groups and was projected to rise.
However, the overall financial conditions remained conducive for business financing, as reflected in the growth in bank lending and corporate bond issuances.
The extension of the cost-of-living alleviation measures may slow the rise in measured inflation figures but other measures such as the prospective increases in the minimum wage and fiscal spending amid continued economic growth will likely add to inflationary pressure and may heighten inflation expectations.
This was consistent with total corporate financing that continued to expand but at a lower rate compared with the historical average and was still highly concentrated in larger firms.
As such, the risks to the baseline inflation forecast were largely symmetric.
Regarding leverage, the seasonally-adjusted household debt-to-GDP ratio slightly increased in the fourth quarter of 2018.
MPC members discussed the development of key factors affecting the economic recovery.
Third, financial measures, particularly the special soft loan facility that helped alleviate liquidity constraints for the affected groups and debt restructuring which helped address elevated debt problems, would be more effective and targeted than the reduction in the policy rate which was a blunt instrument.
Workers in Thailand could move quite easily across sectors in response to changing demand in different situations.
Regarding financial market conditions in Thailand, commercial bank lending rates and government bond yields remained low, whereas corporate bond spreads were still high.
One member viewed reducing the policy rate by 0.25 percent as appropriate given that: deteriorate since the last meeting, while core and headline inflation rates trended downward; economy; (3) exchange rate volatility has intensified and baht appreciation has begun to have an evident impact on exports.
Fourth, the default rates of businesses and households could rise substantially after the phase-out of the credit relief measures.
Members assessed that the Japan crisis would have limited impact on the growth of the Thai economy.
Merchandise exports were expected to contract more than the previous assessment due to the slowdown of trading partner economies and global trade volume owing to intensifying and expanding trade tensions as well as a longer-than-expected down cycle of electronic products.
The price-earnings ratio (P/E ratio) was thus largely unchanged.
However, two Committee members assessed that a rate hike in this meeting would complement the use of macroprudential measures in order to reduce financial stability risks.
Thus, - 2 volatility of the baht increased.
Financial institutions should expedite debt restructuring for retail borrowers and businesses to be in line with the income stream and debt servicing capability in the post-COVID environment.
Inflation should, however, rebound in the second half of this year with upside risks from higher food prices amid a more severe El Niño episode.
In the discussion of the monetary policy outlook the Committee would be data-dependent by closely monitoring the developments of the outlook for growth, inflation, and financial stability, together with associated risks in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
Moreover, increasing the policy rate would reduce financial stability risks and help to build up policy space.
Such risks included (1) the search-for-yield behavior that could lead to underpricing of risks, (2) a continued increase in assets and deposits of saving cooperatives despite slowing down somewhat compared with the previous period due to more stringent regulations, (3) debt serviceability of households and SMEs, and (4) the property market where businesses continued to increase their investment and financial institutions engaged in competition by extending mortgage loans with higher credit risks.
Under the monetary policy framework with objectives of maintaining price stability, supporting sustainable and full-potential economic growth, and preserving financial stability, the Committee continued to put emphasis on supporting the economic recovery.
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas increased the policy rate to stabilize inflation, while Bank Indonesia raised the rate to curb financial market volatilities.
Targeted measures such as these would likely be more effective and create less side effects than using the policy interest rate, a blunt instrument with much stronger and far-reaching effects on the macroeconomy.
There were also additional measures including facilitating debt settlement of unsecured personal loans under specified conditions (“debt clinic”), enhancing financial literacy and discipline of the public, as well as supporting relevant supervisory authorities to push forward the implementation of an upgraded supervisory standard for saving cooperatives in accordance with the Cooperatives Act (No.3) B.E.
Meanwhile, growth and inflation outlook did not change materially from the previous meeting.
Core inflation was expected to rise slowly broadly in line with the previous assessment given gradual improvement in demand‐pull inflationary pressures.
This was mainly attributable to aggressive rate hikes from the Federal Reserve and concerns over US economic recession.
Nevertheless, there remained downside risks stemming from the external front, such as US economic and foreign trade policies as well as geopolitical risks, and domestically from private demand that might not be as strong as expected should the recovery in purchasing power still not broaden out.
One member noted in addition that volatile exchange rate may put upward pressure on inflation in the periods head.
Third, risks in the real estate sector remained, including significant foreign demand for Thai properties, competition in the mortgage loan market, and the oversupply of property in some areas.
Meanwhile, the public’s short-term inflation expectations appeared to be more stable.
Looking ahead, the global financial markets would remain highly volatile.
In addition, uncertainty regarding the Brexit referendum results could add to global financial market volatility and weigh on the euro area recovery through trade and investment channels.
The MPC saw the need to monitor developments in China closely, including: (1) the ongoing high credit growth in China arising from shadow banking activities, which, if not addressed by appropriate measures, could undermine financial stability; (2) the potential impact of China’s slowdown on Thai exports and tourism, given a high share of Thai exports to China and the large number of Chinese tourists.
Liquidity in the financial system remained ample.
Consequently, China lowered its growth target for 2015.
Five members viewed that the continuation of the policy rate hike by another 0.25 percentage points was appropriate.
Inflation expectations remained stable.
Most market participants expected the MPC to keep the policy interest rate unchanged at this meeting.
Looking ahead, the global economy would continue to gain strength in tandem with the vaccination progress and large-scale US economic stimulus.
Second, workers in Thailand could move across sectors quite easily.
The Committee saw a need to closely monitor developments in trading partner economies together with the aforementioned risks and to assess their impacts on the Thai economy that could occur through various macroeconomic linkages.
In deliberating their policy decision, the Committee discussed the need for accommodative monetary policy taking into consideration costs and risks as summarized below.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the Thai economy continued to recover modestly, with the momentum of private consumption and investment being softer than expected due in part to weaker private sector confidence and less-than-expected public investment.
Financial institutions should continue to press ahead with debt restructuring to address debt problems in a sustainable manner for vulnerable groups.
The overall global economy showed signs of stabilisation and improving prospects.
Nevertheless, Thailand’s inflation would be subject to upside risks including higher global inflation and cost pass-through.
Advanced economies were expected to grow at a slower pace in line with exports, production, and investment that were affected by escalating international trade tensions.
In addition, the Committee saw the need to preserve policy space in order to cushion against possible risks in the future and deemed it necessary to monitor the impacts of the policy rate cut and fiscal stimulus measures on the economy.
Pent-up demand was expected to support the economic recovery throughout the rest of 2021, following the progress on vaccination and earlier-than-expected relaxation of containment measures.
Private investment would experience a downturn owing to domestic and external demand.
Meanwhile, inflation risk rose, as reflected in greater-than-expected price pressure in the processed foods category on the back of rising costs.
Regarding household debt, the household debt-to-GDP ratio remained elevated and would continue to edge up as a result of the economic slowdown as well as credit card and personal loan growth where household increasingly resorted to collateralized personal loans for liquidity.
Regarding the Thai financial market, short-term government bond yields declined partly due to higher demand.
Capital inflows were expected to continue, while risks to financial stability warranted close monitoring.
Meanwhile, the eurozone economy entered a recession and it would take time for the structural problems to be resolved.
In addition, new virus variants appeared to spread more easily and became harder to control.
Since the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting in February 2020, the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak continued to worsen and deteriorated rapidly.
The upside risk of inflation could come from two factors.
In this meeting, the Committee assessed that the economic recovery has continued to gain more traction, while the upside inflationary risks continued to increase.
Money market rates in Thailand as well as short to medium-term government bond yields edged lower following the MPC’s decision to reduce the policy rate at the previous meeting.
The baht fluctuated against the US dollar, initially depreciating due to weak Chinese economic outturns before appreciating in line with regional currencies amid expectations of slower tightening in US monetary policy.
There were isolated incidences of a few low-rated corporate bond issuers facing difficulty rolling debt, but these were largely firm-specific and did not constitute systemic problems.
However, headline inflation would gradually decrease and return to the target range in 2023 in the baseline scenario as energy prices were not expected to rise further and cost pass-through would gradually diminish.
Looking ahead, domestic demand should continue to be a key engine for economic growth, with private consumption holding up and private investment remaining on an upward trend backed by businesses’ shifts toward greater capital intensity given rising labor costs.
In their policy deliberation, the Committee voted 4 to 3 to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.50 percent.
Looking ahead, the baht would likely undergo volatile movements due mainly to uncertainties pertaining to the conduct of monetary, fiscal, and trade policies in advanced economies.
Headline inflation was softer than expected in May and June 2017 due mainly to supply-side factors.
The Committee decided to keep the policy rate on hold at 1.50 percent at this meeting.
Government bond yields and commercial bank lending rates remained low.
Moreover, the European Union delisted Thailand from the illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing (IUU) yellow-card status, which would support an increase in fishery exports.
Nevertheless, recent portfolio inflows to Thailand were smaller in size compared with inflows to other countries in the region.
Meanwhile, sectors with high recovery potential would need to adjust their business models in preparation for the post-COVID environment.
Nonetheless, a delayed recovery in merchandise exports remained a downside risk, not least given structural impediments and competitiveness issues which could limit the positive effects of global demand recovery on Thai exports.
The Committee viewed that the economy would continue to expand at the level around its potential, but would experience increased uncertainties from external and domestic factors that could affect economic growth in the period ahead.
2) The annual average of headline inflation was projected to be below the lower bound of the inflation target due to (1) energy prices declining at a fast pace and (2) core inflation being lowest in nine years and projected to slow down in line with subdued demand-pull inflationary pressures.
Given the recession concerns, investors expected the Federal Reserve and European Central Bank to slow down the pace of their interest rate hikes and might even have to cut the interest rates in 2023.
The government should also proactively implement public health measures and procure sufficient COVID-19 vaccines to limit adverse economic impacts of the new outbreaks.
In addition, there remained signs of weakened debt serviceability among SMEs and households, as reflected in rising non-performing loan (NPL) ratios over recent periods.
Thus, scenario analyses are needed to evaluate these risks and impacts on the Thai economic recovery.
On the domestic front, factors included (1) a greater clarity pertaining to political developments and factors attracted more equity as well as both short- and long-term bond inflows to Thailand.
The Committee thus deemed it necessary to closely monitor competition in the mortgage loan market as well as the oversupply of condominiums in certain areas and the existing stock of old condominiums.
not enough credit line / limited access to capital / 63 64 of some businesses and households terms and conditions on loans not sufficiently reflecting risks ' New assistance measures Flexible in dealing Comprehensive Inclusive for different needs of affected with uncertainties solutions borrowers in the near and long term  Asset warehousing program for businesses
Key risk factors included (1) prolonged sanctions against Russia, which would push up energy prices and costs in the long run, and (2) faster-thanexpected policy rate hikes by major central banks, particularly the Federal Reserve, in response to rising inflationary pressures.
Nevertheless, growth in private investment was still concentrated in certain business sectors, namely alternative energy, telecommunication, and manufacturing of electronic goods.
Regarding financial market conditions in Thailand, commercial bank lending rates and government bond yields remained low, whereas corporate bond spreads started to decrease for bonds with high credit ratings.
Despite the much stronger outturn in the first quarter, economic growth for 2012 was expected to remain at 6.0 percent.
Such polices included restructuring existing debt, standardizing DSR calculation, and establishing guidelines on responsible lending practice for financial institutions.
Meanwhile, public expenditure would decelerate more than previously estimated due mainly to the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
Given high growth rates in certain types of credit, close monitoring was warranted to guard against potential imbalances and a policy rate reduction may exacerbate such risks; and (3) the global economy remained susceptible to tail risks and it was important to preserve the room for monetary policy to act quickly should global economic conditions deteriorate rapidly.
Consequently, the projection remained close to the previous figures despite exports slowdown.
Meanwhile, short-term money market rates remained close to the policy rate and mediumto long-term Thai government bond yields were around the same levels as in the previous meeting.
On exchange rates, most regional currencies appreciated, especially currencies of those economies that benefitted from lower oil prices.
Domestic financial conditions were mostly unchanged from the previous meeting, as private sector funding costs via commercial banks and bond markets remained broadly unchanged.
Moreover, foreign investors also reduced holdings of emerging market assets, affecting Thai equity and bond markets.
Meanwhile, Asian economies came under pressure in the previous period as the spread of the Delta variant prompted governments in many countries to re-impose strict containment measures.
Tourism sector may also recover only slowly due to visiting countries’ security concerns.
In this regard, close coordination between regulatory bodies would be critical in closing such gaps as well as in monitoring and addressing risks in an appropriate and timely manner.
The US dollar would likely weaken, with the regional currencies appreciating against the US dollar.
The Thai baht depreciated since the last meeting, owing to the scaling down of asset purchase by the Federal Reserve (Fed) and domestic political situation.
Public expenditure would expand more than assessed.
With regard to the exchange rates, the baht depreciated against the US dollar to a greater extent than other regional currencies due to the accelerated US dollar purchases by gold-trading companies when gold prices dropped and the repatriation of profits and dividends by foreign businesses in Thailand.
However, there were more vulnerabilities in the financial system, especially related to debt servicing capability of households and SMEs due to the prospect of economic slowdown.
Second, private consumption was not sufficiently strong, attributable to household income in some agricultural sectors that were affected by lower agricultural prices as well as declines in hours worked observed in daily workers outside the agricultural sector and monthly workers in services and construction sectors.
The MPC assessed that the reduction in the policy rate over the last two meetings had helped to shore up the Thai economy, with good momentum evident in all major components.
Such conditions meant that there remained excess production capacity in the manufacturing sector and therefore growth in private investment was expected to remain low, despite benefiting partly from public investment stimulus.
The Thai economy would expand by 1.8 and 3.9 percent in 2021 and 2022 respectively, down from the March projection.
Financial stability remained sound overall, but there were pockets of risks that might lead to the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system going forward.
In addition, financial institutions should assess the efficacy of financial and credit measures.
According to the Committee’s preliminary assessment the latest US safeguard measures, such as the tariffs on steel and aluminum, would have a limited direct impact on the US and trading partner economies in the short term.
In addition, most central banks kept the policy interest rates unchanged over the intermeeting period except for the Federal Reserve (Fed) which raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.00–1.25 percent at the meeting on 13-14 June 2017.
There were outflows from both the bond and equity markets, with rising bond yields and baht depreciation against the US dollar.
Asian economies continued to recover, driven by exports to G3 economies and growth in exports of technological products especially electronics.
The shift was consistent with a survey of market participants which indicated expectations of a 0.25 percentage point hike this meeting.
Consequently, most major currencies appreciated against the US dollar except the yen which depreciated due to expectation that the newly elected government would implement additional monetary stimulus measures.
The Committee projected the Thai economy to expand at a rate close to the previous assessment but with greater downside risks from increased uncertainties in the global economy.
Four members voted to maintain the policy rate at 2.25 percent per annum, with the following rationales: (1) Monetary policy stance remained accommodative and appropriately supportive of economic recovery, as reflected by ample liquidity in the financial system and negative real policy rate; (2) Further easing of monetary policy was unlikely to provide a meaningful boost to private consumption and investment at the current juncture, given that political uncertainties were the main headwind to domestic demand at present.
The Committee would thus closely monitor factors that could affect crude oil prices, including those relating to the financial markets and oil supply, particularly from the Middle Eastern countries.
Hence, the Committee saw a need to closely monitor developments of those risks and the impacts on the growth outlook of trading partners, in particular economic activities as reflected in labor market indicators.
Regarding the euro area, labor market conditions improved, while most member countries recorded higher growth than long-term averages.
Inflation thus was not an immediate threat; (3) Risks to financial stability decreased somewhat, reflected by decelerating private credit growth amid economic slowdown.
Safe-haven asset prices increased in August in line with rising volatility in the global financial markets due to risk-off sentiments after the US and China announced additional retaliatory tariff and non-tariff measures.
The Committee assessed that downside risks to economic growth of trading partners increased given US trade protectionism measures and retaliatory measures by US trading partners, which were increasingly intensified and unlikely to be resolved in the near future.
The Committee voted unanimously to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from The Committee judges the economy to expand toward the potential level driven mainly by tourism and private consumption, while merchandise exports contracted in the short term, but should pick up looking ahead as the global economic activity gathers momentum.
The Japanese economy exhibited incipient signs of improvement in the manufacturing sector, while private sector confidence and inflation expectations were boosted by more concrete plans for further stimulus measures.
Other economies in the region also experienced increased capital inflows.
The Committee assessed that the government should address vulnerabilities in the labor markets in an adequate and continuous manner to reduce long- term scarring effects after the COVID-19 outbreak subsided.
Most members viewed that financial measures would be more effective than a further reduction in the policy rate which was already low and thus voted to maintain the policy rate.
However, the financial positions of some SMEs and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden.
Overall, risks to the recovery were judged to be skewed more to the downside compared with the previous assessment.
Headline inflation would rise toward target in inflation expectations remained anchored within the target.
These could cause asset prices and exchange rates to fluctuate.
The global financial market sentiment had been more risk-on.
The Committee viewed that, despite growth moderating, the overall economy performed in line with its potential.
Meanwhile, public expenditure would likely grow at a slower rate than the previous assessment due to Expenditure Budget Act for fiscal year 2020 and (2) delay in some state-owned enterprise investment projects.
The baht subsequently corrected and stabilized due to higher demand for the US dollar from domestic businesses.
- Development and widespread distribution of the vaccines were vital for the Thai economic recovery next year.
The Thai economy in the second quarter expanded more than previously projected.
Public expenditure would grow at a slower pace than previously assessed partly because of budget disbursement constraints as well as the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Budget Expenditure Act, B.E.
The Committee deemed that gradual and measured policy normalization remained an appropriate course for monetary policy and thus voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point at this meeting.
The slowdown in China, coupled with its ongoing structural shift resulting in lower reliance on imported goods, contributed to sluggish export performance of Asian (excluding Japanese) economies, aggravating the already-weak domestic demand.
Continued robust domestic demand should help sustain growth momentum in ASEAN, however.
The details were as follows.
Global inflation remained stable relative to the previous meeting, though pressure from an elevated oil price level persisted.
Headline inflation was expected to slowly rise in most economies.
Moreover, exports are subject to downside risks from softer-than-assessed recovery of the global economy particularly the Chinese and Asian economies.
Even though the proportion of domestic goods and services with significant price increases picked up, this remained concentrated in energy- and food-related product groups.
Meanwhile, several regional central banks, such as the Bank of Korea and Bank Indonesia, further cut their policy rates.
The annual averages of headline inflation in 2019 and 2020 were projected to be lower than the previous projection and below the lower bound of the inflation target due to lower- than-expected energy prices in tandem with the global economic slowdown as well as a sooner-than-expected return to the normal level of crude oil production in Saudi Arabia after the attack on production plants.
The committee agreed that the global economic outlook has improved, though several risks in major economies should be monitored: (1) Deleveraging process in the euro area has not completed and there has been limited progress in the resolution of fiscal and financial sector issues.
Consequently, economic activities would be directly affected in the first half of 2022 via dampened confidence and domestic spending.
These developments resulted in continued capital inflows into regional financial markets, although the size of inflows into the Thai bond market was smaller relative to regional peers.
Growth in commercial bank loans increased mainly on the back of business loans, in particular loans extended to real estate and export-related sectors.
Despite the Omicron’s high transmissibility, its mild symptoms helped shore up sentiment which lessened the impact on economic activities.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy would continue expanding and achieve a higher growth than the previous assessment.
Recovery in exports of goods should be more evident in the latter half of the year, as trading partners’ demand strengthens.
Supply-side inflationary pressures had gradually dissipated along with a decline in global energy and commodity prices, as reflected by the proportion of goods and services with continuous price increases that had fallen throughout the fourth quarter of 2022.
This was due to investor concerns about the outlook of Thai economy caused by both external and domestic factors, especially the COVID-19 outbreak which became more severe and widespread.
The annual averages of headline inflation in 2019 and 2020 were projected to be lower than the previous forecast and below the lower bound of the inflation target.
COVID-19 containment policies in Thailand and abroad must also be monitored, as they would impact the prospects of foreign tourist arrivals and the recovery of tourism in Thailand.
However, the global economic outlook grew more uncertain from persistently high inflation and tighter global financial conditions following episodes of banking stresses in some AEs.
The baseline assessment has already incorporated, to a certain extent, factors that could give rise to inflation remaining elevated for a prolonged period of time.
This resulted in (1) sustained net capital inflows to the Thai bond market and (2) a relatively - 2 smaller amount of net equity outflows compared with other emerging markets.
Looking ahead, the Committee would monitor developments of economic growth, inflation, and financial stability, together with associated risks, including external risks, the impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak, and the adequacy of fiscal, financial, and credit measures in deliberating monetary policy going forward.
In addition, an ongoing recovery of G3 economies remained dependent on unconventional policy support of central banks, which eventually will need to be withdrawn.
Hence, further monetary policy accommodation in response to low inflation in this context deemed unnecessary.
In this light, the Committee unanimously voted to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.
Second, some saving cooperatives reported strong growth in assets and deposits and in some instances where deposits grew faster than loans invested their surplus liquidity in riskier assets.
These two factors would matter more than the economic growth of travelers’ country.
Volatile global crude oil prices continued to pose uncertainty to the headline inflation projection.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy would expand at a slower rate in 2020 than previous projection and much further below its potential.
Moreover, investors would search for higher yields across almost all asset classes, which could lead to underpricing of risks.
Short-term measures to accelerate the procurement and distribution of appropriate vaccines would prevent the outbreak from being prolonged and reduce economic costs.
Meanwhile, domestic demand expanded close to potential and inflationary pressure subsided.
The MPC saw the need to closely monitor the development of credits extended by both commercial banks and specialized financial institutions to ensure a smooth transition towards a more balanced financial condition, consistent with a sustained economic recovery.
The Committee therefore voted to maintain the policy rate at this meeting to preserve the limited policy space to act at the appropriate and most effective timing to maximize its effectiveness.
Some regional central banks such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and Bank Indonesia additionally cut their policy rates.
Meanwhile, exports were expected to grow but would soften somewhat due partly to (1) the slowdown in China’s production of electronics, following prior acceleration, which might affect exports of Thailand that was part of the supply chain, (2) slowing rubber exports to China as the country pared down its elevated rubber stock and as rubber prices started to decline, and (3) structural difficulties faced by exporters in some industries, in particular automotive given production capacity expansion currently underway in regional countries.
Softer private consumption, particularly of durable goods, was an adjustment from the previous extraordinary growth.
Thai exports are also not in direct competition with Japanese goods due to largely different products.
Japan’s economy contracted from the previous quarter following the slowdown in exports, domestic consumption and investment.
The MPC thus voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 2.00 percent per annum.
On the other hand, two Committee members viewed that such a policy rate cut given the already accommodative monetary policy stance might not lend additional support to economic growth, compared with potentially increased financial stability risks.
Were geopolitical risks to materialize, risky assets in global financial markets might experience a sharp correction in prices.
- The Committee viewed that the depreciation of the baht against the US dollar had been rapid and continuous due to the strengthening of the US dollar but was still in line with regional currencies.
- The Committee assessed that headline inflation would increase temporarily in accordance with projected global energy prices.
As such, the Committee deemed it necessary to closely monitor developments on these fronts given that they might affect household purchasing power in the period ahead.
Financial stability had already been addressed to some extent but there remained pockets of risks that warranted monitoring.
The Committee would thus closely monitor the progress of vaccine development and distribution.
Financial and credit measures should accelerate the distribution of liquidity to and reduce debt burden for businesses and households additionally impacted by the new outbreak in a targeted manner.
On the development of risks related to recent defaults of unrated bonds issued by certain companies, the event appeared to have limited impacts on financial conditions, as most unrated bond issuers that did not default were still able to roll over their debt or to obtain financing from alternative sources.
With the recovery of the Thai economy only just beginning and considering potential implementation delays in government stimulus measures, an accommodative monetary policy stance was deemed appropriate in supporting economic growth in the period ahead.
While overall financial system was resilient, some businesses and households remained fragile and sensitive to the rising living costs and debt burden.
In Japan, economic growth was expected to rebound in the fourth quarter of 2014, while the Japanese yen depreciation would benefit exports.
Corporate bond markets became more stabilized but corporate bond spreads remained high, reflecting credit risks and financing costs.
The MPC agreed that uncertainties surrounding the global economic outlook remained, while the Thai economy continued to expand on the back of strong domestic demand.
The Committee assessed Thailand’s growth outlook to have improved further from the previous assessment mainly due to merchandise exports and tourism as well as continued domestic demand expansion.
These developments prompted investors to continually reduce their holdings of risky assets including investments in emerging market economies, particularly countries with vulnerable economic fundamentals such as Argentina and Turkey.
Exports of goods would decline in line with trading partner economies and the potential impacts of regional supply chain disruptions.
This would be driven mainly by improving domestic demand as well as a resurgence in foreign tourist arrivals, which were expected to reach 19 million in 2023.
This was partly due to high vaccination rates which allowed for more relaxation of containment measures.
Merchandise exports improved due to the recent relocation of production capacity of certain products to Thailand.
Exchange rates of emerging market economies recovered from the previous drop triggered by QE tapering, partly due to credible policy responses in countries such as India, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brazil.
The level of the neutral rate varies according to the economic outlook at each point in time and is thus difficult to pin down precisely.
On exchange rates, the baht exhibited more volatile movements owing to monetary policy in AEs and uncertainties surrounding the Thai economic outlook.
The success of those projects would thus depend on understanding the property market and the ability to meet the needs of highincome and foreign customers.
The Committee thus held a special meeting on 20 March 2020 to assess the rapidly changing outbreak situation and its impacts on the economic outlook and the functioning of financial markets, particularly during the week prior to the special meeting, to consider necessary measures in a timely manner.
However, other members stressed that alternative policy measures cannot substitute for the interest rate as the main instrument of monetary policy in targeting price stability.
Sentiments in the global financial markets improved in the short term due to the prospects of an agreement between the US and China over the phase one trade deal, greater clarity on Brexit, as well as stabilizing economic data in advanced economies.
Additionally, some Thai workers had switched to self-employed jobs with better pay in line with growth of e-commerce sector, which could cause labor shortages and wage pressures to continue for some time.
Merchandise exports would gradually improve in several categories.
Merchandise exports would contract more significantly and would recover at a slower pace than the previous assessment due to (1) the slowdown in trading partner economies and global trade as a result of trade tensions and (2) indirect impacts of increasing Chinese merchandise exports redirected to the region.
Some members saw the need to closely monitor the potential implications of gold exports and imports for current account deficits and Thai baht.
As such, the Committee would monitor and assess these developments closely.
The US economy was expected to gain further traction on the back of private consumption that was supported by labor market conditions, which was approaching full employment, and strong household financial positions.
The impact of high oil prices would therefore not have a significant impact on continued economic expansion.
The baht depreciated against the US dollar, primarily influenced by the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy outlook and domestic developments.
One member deemed a reduction of the policy rate by 0.25 percent per annum as appropriate to support the continuity of growth next year, mainly through boosting labour income and helping reduce household debt burden.
(1) The overall Thai economy gained further traction, with domestic demand improving but not sufficiently strong.
Nonetheless, there were notable risks to this outlook, particularly as the Thai exports might not fully reap the benefits of the global demand recovery and the electronic cycle upturn due to multifaceted structural hurdles.
Meanwhile, core inflation was projected to edge up in tandem with the economic outlook.
The Committee saw urgency in providing a lift to the economy’s long-term potential growth, for example via infrastructure investment, labor upskilling programs, and policies to promote business adaptation to rapidly changing global trends.
The euro area expanded more slowly than expected as a result of higher inflation and the end of stimulus packages in some member countries.
However, it would remain at a level exceeding the historical average.
Growth of saving cooperative assets subsided following moderation in deposits and their members’ equities.
While the overall liquidity in the banking system remained ample, the main challenges were about distributing liquidity in a broad-based manner to businesses and households additionally affected by the new outbreak.
Most economies recorded stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter of 2017, with indicators of manufacturing production and global trade volume reflecting a continued recovery.
The Thai economy would contract in 2020 slightly less than the previous forecast but would expand in 2021 at a lower rate than previously forecasted mainly due to the slow recovery of foreign tourist figures.
Overall monetary policy of trading partners in both advanced and regional economies would be more accommodative to shore up the weakening economic outlook.
The Committee also expected that the Fed’s balance sheet normalization would likely proceed at a gradual pace, which would help facilitate expectations formation and orderly adjustments in financial markets.
The Committee voted 6 to 1 to maintain the policy rate at 2.50 percent.
One member voted to reduce the policy interest rate by 0.25 percent per annum.
However, SMEs in some sectors had yet to fully recover and some low-income households were sensitive to the rising living costs.
The committee therefore revised growth projection for 2014 down, from around 4 percent to around 3 percent.
Moreover, the Committee viewed that household debt was a critical and urgent risk that would require a multi-dimensional resolution.
Core inflation increased slightly mainly due to supply-side pressures—in particular, a gradual rise in fresh food and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) prices.
The direct impacts on the Thai economy were limited since the value of exports to Russia in 2021 was only 0.4 percent of total exports and Russian tourists accounted for only 4 percent of total foreign tourists before the pandemic.
Members discussed the neutral rate that will mark the end of the normalization cycle.
Overall financial conditions remained accommodative and conducive to economic growth as reflected in low levels of real interest rates.
There remained risks surrounding the Chinese economy and financial stability, notwithstanding government measures to support growth including tax reduction for businesses and households, a lower reserve requirement ratio, and some financial stability measures to curb debt in the economy recently.
During the policy discussion, the committee evaluated: (1) The need to maintain accommodative monetary policy given the current economic backdrop; (2) The effectiveness of further monetary policy easing, against potential costs and risks; and (3) The appropriate timing for additional monetary policy easing amid the prevailing high degree of uncertainties.
Some Committee members viewed that macroprudential measures were appropriate for mitigating risks to financial stability.
Nonetheless, the period at which headline inflation was expected to turn positive might be delayed as a result of more subdued demand-side pressure and slower-than-projected global oil price recovery.
Developments in the eurozone economy weighed heavily on investor confidence, prompting a flight to safety, which pushed yields on US, Japanese, and German government bonds to historical lows.
Two members voted to cut the policy rate.
Public spending rose modestly from the previous period, though the magnitude of fiscal stimulus remained smaller than anticipated.
The MPC would remain vigilant in monitoring developments in the global economy as well as progress on domestic restoration efforts and stands ready to take appropriate policy actions.
The risk of a prolonged elevation in global energy prices increased primarily from geopolitical factors.
Furthermore, better-than-expected outturns in the first quarter of 2022 and the likelihood of additional stimulus measures by the Chinese authorities further suggested that the Chinese economy would expand in line with the previous projection.
NPL of some SMEs decreased slightly, especially in exports and services sectors, in line with economic recovery.
Exports could be more negatively affected by weakening global demand in the period ahead, but Thai economy would continue to expand on the back of strong domestic demand under benign inflation outlook.
Examples of such measures could include provision of soft loans for businesses and households with the potential to repay their loans as well as credit guarantees so that loans could be allocated to SMEs more efficiently.
However, there remained downside risks from weaker-than-expected growth in trading partners and fragility in the private sector’s sentiments.
Domestic demand continued to recover and started to be more broad-based.
Meanwhile, downside risks receded on account of the accelerated vaccination progress.
The Thai economy overall continued to recover with a 2023 projected growth of 2.4 percent.
In the bond market, the Thai government bond yields were volatile.
Many members viewed that the real minimum wage in recent history had not changed significantly.
Tighter government regulations led to slowing activity in the real estate sector.
Most dismissed workers in the services sector could not reallocate to the manufacturing sector with improving prospects due to their skill mismatch.
This was because inflation was still expected to continue rising, prices of most goods and services did not fall, and consumption and investment continued to expand.
In addition, the recent upward trend in oil prices reflected underlying global demand due to economic expansion, particularly in the emerging markets.
Meanwhile, the public’s inflation expectations appeared to be more stable given recent improvements in inflation outturns.
The Committee assessed that the Omicron outbreak would affect the economy in early 2022.
Headline inflation rose in August 2018 on account of fresh food prices falling only slightly, given damages to agricultural supply caused by heavy rainfall and given a less severe meat oversupply problem.
Furthermore, the Committee saw the need of supply-side policies to restructure the Thai economy in the post-COVID environment that could change business structures in many industries.
Meanwhile geopolitical risks could affect the fragile economic recovery and warranted close monitoring.
First, the household debt remained at a high level, partly due to structural problems stemming from households’ leveraging behavior and financial institutions’ business practice.
In this regard, the Committee saw the need to closely monitor developments and assess impacts of trade protectionism measures between the US and China—both the negative effects on export and domestic markets as well as the positive effects due to investment diversion that could have a bearing on the manufacturing sector and the labor market in Thailand going forward.
In addition, uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 situation remained.
Up to the date of this meeting, the effect on the Thai financial markets was not evident, but the development, particularly in the exchange rate market, warranted close monitoring in the periods ahead.
The Committee viewed that targeted and timely fiscal measures would be vital to support employment and SMEs and facilitate the economic recovery and preserve potential growth going forward.
This was mainly due to the result of the British referendum (Brexit) that negatively impacted confidence in and stability of global financial markets and consequently economic activities going forward.
The Committee assessed that, despite the recent better-than-expected outturns, the Thai economy would recover slowly and need support from the continued low policy rate.
Such vaccination progress, along with continued financial and fiscal support, would help bolster the global economic recovery.
However, there were still risks from the impact of US trade protectionism measures, particularly from US tariffs on imported cars and auto parts.
Several countries announced measures to cool the real estate sector after a recent acceleration in real estate prices.
Government consumption growth was largely stable, while public investment was expected to grow at a slower pace due to problems related to budget disbursement capabilities as well as potential delays in some state‐owned enterprise (SOE) investment projects.
Moreover, debt servicing capability worsened in those industries exacerbated by exports.
The growth forecast for 2017 was revised up from 3.4 percent to 3.5 percent.
Nevertheless, some Committee members viewed that there remained risks associated with declines in the global oil prices, which could affect exports of petroleum and petro-chemical products, together with risks stemming from uncertainties in US trade policies that continued to warrant close monitoring going forward.
Global inflationary pressure generally remained subdued.
The MPC, however, was satisfied that the BoT’s current exchange rate management framework already entailed systematic steps of policy responses, with specific measures ready to be implemented if and when warranted by the circumstances.
Meanwhile, SMEs had limited access to credits due to higher credit risks.
In addition, some central banks employed additional tools to maintain economic and financial stability, such as macroprudential measures to address risks in the real estate sector, and the accumulation of foreign reserves as a buffer against future shocks, especially if advanced economies were to increase policy rates faster than expected.
Nonetheless, they could not fully offset the weaker momentum of domestic demand and exports of goods amid two main factors restraining economic recovery: (1) the slowdown in the Chinese and other Asian economies which should subject exports of goods to further contraction, although the recent weakening of the baht might help buoy exports to some extent, and (2) domestic drought which could weigh down the already-weak recovery of private consumption through a decline in farm income and private confidence.
In contrast with domestic demand performance, external demand was weaker than previously assessed, as reflected by more-than-expected contraction in exports and export production.
Advanced economies (AEs) would continue to recover in line with the previous projection.
The baht against the US dollar had appreciated owing to expectations of a dovish Fed tightening as well as China’s relaxation of international travel restrictions which would benefit the Thai tourism sector.
Market expectations about the gradual monetary policy normalization in G3 economies and the improved global economic outlook led to capital inflows to bond and equity markets in the region including Thailand.
In this regard, maintaining the current level of monetary policy accommodation would be conducive to returning inflation to target over the medium term, although this process might take some time.
Meanwhile, the Committee would continue to closely monitor the impact of higher interest rates, particularly on vulnerable groups.
Inflation could exceed 5 percent in the second and third quarters, mainly attributed to the low-base effect of crude oil prices and government assistance measures in 2021.
Asian economies would gain further traction on account of domestic demand that was partly driven by the public sector.
Most members thus viewed that more accommodative monetary policy would help alleviate the negative impacts.
Delta variant with more severe symptoms.
Tourism activity was solid and was expanded going forward.
The global economy recovered at a pace close to the previous assessment, with the US economic recovery remaining intact despite being temporarily affected by the unusually cold weather.
These included the rebalancing toward consumption in place of investment as a driver of growth, urbanization policy to expand developments to the inner cities, as well as the promotion of labor mobility to support domestic demand growth.
A slowdown in China’s industrial production resulted in a decline in merchandise export growth of other Asian economies (excluding Japan) through strong manufacturing and trade linkages.
In addition, some Committee members viewed that risks to financial stability had receded somewhat after the implementation of targeted measures and regulatory upgrade by supervisory authorities over the recent periods.
Moreover, deteriorating debt serviceability of SMEs must be monitored.
The government’s Oil Fund would partially mitigate the impact of higher global energy prices on domestic oil prices.
Headline and core inflation were slightly below the previous assessment but remained stable.
Public expenditure would expand, albeit at a slower pace than the previous assessment from the impacts of the delayed Annual Budget Expenditure Act.
For one member, the crisis in Japan called for an interest rate pause.
However, there is a need to monitor financial condition and debt serviceability of certain groups of SMEs.
Global financial conditions remained accommodative as overall government bond yields were still lower than historical averages despite some spike during market correction.
- The Committee noted that monetary policy divergence could cause volatilities in global financial markets.
The search-for-yield behavior in the prolonged low interest rate remained present as reflected in (1) the continued expansion in foreign investment funds (FIFs), although risks were limited as most funds invested in countries with investment grade credit rating, and (2) the increase in the asset size of saving cooperatives following expansion in deposits.
In their view, the current level of monetary policy accommodation would foster the return of headline inflation to target, although the (3) Financial stability remained sound overall, but there were pockets of risks that might lead to the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system.
The appropriate level of real interest rates would be one relevant consideration for monetary policy deliberation looking ahead.
Government spending also picked up following the implementation of the Budget Act.
There remained a risk of inflation staying elevated for longer than expected, as firms could pass on higher costs absorbed in the past and demand-side pressures could pick up with the recovery gaining traction.
This was partly attributable to a resumption of capital inflows into Malaysia following a general election on 5 May.
In addition, political developments, such as the future stability of the EU and the US presidential election, could affect confidence and the economic outlook of Thailand’s trading partners going forward.
Meanwhile, the US economic recovery strengthened thanks to improving economic fundamentals.
This was because most corporate bond issuers raised funds in the short maturity and could still do so as usual.
At the same time, income of agricultural households started to improve as a result of higher agricultural commodity prices, especially rubber, while concerns pertaining to the impact of the drought subsided.
Three members voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points.
The global economy continued to soften and downside risks increased since the last MPC meeting due to the lack of clear resolution of the euro area’s debt crisis.
Nevertheless, the extension of government cost-of-living relief measures by four months would delay, if only partly, pressure on core inflation.
Meanwhile, border trade has been expanding well, commanding a rising share of total exports.
The Committee would continue to closely monitor developments in the financial market and volatilities in the Under the monetary policy framework with objectives of maintaining price stability, supporting sustainable and full-potential economic growth, and preserving financial stability, the Committee judged that the Thai economic recovery would be on track, albeit with risks to inflation.
The global economic recovery was better than expected in the third quarter but significant risks remained regarding new waves of COVID-19 infections going forward.
The baht had depreciated against the US dollar mainly due to the strengthening of the US dollar following concerns about the global economic slowdown and the Fed tightening.
In the Committee’s view, sluggish price dynamics in certain good categories may owe to changing market structure and competition rather than macroeconomic factors.
Headline inflation was expected to gradually rise and return to the target band in the first quarter of 2017, although the timing would depend largely on future developments in oil and fresh food prices.
The exceptions were due to country-specific reasons, such as the Philippines where monetary policy was eased in light of a decline in inflationary pressure on account of domestic factors.
Recovery is expected to be slow with subsequent slow recovery.
The Committee viewed that the global financial markets remain highly uncertain in the period ahead due to factors such as (1) directions of monetary policy in advanced economies and (2) trade protectionism that could further intensify and affect the global economy as well as capital flows, which would then put pressure on asset prices and exchange rates particularly in emerging markets with vulnerable economic fundamentals and high interconnectedness with China and Europe.
Meanwhile, consumer loan growth slowed down in almost all categories except for auto loans, which remained contracting albeit at a slower pace.
The value of merchandise exports would expand at a slower pace due to various factors including the global trade slowdown, trade protectionism measures between the US and China that affected trading partner economies, and the plateauing electronics cycle.
Key risk factors included inflationary pressures, monetary policy tightening by major central banks, as well as the global growth outlook.
- The Committee viewed that the most important issue for the Thai economy at present was to accelerate containment of the outbreak and prevention of the spread, especially the procurement and distribution of effective vaccines in a timely manner.
Countries worldwide continued to announce financial and fiscal measures to alleviate impacts from the COVID-19 outbreak.
This should thus help lift the private sector confidence.
The balance of risks to the global economy remained tilted to the downside, given the risks surrounding China’s economy and financial markets as well as monetary policy divergence among advanced economies.
2) Some pockets of risks in the financial system might pose vulnerabilities to financial stability in the future.
Core inflation edged up in line with the previous assessment.
The Committee thus voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 0.50 percent.
The annual average of headline inflation at 2.5 ± 1.5 percent was set as the medium-term monetary policy target and the target for 2017, as it was deemed conducive to economic growth and price stability as well as the country’s competitiveness.
(2) With heightened inflationary risks, delaying the policy normalization could entail greater costs on the economy going forward.
The Thai economy would contract more than the previous assessment.
Moreover, an additional reduction in the policy rate was unlikely to provide a meaningful boost to the economic recovery at the current juncture.
In addition, the committee expressed concerns over the potential negative impact arising from an extended period of slow economic recovery and weak private sector confidence.
The People’s Bank of China additional measures concurrently such as financial assistance for households or SMEs and wage subsidy schemes.
Price pressure moderated in line with the weaker global economic outlook, and inflation was forecasted to remain close to the midpoint of the target range going forward.
Furthermore, foreign tourist arrivals would increase due to the faster-than-expected relaxation of travel restrictions and the return of the ‘Test & Go’ scheme.
Merchandise exports were expected to achieve higher growth than previously assessed partly due to the relocation of production base to Thailand for some industries.
Short- and medium-term Thai government bond yields rose due to (1) recent economic and inflation outturns which were better than expected and (2) an Foreign investors continued to sell off emerging market short-term bonds.
Economic projection after the third wave of the outbreak Risks and uncertainties going forward Forecast period Vaccination benefits Monetary Policy Report March 2021 Case 1: Additional vaccines procured and distributed (100 million doses in 2021) reduced burden of fiscal relief measures Case 2: Planned procurement and distribution of • Sooner re-opening of the country to foreign tourists (“sandbox vaccines (64.6 million doses) Case 3: Delayed procurement and distribution of measure”) in time for the tourist season of 2021, which would vaccines (lower than 64.6 million doses in 2021) contribute to tourism recovery in Thailand Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 • Reduced long-term impact on businesses and employment ' by 3.0%-5.7% of GDP during 2021-22.
Inflation returned to the target band and continued trending upward.
Given the softening economic outlook and prolonged low interest rates, the Committee viewed that microprudential and macroprudential measures would need to play an increasing role in addressing financial stability risks.
Publication date: 27 July 2011 Transmission from the policy rate to commercial bank rates continued to be effective.
In addition, the ongoing financial and fiscal measures, with the focus on rebuilding and enhancing potential growth, would have an important role.
Moreover, banks would increase caution in extending loans during the economic downturn.
This would squeeze business liquidity and slow down employment in the services sector.
Most Committee members judged that a more accommodative monetary policy stance would contribute to the continuation of economic growth and should support the rise of headline inflation toward target.
The Committee assessed that sustained exchange rate appreciation could result in greater effects on exports and the overall economy amid the slowdown in trading partner economies and increased international competition.
Private consumption was projected to continue expanding but overall purchasing power was still recovering at a gradual pace due to elevated household debt.
The US and EU economies were expected to slow down due to rising inflation and tighter financial conditions as central banks accelerated the pace of policy normalization.
Businesses and the labor markets would be more fragile and recover slowly.
- The Committee expressed concerns over household debts which could cause vulnerabilities in the economy and hinder long-term growth, and deemed it important to press ahead with the implementation of sustainable debt solutions.
As a result, deleveraging could occur only slowly.
Nevertheless, some Committee members viewed that headline inflation might fall below the lower bound of the target in some period and saw the need to assess factors, both cyclical and structural, that might affect the inflation outlook in a comprehensive manner.
Nevertheless, loans extended to smallto-medium enterprises (SMEs) picked up and broadened to a broader range of businesses, which reflected ongoing economic growth.
This could impact Thai financial markets and thus warranted monitoring going forward.
Accommodative monetary policy and government stimulus measures continued to underpin economic growth.
Five members deemed maintaining the policy rate at 2.75 percent per annum as justified, with varying rationales.
The Committee anticipated that major central banks would maintain very accommodative monetary policy for a longer period of time (‘low for longer’), which could amount to additional capital inflows into emerging markets including Thailand.
Meanwhile, the Committee expected public expenditure to continue to play an important role in boosting economic growth, although public investment would likely moderate somewhat due mainly to limited budget disbursement by some state-owned enterprises.
The outlook for both the US and Europe improved from the services sector.
Advanced economies pursued accommodative monetary policy to safeguard economic recovery while emerging markets tightened to maintain price stability and are expected to accelerate the pace of interest rate normalization in 2011.
Second, regarding the impact on the global economy of the United Kingdom’s referendum on European Union (EU) membership, the Committee assessed that the vote to exit the EU (Brexit) would create significant volatility in global financial markets in the short run and would adversely affect the UK’s trade and investment in the longer run.
However, going forward, overall public spending was projected to expand at a slower rate for several reasons.
The Thai economy expanded less than expected in the third quarter of 2013 from both private and public spending.
These measures would foster quality growth despite headwinds from uncertainties pertaining to trade protectionist measures.
Credit rating agencies have also reaffirmed Thailand credit rating and deemed the Thai economic fundamentals to be strong.
One Committee member voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 percent.
It would therefore be essential that financial regulatory authorities coordinate more closely to ensure that macroprudential measures could be implemented in an appropriate and timely manner.
Nonetheless, there was a view that a potential escalation of the territorial dispute between China and Japan might pose a risk to the region’s growth momentum.
This would include further debt restructuring, as well as responsible lending measures to address persistent debt problems.
Risks to the global economy increased relative to the previous meeting as doubts about the ability of Greece to remain in the eurozone grew and the Spanish economy became increasingly affected by the growing fragility of its banking system.
Meanwhile, the current account balance was projected to register only a small surplus in 2021, declining significantly to 1.2 billion US dollars, due to (1) reduction in the number of foreign tourists, (2) increasing import prices in line with global crude oil prices, (3) increase in net gold imports given declining gold prices, and (4) higher transportation costs in the services balance caused by shipping container shortage.
Although, under the baseline scenario, the Omicron outbreak would not derail the overall Thai economic recovery, the outbreak situation remained highly uncertain and could have larger and more prolonged impacts than expected.
In addition, some Committee members noted that the impacts would be more pronounced in certain sectors such as manufacturing, construction, and services.
Nonetheless, recovery continued to be weighed by financial health of both real and financial sectors.
Likewise, central banks in several other countries also signaled policy rate increases, particularly where economies have returned to pre-COVID levels and inflation has been above the central bank’s target.
Risks to the global economic recovery increased.
The global economic recovery would be supported by the COVID-19 vaccination progress, additional large-scale economic stimulus measures in the US, and improving exports in accordance with the global economic recovery.
The Committee viewed that recent liquidity strains in the Thai financial markets, especially the bond markets, were partly due to tighter liquidity in global financial markets, despite overall stability of the Thai financial system.
Although risks to inflation have increased, the global economy maintained its recovery momentum as reflected by improvements in the global Purchasing Managers’ Index, particularly in the G3 economies where recovery had become more evident.
The Committee would therefore closely monitor the situation and its implications on capital flows and financial markets.
With monetary policy working by stimulating credit, policy easing could forestall the ongoing deleveraging process and keep debt levels elevated.
The momentum would come from domestic demand, especially private consumption that was driven by the continuation of favorable labor market conditions across almost all sectors.
Private consumption expanded at a gradual pace following more broad-based recovery in farm income across different regions in Thailand.
Nonetheless, this member saw a need to carefully assess incoming economic data in the months ahead to ascertain whether the slowdown in domestic demand and exports during the first two months were temporary or persistent.
Therefore, the Committee saw the need to monitor the income recovery and financial positions of the vulnerable groups.
The Committee would closely monitor the risks arising from corporate bonds especially those issued by businesses severely affected by the COVID-19, which could be downgraded to non-investment grade.
Some investors slowed their sell-off of Thai stabilize the Thai financial markets.
Exports of goods looked to recover at a rate close to the previous projection, but with higher downside risks from a slowdown in trading partners’ economies, notably China.
Private consumption and investment should recover on the back of improving private confidence and fiscal relief measures including repayments of overdue debts under the rice pledging scheme.
The increase in headline inflation was mainly driven by cost-push inflation, while signs of demand-pull inflation were not yet observed as the Thai economy was still in the recovery stage.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) had only depreciated by around 2 percent since the start of 2022, indicating that the baht movements were in line with those of trading partner currencies and thus did not affect Thailand’s competitiveness.
The Committee would thus closely monitor such development and its impact on corporate financing.
First, prices of energy and commodity, particularly chemical fertilizers, and animal feed, could remain elevated for longer than previously estimated due to prolonged sanctions against Russia.
In addition, overall financial conditions remained accommodative and conducive to economic growth.
In addition, potential trade retaliations from US key trading partners would have adverse implications for global trade going forward.
Fiscal measures should help alleviate the adverse impacts and support the economy by more actively addressing vulnerabilities in the labor market and business sector in an adequate and timely manner.
Looking forward, headline inflation was projected to slowly increase, given the recovery in domestic demand, higher oil prices, the excise tax increase, and the impacts of regulations on immigrant workers.
The Committee assessed that headline inflation in 2021 would increase to 1.2 percent mainly on account of the increase in crude oil prices, and would temporarily spike in the second quarter of 2021 due to the low base effect last year.
Consequently, asset prices in the global financial markets became less volatile.
Most members were also in agreement that the policy rate should be kept on hold to preserve the policy space for future use, while some members continued to see the need to monitor risks to economic and financial stability, which might arise from search for yield behavior under the prolonged low interest rate environment.
Overall, most Committee members assessed that the decline in headline inflation over the past two months was a result of temporary supply-side factors.
With regard to domestic demand, private spending was further driven by improved merchandise exports that increasingly lifted household income as well as government measures that were directly aimed at boosting private spending.
However, given low demand-pull inflation pressures, signs of acceleration in prices of goods had yet to be seen.
On the other hand, the postponement of the reinstatement of the oil excise tax would help lessen the effect of rising global oil prices on domestic inflation.
Going forward, the Committee concurred that sufficiently accommodative monetary policy remained necessary given that economic growth was still in the early stages and not yet broad-based.
The financial positions of some households remained fragile from the impact of COVID-19 as their incomes had yet to fully recover.
Benefits from the export expansion were limited to some business sectors and still did not lend support to income and employment in the broader economy.
These uncertainties subsequently impinged on economic activities, especially production and merchandise exports.
However, merchandise exports would later improve during the second half of 2019 due partly to (1) redirected orders from China as well as relocation of production base in some industries to Thailand, and (2) exports of Thai electronic parts benefitting from infrastructure investment pertaining to 5G technology in foreign countries.
The Thai baht depreciated and bond yields rose briefly after the major political change on 22 May 2014, before stabilizing following clearer direction in public policy management and measures to support the economy.
The Committee noted that rising public debt in the medium term would not pose a significant risk to fiscal sustainability.
The Committee viewed that, should economic expansion continue and inflation move within the target, the need for currently extra accommodative monetary policy would start to be gradually reduced, while the need to have policy space to cushion against possible risks to growth in the future would be increasing.
A few members noted that shortages of raw material and labor were constraining some sectors and, in the context of the elevated inflation expectations, would drive pass-through of costs to final goods and services prices in the period ahead.
Therefore, a broader range of indicators would be needed to reflect the recovery across sectors and income groups, particularly labor market indicators such as the number of unemployed and underemployed workers, as well as income loss.
Overall financial conditions remained supportive of fund mobilization, which should expand at a pace consistent with the economic recovery.
The real estate sector would experience a decline in both domestic and external demand.
In the monetary sector, private credit growth continued to accelerate.
However, there remained a need to monitor risks arising from higher production and living costs which could affect the Thai economic recovery.
Advanced economies were expected to expand mainly on the back of private consumption.
In addition, external and domestic uncertainties would remain high in the period ahead.
The Committee would thus monitor factors that could affect crude oil and fresh food prices, particularly a potentially intensified drought.
The committee saw failure to negotiate public debt resolution in the US as a key risk that could have implications for global financial market volatility going forward.
The Committee would closely monitor exchange rate developments as well as potential impacts on the economy going forward.
Commercial banks had robust capital fund and loan loss provision levels, capable of absorbing of relief measures to assist retail borrowers affected by COVID-19 and expedited commercial banks’ proactive debt restructuring for households and businesses, to the extent that the results are substantial, and credit extension under various measures previously announced.
For example, unemployed workers could take a long time to re-enter the labor force.
In the period ahead, the Committee viewed that inflation would face uncertainties from oil price fluctuations and weather conditions.
Looking ahead, exports of goods should gradually improve in line with a moderate recovery in major economies.
The Committee engaged in a discussion regarding monetary policy transmission after the policy rate cut.
In addition, this new ecosystem would allow Thai investors to invest abroad more easily and in a larger amount, increase flexibility in foreign exchange risk management for entrepreneurs, and promote more competitions among foreign exchange service providers.
This would increase debt rollover risks as financial conditions became tightened.
Transmission from the policy rate to commercial bank rates continued to be effective.
The euro area economy continued to recover driven by domestic demand that benefited from accommodative financing conditions, rising employment, reduced political uncertainties after the results of the French presidential election, and improved exports growth.
As global price pressure softened in line with weaker global demand, a few central banks, such as in South Korea, China, as well as the eurozone, eased policy with a view to containing downside risks to growth.
Furthermore, a program is established to resolve persistent debt by converting high-interest revolving personal loans into lower-interest installment loans with terms and conditions enabling debtors to repay within 5 years.
Risks associated with the US economic and foreign trade policies as well as China’s economic structural reform remained in line with the previous assessments but still warranted close monitoring.
Moreover, the prolonged low interest rate could affect savings going forward.
Merchandise exports were projected to contract slightly this year, weighed by subdued Chinese demand, global electronic cycle, and a severe El Niño episode.
First, foreign tourist figures were revised downward due to Thailand’s slower-than-expected reopening plan and the international travel restriction policy in source countries, particularly China.
As it became apparent that the rate lift-off would not occur in the October meeting, volatility in the global financial markets subsided.
While the Federal Reserve remained on the path of monetary policy normalization, concerns regarding low inflation led market participants to anticipate a more gradual hike in the federal funds rate.
Meanwhile, the promulgation of the Public Procurement and Supplies Management Act B.E.
The Committee assessed that the overall financial institution system remained sound.
The Committee noted that the decline in short- term yields had no bearing on the future monetary policy stance which would be primarily conditioned on the outlook of inflation, economic growth, and financial stability.
Demandpull inflationary pressures remained subdued given that income had just begun to recover.
The commercial banks’ lending and borrowing rates were lowered in response to the policy rate cut.
Thus, there was a need to monitor rollover risks especially for non-investment grade or unrated bonds.
Nevertheless, search-for-yield behavior that led to underpricing of risks still persisted in the prolonged low interest rate environment.
Given that the economic recovery would be restrained in the period ahead, monetary policy should be further eased at this meeting to benefit the economy in a timely manner as well as to reinforce the previously announced fiscal, financial, and credit measures.
The MPC therefore voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 2.75 percent per annum.
However, there remained a risk of the elevated global energy prices persisting longer than expected.
Over the long term, climate change would put pressure on raw food inflation, making it higher and more persistent.
In addition, whenever appropriate, as at this meeting, a policy rate increase would help build policy space.
The MPC will closely monitor evolving developments, and stand ready to implement appropriate policy as warranted.
Nevertheless, the Fed funds rate lift-off was likely to have limited impact on domestic financial markets under a gradual normalization path.
Additional economic indicators, such as incomes of self-employed workers in non-agricultural sectors, should thus be monitored for better insights.
Second, the labor market was more severely and extensively affected than expected.
Market confidence improved temporarily before declining from concern over sovereign debt problems in Spain and Italy.
Private consumption would thus have to be monitored going forward, particularly after the effects of this year’s government measures dissipated.
Meanwhile, loans extended by specialized financial institutions (SFIs) and non-banks were projected to rise.
However, government consumption would increase due to the budget restructure with an increase in the share of current expenditure for fiscal year 2020.
The depreciation of the baht against the US dollar was rapid and continuous due to the strengthening of the US dollar but was still in line with regional currencies.
The Thai economy would continue to recover at 3.3 percent in 2022 and 3.8 percent in 2023, down from 3.3 percent and 4.2 percent previously projected.
Nevertheless, the rise in oil prices had a small impact on consumption given government measures to mitigate the adverse impact in many countries.
Nevertheless, merchandise export volume, after excluding gold, still contracted from the same period last year due to the slowdown in trading partners’ economies and prevailing structural problems.
The MPC assessed that the surge in oil and commodity prices resulted in increased inflationary pressure but would not impede continued growth of the global and Thai economies going forward.
Core inflation was projected to remain largely unchanged at low levels.
Demand-pull factors include: 1) a diminishing output gap as output growth neared potential while producers have revised their inflation expectations upwards for some time.
In this regard, the Committee would closely monitor Thailand’s economic and financial developments and stand ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery, while maintaining economic and financial stability.
Second, regarding shock absorption capacity and the global recovery outlook, the global economy would likely enter into a recession given that the COVID-19 outbreak affected behavior and lifestyle of the population.
Headline inflation would remain at a high level throughout 2022, largely unchanged from the previous forecast.
This upward revision was due to the better-than-expected outturn in the first quarter, as well as better-than-expected improvements in merchandise and service exports, which partly offset the impact of delays in public investment.
Looking ahead, the overall economic outlook remained uncertain.
- The Committee assessed that the Thai economy had bottomed out in the third quarter of 2021 and would continue to recover, but uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook remained high.
However, the Thai economy still encountered increased downside risks arising from impacts from trade protectionism that could be greater than expected as well as from geopolitical risks.
In addition, the Committee viewed that the extended period of subdued exports could negatively affect employment in some industries, while the ability of the service sector and other industries to provide employment cushion might be more limited should the economic recovery be slower than expected.
Hence, oversupply and time-togo still rose.
Exports of manufacturing goods expanded more than expected, partly due to special factors such as the consolidation of production location of certain products to Thailand and an increase in demand for some of Thailand’s export goods.
The Committee would closely monitor inflation developments and continue to communicate with public to anchor public’s inflation expectations within the target band going forward.
These would include, in particular, uncertainties in the direction of the US economic policies under the new administration, together with the timing of, or policy measures to be used for, further monetary easing by central banks in major advanced economies.
The majority of the committee saw further room to ease monetary policy in order to mitigate downside risks and support an economic recovery, given benign inflation outlook.
Private consumption picked up on the back of growth in income and employment in the service sector.
In addition, the new issuance of government bonds related to the 2-trillion -baht public investment was expected to be further delayed after parliament dissolution.
The overall growth outlook for Thailand’s trading partner economies improved.
Meanwhile, additional monetary policy easing by major central banks prompted investors to increase holdings of emerging market assets, including those of Thailand.
Meanwhile, despite some slowdown in the investment of saving cooperatives, there was an increase in the interconnectedness within the system of saving cooperatives.
The Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER), however, depreciated due to a rapid appreciation in the Japanese yen.
Driven by a strong post-flood economic recovery, foreign investment in equity and bond markets increased, pushing medium- and long-term government bond yields lower.
Meanwhile, overall growth in asset sizes of saving cooperatives slowed down relative to the previous period.
Real estate developers thus launched sales promotion for completed condominium projects as well as delayed opening new projects.
The Committee came to an agreement on the following considerations.
Overall sentiments in global financial markets remained sound on the back of the positive global economic outlook and gradual interest rate hikes of major advanced economies, although volatility heightened in some periods along with uncertainties from the appointment of the new Fed chairman and the progress in US tax reform.
Long-term Thai government bond yields declined in line with long-term US government bond yields as a result of more accommodative monetary policy stance.
Looking ahead to 2024 and 2025, growth was expected to become more balanced and reach 3.2 and 3.1 percent, respectively, excluding the estimated impact of the government’s digital wallet scheme.
In this circumstance, commercial banks’ ability to adjust their interest rates in line with official policy rate may have been limited.
This was evident in a persistently high asset growth among saving cooperatives, as some large saving cooperatives increasingly engaged in taking deposits and lending to other cooperatives, as well as increased investment in both equities and debt instruments.
This is attributable to (1) the 10-year US Treasury yield now exceeding 3 percent, a four-year high, thanks to increased US inflation expectations and stronger US economic performance relative to other countries especially Europe, (2) uncertainties surrounding US trade policies, and (3) geopolitical risks.
Inflation should pick up next year in line with stronger domestic demand, additional impetus from government economic policies and higher minimum wages, as well as higher food prices due to El Niño.
Nonetheless, upside risks to inflation remained from the possibility of higher oil prices resulting from unrest in the Middle East, as well as changes in the excise tax on oil and a higher contribution rate to the oil fund.
In addition, the economic policy of the new government, such as the minimum wage increase, will add to inflationary pressure.
This was due to low foreign participation in the long-term Thai government bond market compared with other regional countries, as well as the continuous underweighting of foreign investment in Thai equities over recent periods.
The global economy recovered at a slower pace than previously assessed, due mainly to a slowdown in the Chinese and Asian economies, and was subject to higher risks stemming from heightened volatility in China’s financial markets and uncertainty regarding the timing of Fed’s rate hike.
Headline inflation for the full year 2022 was expected to exceed the target range, reaching 4.9 percent, driven primarily by rising energy prices and the pass-through of food prices.
In addition, a pre-condition for macroprudential tools to be effective, is that the policy interest rate is first set at an appropriate level for maintaining macroeconomic stability; various studies found that interest rate differential was a less important determinant of capital inflows when compared to other factors such as investors’ assessment of the economic outlook and expectations of future currency movements and; the relatively low interest rate environment, investors can be induced to search for higher returns as well as speculate in riskier assets, especially in real estate and equity markets.
Coupled with lingering concerns over subdued inflation, the impacts might prompt additional monetary easing by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan in order to buttress the recovery of their respective economies.
Global inflationary pressure remained low.
However, looking ahead, commercial banks needed to prepare for the uncertain COVID-19 situation and a deteriorated debt servicing capability of businesses and households.
The Committee assessed that the Thai economy continued to gain traction on the back of domestic demand despite a slowdown in external demand.
Inflationary pressure may edge up going forward due to supply constraints, higher labor costs, and greater cost pass-through given entrepreneurs’ diminishing ability to hold down prices.
Nevertheless, rising inflationary pressure prompted many countries, especially those in Asia, to pursue tighter monetary policy to anchor inflation expectations.
Also, some members reiterated the necessity of continued monitoring of the household debt situation, as the rate of new debt creation still outpaced income growth.
In contrast, accelerating inflation in the US and euro area would probably not give rise to significant second-round inflation given the degree of slack in these economies.
First, household leverage increased, driven particularly by auto-leasing and personal loans.
2) The Thai economy continued to expand, supported by robust private consumption and investment as well as fiscal stimulus measures, which were expected to help sustain growth momentum up to the first half of 2013.
Another was a potential deterioration in soil fertility following severe dry season.
The majority of market participants surveyed expected the current MPC meeting to result in a rise in the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points while some expected an overall rise of 0.50-1.00 percentage points in 2011.
Meanwhile, both equity and bond inflows into the region accelerated on the back of improving global economic outlook.
However, subsequently more subdued outflows and lower-than-expected government bond issuance announcement for the third quarter helped lower yields to some extent.
For agricultural households, although agricultural output expanded, purchasing power started to improve only in product groups that experienced higher prices, such as jasmine rice and cassava.
However, tourism was affected more than expected by recent measures to curb illegal tour operators.
Regarding exports of services, the number of foreign tourists would recover at a slower rate than the previous assessment due to new waves of outbreak in some countries and the highly uncertain protocols in admitting foreign tourists to Thailand.
Total corporate financing and household credits also continued to expand, although certain businesses faced limitations in gaining access to credit.
Most market participants expected the MPC to maintain the policy rate at this meeting, given lower downside risks to growth following the political resolution.
Private investment was expected to expand due to the relocation of production base to Thailand and PPP infrastructure investment projects which showed signs of continued progress.
Furthermore, there had not been an indication of broad-based increases in the prices of goods and services.
With the balance of risks tilting towards growth rather than inflation, the MPC saw further room to ease monetary policy and cushion the economy against downside risks to growth.
Nevertheless, the Committee remained concerned over financial positions of vulnerable households and businesses, and supported holistic and sustainable debt resolution.
The baht initially depreciated after the policy interest rate cut and the announcement of the relaxation of foreign exchange regulations.
Meanwhile, large corporates increased their fundraising in the prolonged low interest rate environment, representing a larger share of the bond market and commercial bank loans.
The committee noted a recent surge of bond inflows into Malaysia especially in the first two weeks of May, while there were net bond outflows from the Thai market.
This gradual policy rate hike would help facilitate a sustained economic recovery without creating upward pressures on inflation.
In particular, business model adjustments as well as the upskilling and reskilling of labor to suit the post-COVID environment should be facilitated.
The main exception was the manufacturing sector, where normal production levels were expected to resume in the third quarter, paving the way for a steady recovery in exports.
Three members voted to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 percent.
If the US economy exhibited robust recovery with rising inflation, US monetary policy could be normalized faster than expected.
Increased risks to the global economic recovery might affect Thai exports of goods.
The impact of the Omicron outbreak on economic activities was expected to be more contained than previous waves.
The Committee assessed that risks to trading partners’ growth were largely unchanged and would remain tilted to the downside due mainly to uncertainties pertaining to US trade protectionism and retaliatory measures by US trading partners that could be intensified, as well as geopolitical risks that could cause volatilities in financial and commodity markets, especially oil prices.
However, NPLs of overall consumer loans remained stable, except NPLs of mortgage loans which continued to increase.
Financial stability remained sound overall but there remained a need to monitor some pockets of risks that might pose vulnerabilities to financial stability in the future.
The ECB also announced a plan for additional liquidity injection into the financial system through targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs).
Meanwhile, fiscal stimulus measures should be expedited.
Risks to the inflation projection tilted to the downside consistent with the risks to economic projection.
Moreover, with the saving-investment gap, investment still had the potential to expand further.
While these measures were in a smaller scale than those in the past, they were designed to be more targeted and taken into account financial stability consideration.
Thailand’s trading partners performed as previously assessed.
Nevertheless, investment in the manufacturing sector would likely expand, as reflected in growing imports of capital goods in the manufacturing machinery category.
These included (1) a surplus in the services balance attributed to net tourism receipts following the Chinese government’s policy supporting Chinese outbound travels, (2) a surplus in the trade balance due to a decline in the value of imports on account of a significant fall in oil prices since late 2014, and (3) the low level of domestic investment.
The Bank of Korea also cut the policy rate, in order to shore up domestic demand.
The economy expanded in the fourth quarter by more than previously assessed largely from stronger-than-expected domestic demand, on the back of both private consumption and investment.
The Committee therefore voted 5 to 2 to cut the policy rate by 0.25 percentage point from 1.75 to 1.50 percent.
Asian economies improved on the back of better export performance and a pick-up in the Chinese economy, as well as continued buoyant domestic demand.
The European Central Bank (ECB) would hold its policy rate at least through the end of 2019, which was longer than market expectations.
Most cases were from resulting in lower economic activities in all regions.
Core inflation increased mainly due to higher cost passthrough.
However, favorable labor market conditions would bolster private consumption and drive the economy going forward.
The Committee thus revised down the headline inflation forecast for 2016 from 0.8 percent to 0.6 percent, and lowered this year’s core inflation forecast slightly from 0.9 percent to 0.8 percent.
The Nominal Effective Exchange Rate baht’s movement was in line with the regional currencies.
The Committee will closely monitor the issue of China’s economic slowdown, global financial markets, and the impact of fiscal stimulus measures on the economic recovery.
The Federal Reserve was expected to hold its policy rate through the end of 2019.
On the one hand, some members took the view that the changing nature of the global supply chain had resulted in more intense price competition, as it gave the customers more bargaining power.
The Committee viewed that the economy would experience increased uncertainties from domestic and external factors that could affect economic growth in the period ahead.
The Committee therefore voted 5 to 2 to reduce the policy rate by 25 basis points from 1.75 to 1.50 percent.
Exports of goods were subjected to the more uncertain global economic outlook.
Furthermore, global factors such as ongoing Brexit negotiations and re-intensifying tensions between the US and China also affected investor confidence.
Under the worse scenario, the Omicron outbreak would be widespread despite efforts to accelerate vaccination rates.
The Committee expected the Thai economy in 2019 and 2020 to expand at a lower rate than estimated in June 2019 mainly due to merchandise exports contraction which started to affect domestic demand.
Thus, it was important to preserve policy space for extended by Specialized Financial Institutions (SFIs), maintaining a low policy interest rate for an extensive period could accumulate greater risks to financial stability.
These factors could continue to pressure the baht in the period ahead.
By reducing pressures on the baht and addressing structural problems in the Thai foreign exchange market through expediting the new foreign exchange ecosystem, capital flows would become more balanced.
Moreover, clarity and continuity of government policies should lend further support to private consumption and investment.
The MPC therefore voted 3 to 2 to maintain the policy rate at 3.0 percent per annum.
Regarding mortgage loans, the share of new mortgage loans with high loan-to-income (LTI) ratios was still rising.
The Thai economy would expand at a lower rate than previous projection and further below its potential due to the contraction in merchandise exports that increasingly affected the labor market.
In particular, labor upskilling and infrastructure investment to support the digital economy should be promptly pursued to help support sustainable economic recovery in the long term.
The deterioration in debt service ability was reflected by rising nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios, especially in the categories of SME loans and credit card loans.
The MPC will closely monitor developments in financial markets and implications for private sector’s financing conditions in the periods ahead.
However, risks to the growth forecast tilted more toward the downside with possibilities that growth outturns could be lower than the baseline projection mainly due to external factors.
Tourism and private consumption would continue to gain traction thanks to the return of Chinese tourists.
However, some additional policies should be expedited to distribute liquidity to those affected in a targeted and continuous manner.
Maintaining the policy rate at a low level for an extended period could also create financial stability risks in the long run.
Movements of the baht somewhat diverged from those of the yen and gold prices due to risk-on sentiments following better prospects in trade negotiations between the US and China as well as Brexit negotiation.
One member noted that interest rate differential played a part in affecting capital inflows, though the strength of this relationship varies over different phases of the business cycles and with financial market sentiments.
Going forward, some sectors would experience a rapid recovery, especially tourism-related businesses such as hotels, restaurants, and commerce.
External stability risks edged up somewhat, especially for those with a high reliance on exports of goods using medium or lower technologies.
There was also a need to monitor the growth outlook of Thailand’s trading partners as this could affect Thai exports, especially in 2023.
Nevertheless, the overall impact on the financial institution system and the bond markets would be limited, as financial positions of commercial banks remained robust and were capable of withstanding potential deterioration in loan quality in the future.
Meanwhile, domestic demand of Asian economies weakened in line with dampening consumer confidence.
In any case, the Committee assessed that trade protectionist measures between the US and China were a significant risk and remained highly uncertain, and deemed it necessary to closely monitor developments with a more comprehensive analysis of the impacts.
The minimum wage increase and changing structure of the Thai labor market should thus be monitored going forward.
The value of merchandise exports improved from the previous assessment mainly on the back of rising global crude oil prices, while export volume would expand at a slightly better pace than previously estimated.
This was owing to a smaller-than-expected impact of China’s containment measures on the Thai exporting sector, as well as gradual easing of supply chain disruptions.
These would result in higher costs of goods and living expenses, a dampened domestic purchasing power, as well as a slowdown in external demand.
Long-term Thai government bond yields rose in tandem with US Treasury yields.
The Committee assessed that these increasing risks to global growth could weigh on Thai exports, and that warranted close monitoring.
However, impacts in agricultural and household sectors were judged to be less, as most of immigrant workers in these sectors had already registered.
Public expenditure would likely grow at a slower pace than previously assessed due to (1) the expected delay in the enactment of the Annual Expenditure Budget Act, B.E.
Inflationary pressure and their expectations were projected to remain stable in the short-run, but there are upside risks stemming from rising global oil prices, a pick-up in domestic demand in the latter half of this year, and government stimulus measures, especially the minimum wage hike which comes into effect in April 2012.
The financial system would be more vulnerable.
Furthermore, some saving cooperatives accepted deposits from associate members in addition to regular members.
The Chinese and Asian economies have expanded well on the back of strong domestic demand and improving prospects of exports, together with further support from Japanese government stimulus measures.
The Committee viewed that financial markets would remain highly uncertain going forward due primarily to (1) Thailand’s political uncertainties, (2) an unsettled outcome of trade negotiations between the US and China, and (3) the global economic slowdown.
(3) Agricultural products such as rice saw diminishing market shares, from 25 percent in 2003 to 13 percent currently.
However, the Committee viewed that uncertainties regarding highly volatile fresh food prices remained an important factor.
The global economy expanded at a slower pace compared with the assessment in the previous meeting due mainly to weaker Asian economies, in particular China.
Financial stability remained sound overall but there remained pockets of risks that warranted monitoring.
Private investment particularly in machinery and equipment continued to improve, as reflected in signs of increasing imported capital goods and domestic machinery sales across various industries.
The Committee expected volatility in international capital flows and exchange rates to persist in the period ahead.
Farm income was gradually improving, although some households were affected by declining agricultural prices.
Most central banks have kept their policy rates unchanged given steady improvement in domestic demand.
Asian exports should nonetheless rebound in the fourth quarter this year, lifted by an expected global electronic cycle recovery.
Despite moderating merchandise export growth attributable to impacts from trade protectionism measures between the US and China, tourism started to show signs of improvement thanks to a gradual rise in the number of Chinese tourists.
On exchange rates, the baht appreciated rapidly against the US dollar over the recent period on the back of improved investor confidence regarding the global economy and greater capital inflows reinvesting in the debt and equity markets.
SMEs were particularly affected more than large corporates.
In their policy deliberation, the Committee discussed key considerations underpinning policy decision.
Only midpoint of the target range.
The US economy, in particular, saw continued strengthening of labor market conditions towards full employment as well as a firmer recovery in investment.
The recovery of European economies remained weak, but continued monetary policy easing by the European Central Bank was likely to help sustain economic growth.
The present context of sustained economic expansion should provide an opportunity for building up policy space in readiness for uncertainties looking forward.
At the same time, the Committee also discussed the room to reduce the policy rate further (policy space), as going forward, there remained uncertainties in both the internal and external environment.
The Federal Reserve (Fed) was expected to delay its further rate hike due to growing concerns over the economic outlook and downward pressure of inflation.
In this case, herd immunity would be delayed to the end of 2022 and the Thai economy would return to the pre-COVID level at the beginning of 2023.
The Committee viewed that these developments reflected a stronger economic expansion.
The Committee nonetheless agreed to closely monitor the impact of the new government policies and assess their inflation implications, including through wages, firms’ price setting behavior, and the public medium-term inflation expectations.
Average lead time for advance order of Freight costs continued to rise, affected, resulting in delay in semiconductor would likely increase to reflecting a container shortage problem product deliveries.
Moreover, there remained the need to monitor trend of short-term financing by businesses, especially those in sectors with long term investment projects which could result in possible maturity mismatch.
The economy in the third quarter of 2014 was expected to expand less than previously assessed, on account of slow recovery in domestic demand and weak exports.
The Committee assessed the Thai economy to continue gaining traction on the back of domestic demand, while external demand slightly slowed down.
The numbers of tourist arrivals for 2022 and 2023 were revised upward by 1 million and projected to be at the tourists would come from ASEAN and other Asian nations.
The Committee viewed that the continued accommodative monetary policy would help support overall economic growth, and thus voted to maintain the policy rate.
Thus, policy normalization should be implemented at an appropriate timing and in a timely and gradual manner to avoid such tradeoff.
This was due particularly to virus mutations which could reduce vaccine efficacy.
- The Committee viewed that inflation risks were still substantial, mainly from the cost pass-through.
Nonetheless, fiscal policy implementation in several advanced economies could be constrained by smaller fiscal policy space as reflected in a historically high public debt-to-GDP ratio.
Consequently, the recovery of exports was expected to be gradual and would likely weigh on household income and spending as well as business investment.
Looking ahead, Japan’s economy should recover slowly given lingering domestic structural constraints.
The financial system remained sound despite increasing vulnerabilities given the economic conditions affected by the COVID-19 situation.
The Committee assessed economic expansion to have become more broad-based.
(3) Bond markets have been functioning normally.
AE central banks appeared set to be on a hiking cycle to curb rising inflation as their economies had returned to or exceeded the pre-pandemic levels.
Furthermore, the ability of businesses in certain sectors to absorb rising costs had diminished, particularly those with large shares of fuel and commodities in their cost structure, including transportation, petroleum and chemicals, and construction.
The Thai economy continued to recover at a gradual pace, mainly driven by effective disbursement of the fiscal budget as expected and a steady expansion in the tourism sector.
Stakeholder engagement New wave of COVID-19 outbreak Not as severe as the previous wave but exacerbated financial positions e.g.
Nevertheless, credit assistance measures partially relieved liquidity constraints of businesses and households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nevertheless, the Committee assessed that more accommodative monetary policy in the recent period would support the rise of the headline inflation toward target within the second half of 3) Some financial system risks had been partly addressed by the implemented macroprudential measures.
In addition, financial institutions should accelerate debt restructuring in a sustainable manner.
The Committee would stand ready to utilize an appropriate mix of available policy tools in order to support the economic recovery and ensure financial stability.
Macroprudential and microprudential measures could only address risks in connection with loans and financial institutions under loans.
Fiscal measures would play a crucial role in driving the economic recovery amid high uncertainties.
The MPC judged that growth momentum in the fourth quarter was stronger than expected and domestic demand outlook should continue to be strong, supported by a number of favourable factors.
In addition, the Committee viewed that raising the public debt ceiling to 70 percent of GDP would allow the government to continue expediting additional policies to support economic recovery.
However, it remained essential to monitor economic developments, especially the recovery of exports and government measures.
US dollar liquidity tightened in some instances but did not cause significant movements in global financial markets.
The Committee viewed that global financial markets would remain highly uncertain due primarily to (1) monetary policy direction of advanced economies, (2) progress on trade negotiations between the US and China, and (3) Brexit and political situation in the euro area that could intensify and affect the global economy as well as cross-border capital flows, which in turn could exert pressures on asset prices and regional exchange rates.
On balance, financial conditions remained supportive of fund mobilization by the private sector and ongoing recovery, as bank lending and corporate bond issuances continued expanding.
Trading partner economies continued to expand, with projected growth rates of 2.6 and 2.7 percent in 2024 and 2025, respectively.
Inflationary pressure has risen slightly in line with improving economic outlook and an increase in oil prices.
Next year’s global economic expansion was projected to be slightly higher than this year, and the probability of tail events had diminished thanks to additional policy measures undertaken by the G3 economies.
Although China’s slowdown might delay the recovery, the effect was expected to be marginal, especially for the US economy which was supported by improvements in the labor market and consumer confidence.
Meanwhile, many industries had planned to increase their business investment in Thailand, which would also support export growth in the period ahead.
The Committee would therefore closely monitor the impacts of these regulations especially on the private consumption outlook, as some immigrant workers had left the country, and the impacts on the inflation outlook due to a possible wage rise as labor market tightened.
The Committee viewed that the Thai economic growth would encounter uncertainties mainly from the external front that could affect the growth prospect going forward.
The MPC would continue to monitor both core and headline inflation as usual, and communicate its policy deliberations in terms of both measures with increasing emphasis on the headline inflation to foster public understanding from this point forward.
Meanwhile, several regional central banks further eased their monetary policy.
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy softened more than expected in the second quarter, pointing to more sluggish recoveries in other Asian economies than previously anticipated, especially as Chinese manufacturing inventories remained high.
Furthermore, the recovery of the global electronic cycle remains concentrated in high-tech products, leaving certain Asian countries yet to fully benefited from the export of electronic components.
Meanwhile, demand-pull inflationary pressures remained low and would be subject to structural changes.
The US economy expanded at a moderate pace on the back of private consumption.
The Committee viewed that the policy rate should be normalized to the level that is consistent with sustainable growth in the long term, and that monetary policy normalization should be done in a gradual and measured manner consistent with the growth and inflation outlook in the period ahead.
Inflation in the Global Economy and Domestic Economy Inflationary pressure increased in many regions in line with high oil and commodity prices.
Although the economy has continued to recover in the wake of the reopening, the speed of recovery has been held back by multiple structural headwinds such as (1) shifting global manufacturing supply chains, including China’s greater reliance on domestic production capacities, limiting Thailand’s gains from the global demand recovery, (2) technological progress that could alter the supply chains and negatively affect Thailand’s competitiveness, and (3) the relatively slow adjustments of domestic labor force amid rapid global shifts.
Accounting for the government’s digital wallet scheme, headline and core inflation in 2024 were projected to be - The Committee deemed the overall recovery to be intact, both including and not including the impact from the government’s digital wallet scheme.
Private investment would recover in line with domestic and external demand albeit at a lower rate than expected due to uncertainties surrounding the impact of mutations of the virus, which would affect investment decisions.
The Chinese economy moderated primarily from exports and investment, though domestic demand should be an important driver of growth going forward on the back of high employment, favourable household and corporate income, and government measures to support investment.
Nonetheless, downside risks remained given that economic growth might be lower than expected if domestic demand did not exhibit a strong recovery.
The Federal Reserve would therefore accelerate the pace of rate hikes to temper inflation arising partly from demand-pull factors.
The economic impacts were, nonetheless, expected to be less severe than the first lockdown since economic activities in several sectors, especially those related to manufacturing, continued to operate.
Given subdued domestic demand and stable world crude oil prices, inflation was not an immediate threat; (3) Improved global financial market sentiments helped contain capital flows and exchange rate risks; and exposed to economic slowdown, such as small and medium enterprises and households.
International Banks, (3) the Government Financial Institutions Association, (4) the Thailand Leasing Association, The Committee would stand ready to use additional policy tools in an appropriate and timely manner.
Hence, the Committee decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 1.50 percent at this meeting in order to maintain accommodative financial conditions which would facilitate the Given that economic growth in the period ahead remained susceptible to risks, the Committee saw the need for concrete structural reforms that would uplift the competitiveness of Thai businesses and help cushion the impacts of adverse shocks to the economy.
(2) Growth of the Thai economy moderated from domestic demand and exports, partly as a result of rising debt burden coupled with waning government consumption stimulus measures.
Such a situation is undesirable because households and businesses would have to endure adverse impacts on their income, cost of living, and debt burden.
However, merchandise exports continued to contract on account of weak demand from Asian economies, shifting global trade structure, and declining competitiveness in some product categories.
Yields on medium- and long-term Thai government bonds moved down by 19-48 bps following a reduction in US Treasury yields after the FOMC highlighted the consequences of weak global recovery on the US economy.
Adverse impacts of the global economy appeared to have been limited to export-related sectors, while exports should begin to pick up during the first half of 2013 on the back of anticipated improvement in the global economy.
For the real estate sector, the house price index continued to rise, although it did not pick up significantly.
gold 107.1 PII 100 99.9 PCI Import value excl.
The MPC agreed that the economy would continue to expand, and discussed potential risk factors that might undermine growth momentum going forward, including labour shortages, risks to financial stability in some sectors and sustainability of the tourism industry.
The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) index appreciated due to Thailand’s strong external stability, which was partly reflected by the sustained current account surplus.
Overall private investment remained low, with capacity expansion seen only in certain industries such as telecommunications and renewable electricity generation.
One member viewed the slowdown in the economy to have stemmed primarily from the fragile state of the global economy and, to a lesser extent, less support from fiscal policy.
The baht recently depreciated and thus did not hinder the economic recovery.
Nevertheless, the Committee were of the view that heightened volatility in the global financial markets was likely to have limited impact on the Thai economy, as external stability remained sound and there was sufficient cushion against increased volatility.
However, the economies remain subject to the uncertainty surrounding Greece’s debt servicing ability.
Although headline inflation began to decelerate, price pressure continued to rise as reflected in the increase in core inflation and inflation forecasts that exceeded the target for many countries.
Meanwhile, Asian economies experienced more differentiated growth as the ASEAN economies slowed down slightly, while North Asian economies picked up on the back of better domestic demand and exports.
The risk-off sentiments stemmed in part from growth concerns in China and the prospect of a tighter-forlonger US monetary policy stance.
As a result, financial conditions in China could tighten further and potentially affect funding costs and corporate financing.
Nevertheless, most members viewed that risks remained tilted to the upside as foreign tourists could return in a greater number and earlier than expected.
Although pressures on the baht would abate in tandem with the projected current account deficit in 2021, the Committee would continuously expedite the new foreign exchange ecosystem to improve the structure of the Thai foreign exchange markets over the medium term.
Meanwhile, the recovery of the US economy might be moderated by the recent appreciation of the US dollar, which led to market expectations that the Federal Reserve would postpone further hikes in the federal funds rate.
Other members emphasized exchange rate expectation as the key driver of capital outflows from emerging markets in recent months, as economic fundamentals usually changed too slowly to justify large swings in market sentiments.
3) Headline inflation would be largely unchanged compared with the previous assessment.
Private consumption would remain an important growth driver thanks to employment in the services sector.
The Thai economy was projected to grow by sectors, while external demand was expected to play a larger role in the latter half of this year as the anticipated recovery in the global economy takes hold and exports return to their normal levels.
Hence, the Committee voted unanimously to maintain the policy rate at 1.50 percent at this meeting.
Given high level of competition in both credit and deposit markets, commercial banks were reluctant to lower their interest rates.
The Committee viewed that the new foreign exchange ecosystem should be expedited to address structural problems in the foreign exchange market and encourage more balanced capital flows.
Against this backdrop, maintaining the policy rate and monitoring the situation closely remained an appropriate strategy in safeguarding domestic financial stability; (2) the Thai economy was projected to recover at a gradual pace, subject to various constraints.
In addition, the search for yield, especially in unrated bonds, would be closely monitored because if investors do not have sufficient understanding of investment risks, it might lead to underpricing of risks and accumulation of financial fragilities going forward.
A low-for-long interest rate could contribute to a build-up of financial fragilities, for example in the form of elevated household debt and more widespread search-for-yield behavior leading to underpricing of risks in borrowing and investment activities.
However, if economic growth were to accelerate going forward, inflationary pressures might ratchet up and central banks in G3 economies might have to raise their policy rates earlier than previously expected.
The 2024 growth projection inclusive of the government’s digital wallet scheme was 3.8 percent, relative to the previous assessment of 4.4 percent.
With regard to the bond market, long-term government bond yields decreased owing to higher foreign demand.
This, however, might not lead to additional investment in the near term, as spare production capacity should remain in many industries.
As a result, investors did not significantly adjust their risky asset position.
In addition, the private sector resumed the issuances of unrated bonds in the fourth quarter of 2017, but most of these bonds were shortterm debts issued by large real-estate companies with sound financial positions.
Businesses should thus hedge against currency volatilities and promptly adjust their business models to enhance value-added competitiveness and rely less on price competitiveness.
- Long-standing structural impediments in the export and manufacturing sectors were having a more discernible impact on the economy.
Although the eurozone debt crisis and the US fiscal cliff remained major hurdles to global economic recovery, tail risks have declined significantly thanks to progress in policy resolution.
However, private investment going forward would be supported by planned relocation of production base to Thailand under the Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC) and investment in both large-scale infrastructure and infrastructure to support the digital economy that were likely to proceed continuously.
Most central banks have consequently kept policy interest rates unchanged since the last meeting.
Meanwhile, the baht experienced heightened volatility and appreciated against the US dollar since the previous meeting in the same direction as most regional currencies.
Global inflationary pressure remained low, and most central banks have consequently kept policy interest rates unchanged since the last meeting.
The Committee viewed that global financial markets would remain highly uncertain in the period ahead due primarily to (1) monetary policy direction of advanced economies, situation in the euro zone that could intensify and affect the global economy and crossborder capital flows, in turn exerting pressures on asset prices and exchange rates.
Medium-term inflation expectations remained anchored within the target.
Moreover, although domestic inflation remained high, short-run inflationary pressures from the government’s stimulus package may not be material given the implementation time lag and only a small disbursement was expected in the second half of the year.
Bond yields rose while the baht depreciated against the US dollar, driven by the US monetary policy outlook, and as market participants awaited clarity on the details and the funding sources for government policies.
Risks to the outlook also increased from uncertainties surrounding the global economy.
However, the core inflation projection for 2019 was slightly revised down from 0.9 percent to 0.8 percent due mainly to prepared food prices.
The Committee assessed that there was a probability of trading partner’s economic growth being lower than the previous assessment due mainly to (1) the coronavirus outbreak that could widely spread to other countries and their impacts could extend from private consumption and tourism to manufacturing sector and international trade, (2) high uncertainties of trade protectionist measures regarding the further actions of the US and China following the phase one trade deal, which warranted monitoring as it could affect international trade and trade negotiation going forward, (3) uncertainties pertaining to trade deal after Brexit, and (4) geopolitical risks that could be intensified and prolonged, particularly recurring protests in several countries.
- The Committee assessed financial conditions to be moderately tighter in line with previous policy normalization, and overall have not hindered the ongoing economic recovery.
Nonetheless, some positive developments would partially offset the negative factors.
1) The Thai economy was expected to expand at a lower rate than previously projected and below its potential due to (1) the contraction in merchandise exports in line with the slowdown in trading partner economies and global trade volume as a result of intensifying trade tensions and (2) a prolonged downturn in the electronic cycle.
Japan saw contraction in domestic demand as a result of consumption tax hike, but the market held off its expectation of further monetary easing by the Bank of Japan given accelerating inflation.
The Committee discussed the possibility of the economy regaining momentum in the second quarter of 2015.
Growth resumed for the euro area in the second quarter, the first expansion since the third quarter of 2011.
In addition, some members viewed that inflation would mainly be driven by developments in global oil prices.
Nevertheless, there were possibilities that the Thai economy would expand at a higher rate than the baseline projection owing to from government stimulus measures or in case of alleviated uncertainties and (2) higher-thanexpected domestic demand arising from public investment in infrastructure, PPP projects, quick acceleration of private investment following greater political clarity, as well as additional government measures to support private spending.
(2) Headline inflation was expected to rise gradually.
Nevertheless, the Committee stands ready to adjust the policy interest rate should there be significant changes to economic and inflation developments.
The global economic recovery was projected to continue at a rate close to the last meeting’s assessment.
Delaying an additional policy rate reduction, on the other hand, could hamper economic recovery.
There remained pockets of risks, though largely benign, that warranted monitoring as they might result in the build-up of vulnerabilities in the financial system going forward.
Increased risk in global financial markets from sovereign debt problems in the euro area contributed to a decrease in foreign investment in the Thai equity and bond markets.
As such, an accommodative monetary policy stance was deemed necessary and appropriate to sustain ongoing economic expansion.
However, such impact can be partly cushioned by economies; and (3) ongoing stimulus from public consumption and investment.
The Committee viewed that, despite a decline in geopolitical risks, the balance of risks to global economic growth was skewed to the downside due mainly to risks associated with US economic and foreign trade policies as well as possible retaliation from US trading partners.
At the same time, the lower-than-expected third-quarter GDP outturns continued to show a recovery of economic activity, notably in private consumption of services, despite merchandise exports having been muted.
Instead, it would reduce financial stability risks, and that would be conducive to sustainable economic growth in the long term.
Overall, members were in agreement that dynamic technological and productivity improvements would enable Thai exports to better respond to changing global demand, and therefore would truly reinforce the competitiveness of the exports sector in the long-run.
Investors accelerated selling of equities in the middle of March, resulting in sharp plummets of stock market indices in advanced economies which frequently triggered circuit breakers.
Advanced economies would expand at a moderating pace this year but would be stabilizing in 2020 due to improvements in the manufacturing sector and services employment, favorable private consumption, as well as more fiscal stimulus.
Consequently, the Committee decided to keep the policy interest rate unchanged at this meeting.
The government bond yields declined, driven by higher demand from domestic institutional investors and lower expected issuance of government bonds owing to delayed public investment.
With regard to domestic demand, the ongoing expansion began to be more broad-based.
Going forward, fiscal policy could focus on measures to restore income as well as measures to rehabilitate and raise long-term potential growth of the Thai economy.
Remaining policy space should be conserved as further policy easing would likely yield limited growth benefits amid lingering political uncertainties; (2) Maintaining the policy rate was conducive to safeguarding stability in the domestic financial markets; (3) Financial institutions continued to function normally in supporting the economy and assisting customers to manage short-term difficulties, despite some tightening in credit standards ; and financial stability, needed to be taken into account.
Volatilities have picked up since the last meeting in major and regional currencies, as well as for money and fixed income markets, from uncertainties about the timing of QE tapering and US public debt problem.
While spending on durable goods was growing driven by improved purchasing power of non-agricultural households with higher income, the underlying strength of consumption growth remained soft as income of some non-agricultural households, especially those with lower income, was affected by decreased hiring.
and (3) an acceleration of long-term unemployment.
Meanwhile, flood-related shortages could push prices of some goods up temporarily.
However, overall private investment remained subdued, while the total merchandise export values markedly contracted.
Despite signs of moderating external demand, domestic demand continued to expand.
In deliberating further policy rate increases looking ahead, the Committee will take into account economic and inflation outlook as well
First, although the household debt to GDP ratio gradually declined, it remained high relative to that of emerging markets.
Meanwhile, downside risks remained largely unchanged.
However, the spread of COVID-19 to various countries in Asia caused significant slowdown in Asian economic activities.
Lower interest rates might also induce medium- to high-income households, which mostly hold bank deposits, to enhance return by investing in riskier assets instead of increasing consumption.
Members viewed fiscal sustainability, consisting of a more balanced budget and greater emphasis on public investment, as a key factor to bolster market confidence; (2) the recent emergence of current account deficit could be explained in part by unusually high gold imports and repatriation of profits and dividends abroad.
Fiscal stimulus, especially the implementation of planned public investment, should be a key growth driver at this juncture.
Risks to global growth remained tilted to the downside.
The Thai economy should continue to expand, driven mainly by tourism and private consumption, with 2023 and 2024 growth projected to be 3.6 and 3.8 percent, respectively.
- The Committee saw increased risks to the global economy and financial system.
Monetary policy should therefore be sufficiently accommodative to support the ongoing economic recovery, while at the same time consistent with the safeguarding of long-term financial stability, against the backdrop of contained inflationary pressure and stable financial system.
Meanwhile, demand-side inflationary pressure remained low, as reflected by subdued core inflation which was consistent with a gradual economic recovery.
The Committee would also monitor the effectiveness of the relaxation of foreign exchange regulations to encourage capital outflows and consider implementing additional measures if necessary.
Some MPC members saw a need to closely monitor developments of public investment in large-scale infrastructure projects, as well as private investment as there could be further delay.
export recovery which was in line with the trading partners’ economic outlook and (2) the additional fiscal stimulus measures in the first half of 2021 to alleviate impacts of the new wave of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Nevertheless, headline inflation rate, currently below zero, was projected to rise gradually and turn positive during the first half of 2016, although the inflation outlook would largely depend on the trajectory of oil prices.
Nonetheless, a few MPC members viewed that constraints on the supply of key inputs, particularly shortages of labour in some industries, would limit growth of the country’s production capacity in the long run.
In particular, growth of the Chinese economy decelerated from the previous year, and could be adversely affected by the recent plunge in domestic stock prices.
However, financial stability risks were confined to the low‐income households and SMEs, and did not pose a systemic threat.
Moreover, a few members stressed the importance of close monitoring of geopolitical situations and the ongoing assessment of the ensuing impacts on the global economy.
Uncertain demand particularly from China would directly weigh on Thailand and the region given the tight trade linkages – China and ASEAN accounted for almost 40 percent of Thai goods exports.
Given uncertainties in fiscal outlook and tighter financial conditions, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to maintain the pace of asset purchases in their September meeting.
Some of these would be financed by (1) the Emergency Decree Authorizing the Ministry of Finance to Raise Loans to Solve Problems, to Remedy and Restore the Economy and Society, with the budget limit of 1 trillion baht, and (2) the revision of the 2020 budget according to the Budget Expenditure Transfer Bill.
However, the impact would be less severe than last year thanks to the less strict containment measures, the additional support from the timely and targeted government measures, and the continued export recovery.
Despite a limited impact on the overall economy, the consequence on the wellbeing of citizens in the affected areas were quite significant.
The Committee viewed that pursuing policies which would strengthen supervision of saving cooperatives was highly critical.
In the Committee’s assessment, volatility in the financial markets could potentially rise as a result of monetary policy divergence among advanced economies.
Private investment indicators improved across various sectors, while private consumption continued to expand in line with improvements in household purchasing power and consumer confidence.
Looking ahead, headline inflation was expected to gradually trend up toward target on account of domestic demand recovery and higher oil prices than in the previous year.
While demand for cash increased notably during the crisis, transaction volume in the interbank and foreign exchange markets decreased slightly.
The Chinese economy was projected to slow down due to its strict zero-COVID policy and fragile real estate sector.
- 4 Headline inflation was expected to be around the lower bound of the inflation target, while core inflation would be lower than previously assessed.
Prolonged political situation and delay in forming a functioning government will have repercussions for the enactment of the 2015 Budget Act and public spending.
However, the main impact on the Thai economy would be the indirect spillover effects on energy and commodity prices.
The euro zone economy entered recession and was projected to weaken further in the latter half of this year as a result of tighter government spending and markedly lower private sector confidence.
The weakened baht was consistent with market expectation of the forthcoming Fed rate hike and investors’ perception of higher downside risks to the Thai economic outlook, leading to sell-offs in domestic bond and stock markets.
Although the recovery process in the manufacturing sector has already begun, the restoration of production to normal capacity is expected to be more prolonged than previously assessed.
- The Committee remained concerned over the financial positions of the vulnerable groups, especially SMEs and low-income households.
The Committee viewed that in the context where (1) the economy is growing at potential and (2) inflation became less responsive to economic growth due partly to structural factors, with the annual average inflation expected to be within target, it would be important to monitor the build‐up of vulnerabilities in the financial system, which could be reflected in underpricing of risks and competition in the mortgage loan market.
In addition, some other risks still warranted close monitoring, including (1) trade tensions that could be more intensified and prolonged than previously assessed, especially trade negotiations between the US and China, as well as the likelihood that the US would increase tariffs on all auto imports in the future, (2) uncertainties regarding the timeline and outcome of Brexit, and (3) geopolitical risks that could become widespread and intensified, particularly recurring protests in several countries which exhibited common patterns.
Improving global economic outlook, slowing inflation, and contained banking stresses in the US and Europe helped alleviate investors’ concerns.
The Thai economy expanded well in the first quarter of this year from both internal and external demand.
The current account surplus was expected to sustain for some period.