In the coming quarters, demand for imports in ruble terms will continue to adjust to recent key rate decisions.
The Bank of Russia forecasts the growth rate of the Russian economy in 2021 in the range of 3.0–4.0%.
have tightened since the previous meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors.
The Bank of Russia’s assessment of the medium-term economic development remains the same.
On 28 October 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.50% per annum.
Despite the fact that inflation expectations of households and businesses notably declined in February and March, they remain elevated.
Inflation fell perceptibly; however, the trend bears risks of instability.
Annual inflation will slow down to 4% in the first half of 2020 when the effects of the ruble’s weakening and the VAT rise peter out.
In 2015, GDP is expected to contract by 3.2%.
At the end of 2018, inflation is expected to be close to 4%, which corresponds to the Bank of Russia’s target.
Lending to non-financial organizations showed stable dynamics despite a persistent tightening of requirements for a borrower’s financial standing and a loan collateral quality.
Significant short-term proinflationary effects may also be caused by a deterioration in the global economic outlook and a further rise in volatility in global financial markets.
Over the medium-term horizon, the balance of inflation risks is significantly tilted to the upside.
Given the balance of risks for inflation the Bank of Russia’s ongoing transition from moderately tight to neutral monetary policy will be gradual.
A deterioration in the global economic growth outlook can also have significant short-term pro-inflationary effects, in particular given volatility in foreign financial markets.
The expansion of private demand along with a continuously high level of public demand is facilitating strong growth in domestic demand.
The current economic slowdown is predominantly structural by nature and thus does not exert any noticeable downward pressure on inflation.
Survey data show that enterprises are still struggling to fix production and logistics — despite the nascent diversification in suppliers of finished products, raw materials and components, as well as in sales markets.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that in the coming months, annual inflation will temporarily fall below 4% under the influence of last year’s high base effect.
While making its decision hereinafter, the Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks, the inflation dynamics and economic developments against the forecast.
During the transformation of the economy, a change in the structure of aggregate demand is taking place.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements, prices of individual food products, and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
Continuing growth of interest rates on household deposits stimulates the propensity to save and increases the attractiveness of deposits.
For the trend towards inflation slowdown to become sustainable, according to Bank of Russia estimates, it is necessary to hold the current key rate throughout 2016, with its potential downgrades due in 2017 Q1-Q2.
These risks are implied by the inertia of inflation expectations, as well as a possible rapid decline in households’ propensity to save.
OFZ yields are essentially unchanged since the end of October.
In 2019, the forthcoming VAT increase might have a slight constraining effect on business activity, mostly in the beginning of the year.
Monetary conditions evolve, among other things, under the influence of earlier decisions to cut the key rate.
The Bank of Russia leaves unchanged its estimates of risks associated with consumer and oil price volatility, wage movements and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
The disinflationary effect on the short-term horizon may be caused by the persistence of households’ high propensity to save in the conditions of general economic uncertainty, prolonged habituation to the new structure of supply in consumer markets, and expectations of further price decline amid the strengthening of the ruble since the beginning of the year.
Weekly estimates show that inflation has significantly accelerated since early March.
An additional disinflationary factor was the expansion of supply in a number of goods markets as external and domestic export restrictions remained in place.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy pursued will create the conditions for returning the economy to the balanced growth path.
Variations in the dynamics of economic activity persist, with differing trends observed across industries.
Economic growth resumed in early 2018, following the decline due to temporary headwinds in late 2017.
Moving forward, should inflation risks fall as much as to ensure with greater certainty that the Bank of Russia achieves its inflation target, the Bank of Russia will resume a gradual lowering of its key rate at one of its forthcoming Board meetings.
Concurrently, higher incomes allow households to simultaneously increase savings and consumption.
Given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will return to the Bank of Russia’s target in the second half of 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
Second, inflationary pressure may stem from households’ shrinking propensity to save.
The Bank of Russia takes into consideration the oil market uncertainty and keeps pursuing a conservative approach to the forecast, which assumes an oil price reduction to $40 per barrel by the end of 2017 and its further staying near this level.
This factor’s influence on inflation is abating amid the relatively stable exchange rate.
On 18 March 2016, the Board of Directors of the Bank of Russia decided to keep its key rate at 11.00% p.a.
Consumer lending dynamics do not entail material inflation risks so far.
According to the updated forecast of the Bank of Russia, annual inflation will stay at 6.0–7.0% in 2023.
Current inflationary pressure has intensified, also because of the pass-through of the ruble weakening to prices.
Monetary conditions have continued to ease since the last Board meeting.
At the same time, inflation risks have increased due to a combination of factors, including, inter alia, the aggravation of geopolitical tension and its potential impact on the ruble exchange rate dynamics, as well as potential changes in tax and tariff policy.
Surveys suggest that a significant proportion of enterprises are still confronted by difficulties in production and logistics.
A slowdown in annual consumer price growth will be conducive to inflation expectations decrease.
This may bring about a more substantial and prolonged upward deviation of inflation from the target.
At the same time, there has been a stop in the decline of core inflation, seasonally adjusted monthly growth rates of consumer prices and inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses edged down but remain elevated.
Acceleration of inflation in 2013 Q4 was largely attributed to rise in prices of fruits and vegetables, along with some milk and poultry products.
The key rate decision and the potential for its decrease in the future will contribute to further easing of monetary conditions, thus supporting domestic demand and creating prerequisites for inflation to approach 4%.
An accurate assessment of the VAT increase effect on inflation can be made in the second quarter of the current year.
Given the weak economic activity observed since the beginning of this year, the Bank of Russia has lowered its GDP growth rate forecast for 2019 from 1.0-1.5% to 0.8-1.3%.
Annual inflation registered an expected short-term increase against this backdrop standing at an estimated 4.2% as of 13 June 2017.
The balance of risks has further shifted towards proinflationary risks.
Amid economic uncertainty and declining producer confidence this year there is a high probability of a reduction in fixed capital investment.
The labour market remains tight.
Accelerated vaccination rates, as well as expectations of additional fiscal support measures in certain countries, contribute to the growth of prices in financial and commodity markets.
Overall, the actual decrease in economic activity in 2022 Q2 is less pronounced than the Bank of Russia assumed in its April baseline scenario.
This reinforces persistent inflationary pressure in the economy.
Maintenance of moderately tight monetary conditions will constrain inflation risks, including the short-term ones, coming from the launch of the Finance Ministry-conducted purchase of foreign currency in the FX market.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will reduce to 5.0-6.0% in 2022 to return to the target in the middle of 2023.
The current conditions continue to encourage savings and ensure that consumption growth is balanced.
An increase in structural staff shortages may cause labour productivity growth to considerably lag behind wage growth.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, to strengthen the trend to a steady decline in inflation the current key rate needs to be maintained till end-2016 with a possibility to cut it in 2017 Q1-Q2.
With regard to external conditions, accelerated yield growth in advanced economies and geopolitical factors may cause surges in volatility in financial markets and affect expectations for the exchange rate and inflation.
This led to a moderate decrease in interest rates on bank loans and on household deposits.
Considering the change in the external and internal environment, the Bank of Russia’s capability to downgrade its key rate in the course of the first half of 2017 has diminished.
The revisions of the expected paths of monetary policy tightening by the US Federal Reserve and other central banks in developed markets reduce the risks of persistent capital outflows from emerging markets.
If the external conditions improve and inflation and inflation expectation show a stable downward trend, the Bank of Russia will be ready to start monetary policy easing.
No legislative decision has yet been taken with regard to specific medium-term fiscal consolidation measures, including the indexation of wages in the public sector and social benefits.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of further key rate increase at its upcoming meetings.
Growing domestic demand is supporting an improvement in business sentiment despite persistently challenging external conditions.
The risks remain that inflation may exceed the target in late 2017.
Unsecured consumer lending is supported by higher households’ incomes.
Significant labour shortages may lead to labour productivity growth lagging behind growth in real wages.
This may become an additional source of higher volatility in global financial markets.
In accordance with the updated baseline forecast, GDP is projected to grow 2.0-3.0% in 2022.
For all the elevated inflation expectations and ongoing improvements in consumer sentiment, Russian consumers have sustained a cautious stance.
The deterioration in the global commodity markets will require a further adjustment of the Russian economy.
Under these conditions, a further rise in interest rates is progressing in the deposit and credit market.
Given this decision and considering that the moderately tight monetary policy is maintained, annual growth in consumer prices is set to total less than 4.5% for October 2017, dropping to the target level of 4% by the end of 2017.
Against the background of a drastic change in external conditions, the sharp increase in the Bank of Russia key rate of 28 February helped sustain financial stability and prevented uncontrolled price rises.
The Bank of Russia still assumes that monetary policy will become neutral in 2018.
Moving forward, the Bank of Russia’s key rate decisions will be based on its assessment of the balance of risks of inflation’s material and sustainable deviation in either direction from the target, as well as the dynamics of economic activity against the forecast.
2 Starting from 01.07.2016 auctions were discontinued.
Lending gained support from both the key rate reduction since spring and government-subsidised lending programmes.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, as of 27 April, annual consumer price growth rate stood at 16.5%.
The Russian economy reached its pre-pandemic level in 2021 Q2.
Fourth, inflation expectations remain highly sensitive to changing prices for individual groups of goods and services and exchange rate movements.
As to a medium-term horizon, proinflationary risks still dominate and have grown slightly since mid-September.
Moreover, there were a number of specific factors affecting the markets for some food items and boosting their prices.
Major macroeconomic indicators demonstrate further economy cooling.
At the same time, corporate lending is continuing to grow at rates close to recent years’ highs.
In these circumstances, the Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2019 GDP growth forecast in the range of 0.8–1.3%.
Inflationary pressure in the Russian economy remains high.
Banks continue to adhere to a conservative policy by mitigating price and non-price lending conditions primarily for reliable borrowers.
The expansion of government spending, including investment expenditures, in the second half of 2019 will support economic growth.
The FIFA World Cup made a positive contribution to the annual GDP growth rate in Q2 The Bank of Russia forecasts that in 2018 the Russian economy will post a 1.5–2% growth rate, which corresponds to its potential amid the remaining structural limitations.
According to Rosstat’s tentative estimates, the annual pace of GDP drop decreased in Q3.
The dominating influence of proinflationary factors could lead to a more substantial and prolonged deviation of inflation upwards from the target.
Within the next months, the Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks and economy and inflation dynamics’ consistence with the baseline forecast.
Russian economy’s growth rates remain low while industrial output continues to stagnate.
According to the estimate as of 3 June, annual inflation stood at 8.1% after 7.8% at the end of April.
At the same time, the trend towards sustainably low inflation remains in place.
Its expansion is largely based on the non-food sales.
Following the Board of Directors’ key rate meeting on 16 February 2024, the Bank of Russia releases its medium-term forecast
Volatility in global commodity and financial markets may produce a negative impact on exchange rate and inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations of households continue to grow, remaining close to their highest level for the last four years for more than six months.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that the annual growth rate of consumer prices will be less than 5% in July 2017, to reach the target of 4% in late 2017.
A growing risk premium in bond yields and lending rates may further tighten monetary conditions, which will restrain lending in the economy.
Annual GDP growth is predicted to enter positive territory in 2017.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy helps make deposits more attractive, increasing households’ propensity to save.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy stance will accelerate the formation of tight monetary policy stance needed to return inflation to the target and limit the influence of the currently high inflation on long-term interest rates.
Concurrently, labour market tightness has increased again.
Consumer demand continues to recover, but it is still moderate.
The Bank of Russia forecasts annual inflation to be 3.5 4% in late 2018 and increase for a short-term period to 4 4.5% in 2019.
Labour productivity growth is sluggish, while fixed capital investment continues to contract because of declining profits in the real sector, limited access to long-term financing in both international and domestic markets, as well as low producer and consumer confidence.
The increase in consumer prices growth caused by the aforementioned factor is unlikely to be protracted.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 5.0–7.0% in 2023, return to 4% in 2024 and stabilise close to 4% further on.
At the same time, inflation expectations of households have declined significantly in March.
However, for the trend towards sustainable decline in inflation to strengthen, according to the Bank of Russia’s estimates, the current value of the key rate needs to be maintained till end-2016 with its further possible cuts in 2017 Q1-Q2.
The April weakening in the ruble against the backdrop of geopolitical tension will be a factor for consumer price growth paces to quicken as they move closer to 4%.
Should inflation pressures in the global economy strengthen further, central banks in advanced economies may attempt an earlier normalisation of their monetary policies.
Flash data including business survey results show that the labour market remains tight.
In February 2018 it stood at 2.2%.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia proceeds from the fiscal policy normalisation path stipulated by the Guidelines for Fiscal, Tax and Customs and Tariff Policy for 2021 and the 2022–2023 Planning Period, which implies a return to the fiscal rule parameters in 2022.
The extension of the agreement between oil-exporting countries lowers the uncertainty of energy prices’ dynamics and related pro-inflationary risks over a one-year horizon.
In June 2014, the year-on-year consumer price growth rate increased to 7.8% and core inflation grew to 7.5%.
Further GDP growth above 1.5-2% a year is attainable if structural reforms are put in place.
Significant inflation acceleration in February‑May 2014 was prompted by a number of unforeseen factors, i.e.
Since the previous key rate review meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors OFZ yields have risen and the slope of the OFZ curve has increased.
Fixed capital investments will continue to contract due to high prices for the imported investment goods, deterioration in companies’ financial performance, tighter lending conditions, and high economic uncertainty.
Inflationary pressures, including underlying ones, were close to the maximum values since the beginning of the year.
There are still risks associated with the persistently high inflation expectations and the upward deviation of the Russian economy from a balanced growth path.
This is set to be a protracted process.
However, current monetary conditions set the ground for inflation decline in the medium run.
Factors that led to acceleration of inflation at the end of 2013 are expected to exhaust their influence in the first half of 2014.
At the same time, current rates of price growth in the greater part of the consumer basket, although having dropped, are still significantly above 4% annualised.
Current rates of price growth remain moderate, including in the stable components of inflation.
Analysts’ medium-term inflation expectations are anchored close to 4%.
According to the Bank of Russia’s monitoring, increasingly more businesses report that their production rate has returned to the pre-pandemic level.
The slowdown in inflation comes largely on the back of a stronger ruble and a cooling of consumer activity.
Real wage decrease and a slowdown in retail lending growth will result in lower consumer demand.
Import substitution steps up and non-commodity exports expand for certain items.
At the end of 2022, an increase in budget expenditures made a significant contribution to the growth of current accounts.
Recent data also indicate that businesses’ price expectations are holding close to multi-year highs.
Supply-side factors in the oil market may amplify the volatility of global oil prices.
On 17 December 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 100 b.p.
Higher nominal interest rates have had a minor effect on lending amounts as yet.
Inflation movements The current rate of price growth is about 4% (on an annualised basis).
The OFZ curve has flattened.
This is helped by the economic environment including steady Russian financial market, persistently weak consumer demand and the indexation of administered prices and rates as previously planned.
In September, the current seasonally adjusted price growth rose to 9.8% in annualised terms from 7.5% in August.
The ruble appreciation since the beginning of the year alongside with inflation slowdown in Russia’s trading partners limits the price growth of imports.
Faster growth of food prices to 5.9% (vs 5.5% in January 2019) played a significant role in the inflation rise in February.
Annual consumer price growth rate declined to 4.3% in August (from 4.6% in July 2019).
March saw a slowdown in price growth across all core groups of goods and services.
The revision of the interest rate paths by the US Fed and other central banks in advanced economies in 2019 H1 reduces the risks of persistent capital outflows from emerging markets.
Disinflationary risks are primarily related to domestic demand slowing down faster due to monetary policy tightening already in place.
The dynamics of the major macroeconomic indicators show a considerable GDP contraction in 2015 Q1.
Risks of a global economic slowdown have increased.
In certain sectors, the capacity for output expansion is lagging behind the expanding demand, including due to lack of labour force.
This decline will be mainly driven by supply-side factors, thereby producing a limited disinflationary effect.
In August, households’ inflation expectations somewhat decreased but still remain elevated.
Annual inflation will return to 4% in the first half of 2020 when the effects of ruble’s weakening in 2018 and the VAT rise peter out.
Annual consumer price growth rate declined to 4.0% in September (from 4.3% in August 2019) and was close to 3.8% according to the estimate as of 21 October.
In the first quarter, the rate of consumer price growth has been higher than the Bank of Russia’s forecast.
Inflation slowdown was broadly facilitated by the ruble appreciation amid relatively higher oil prices, persistent interest in investment in Russian assets among external investors, and a drop in the sovereign risk premium.
This will result in a more sizable GDP contraction in 2016 than forecast previously in the baseline scenario.
Annual inflation in general corresponds to the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
Households’ inflation expectations and businesses’ price expectations have increased.
In the majority of economic sectors, which specialise in meeting domestic demand, output has either reached or exceeded pre-crisis levels.
However, indicators reflecting the most sustainable price movements appreciably exceed 4% (annualised), Bank of Russia estimates show.
Amid persistently restricted access to the international capital markets for Russian companies and relatively cheap energy resources, fixed capital investments will continue to edge lower.
The Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2018 annual GDP growth forecast of 1.5-2%.
The Bank of Russia’s forecast also takes into account decisions made by the Russian Federation Government to invest the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund.
The annual inflation has stabilised at 7.3% and the annualised monthly inflation, seasonally adjusted, is about 5%.
Structural factors continue to exert a restraining influence on economic growth, however, its slowing is becoming more and more cyclical.
In recognition of this, the Bank of Russia assumed in its baseline scenario the average forecast oil price of $30 per barrel in 2016, with its gradual rise to $40 per barrel to 2018.
Inflation expectations of households are down.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia admits the possibility of turning to cutting the key rate in Q2-Q3 2019.
This is primarily related to the weak dynamics of domestic and external demand.
Despite elevated inflation expectations and an increased share of the most liquid assets (current accounts and cash rubles) in the structure of savings, households maintained a high propensity to save.
The expansion of domestic demand is reflected, among other things, in increased demand for imports, which has substantially contributed to the weakening of the ruble since the beginning of 2023.
These months saw food inflation unusually low for this period, supported by the high level of supply including bumper harvests of 2015-2016.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, GDP growth rate in 2015 will amount to 0.9-1.1%.
Besides, inflation reduction can be hampered by persistently high inflation expectations, and an upward revision, planned for 2016-2017, of rates and prices in the regulated sector, an upward revision of social payments indexation, as well as overall budget policy easing.
Its influence on price growth rates is enhanced by restrictions on foreign travel.
OFZ yields and interest rates in the credit and deposit market have turned downwards.
This primarily concerns energy commodities and food markets.
Over the medium term, the balance of inflation risks is still tilted to the upside.
Overall growth in corporate lending is below the peak levels of autumn 2023, though fiscal stimuli back up high corporate sector demand for loans.
Due to the long-term demographic trends labour supply decreases.
In line with the pursued monetary policy, the Bank of Russia has lowered its end-of-year annual inflation forecast for 2019 from 4.7-5.2% to 4.2-4.7%.
On 23 April 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 50 bp to 5.00% per annum.
This was instrumental in restoring the inflow of funds into fixed-term ruble deposits and stabilised household demand for cash.
In September, business and consumer sentiment slightly worsened due to a rise in overall uncertainty.
Taking into account Q1 GDP data and the negative changes in external conditions, output is forecast to contract by 3.9-4.4% in 2015.
In terms of stable components, however, the current price growth rates remain moderate.
Alongside with accommodative monetary conditions, lending dynamics are influenced by the preferential programmes implemented by the Government as well as by regulatory relaxations.
The Bank of Russia forecasts annual inflation to be 3-4% in 2018 and close to 4% in 2019.
At the same time, labour shortages are emerging in many sectors, despite the inflow of foreign labour.
The Russian economy’s growth rate still remains subdued.
This decline will be in significant part driven by supply-side factors.
The annual rate of consumer price growth is estimated at 7.6% as of 9 June 2014.
Nominal and real interest rates continue to increase.
Price growth becomes more homogeneous in regions and for major groups of goods and services.
Real wage growth has sped up, which is, however, associated with large payments of annual bonuses in 2024 Q1.
The sources of medium-term risks remain unchanged.
Estimates as of 23 October 2017 indicate that annual inflation is 2.7%.
A number of factors bear the risk of inflation deviating from the target both upwards and downwards.
However, signs emerged in October of a slowdown in credit activity including in the context of the tightening in non-price bank lending conditions, particularly in the retail segment.
Having said that, the application of the transitional budget rule, accompanied with the Finance Ministry-conducted purchases/sales of foreign currency in the FX market will help lower the dependence of the Russian economy, particularly in terms of monetary conditions and inflation dynamics, on fluctuating oil prices.
This means that a steady rise in domestic demand is progressively exceeding the capabilities to expand the production of goods and the provision of services.
Pro-inflation risks from the labour market persist.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that the annual consumer price growth rates in the second quarter will be close to their first quarter values.
Under these conditions, the continuing growth of the most liquid assets in the structure of household savings may spur a rise in consumer demand in the future.
Due to limited labour resources, labour productivity growth may lag further behind an increase in real wages.
In order to maintain the propensity to save and anchor sustainable inflation slowdown driven by demand-side restrictions, monetary conditions should remain moderately tight.
At the same time, economic growth is nearing its potential level.
The combination of slowdown in real wages growth and a decline in household lending growth rates will have a dampening effect on consumer activity.
Slack domestic demand will facilitate the continuation of annual inflation reduction in years 2015-2017.
This is reflected in the high propensity to save and the increased share of liquid assets (current accounts and ruble cash) in the savings structure.
In case of a further expansion in the budget deficit, proinflationary risks will increase and tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
The main proinflationary risks are associated with changes in terms of trade (including as a result of the geopolitical tensions), persistently high inflation expectations and upward deviation of the Russian economy from a balanced growth path, as well as with the fiscal policy normalisation path.
The high debt load of Russian companies and interest rate risks for banks and their borrowers have also been factored in.
Quarterly GDP growth is expected no later than 2016 H2.
First, increased structural labour shortage may cause labour productivity growth to considerably lag behind wage growth.
The Bank of Russia has reviewed the inflation forecast upwards considering the planned increase of the value added tax in 2019.
Taking into account domestic and global economic developments as well as the nature of supply-side constraints, the Bank of Russia expects GDP to grow 4.0–4.5% in 2021.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy will limit the upward deviation of inflation from the target.
Based on the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will edge down to 4.0–4.5% by late 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
According to Bank of Russia forecasts, in 2016, GDP growth will stand at 0.7%, if oil prices recover to US$70 per barrel by late 2016.
This comes as a result of ruble exchange rate movements and the tailing-off of the surge in consumer demand in the context of a marked decline in inflation expectations of households and businesses.
The rapid recovery of demand and elevated inflationary pressure call for an earlier return to neutral monetary policy.
The dominating influence of inflationary factors could lead to a more substantial and prolonged upward deviation of inflation from the target.
However, their sentiment is continuing to improve as suppliers of finished products, raw materials and components diversify, as do sales markets.
As a result, consumer price growth rate is likely to remain exceeding 7% till the end of 2014.
A faster — relative to the baseline scenario — normalisation of production and logistics chains in the Russian and global economies may become another source of downward pressure on prices.
In September, monthly prices increased their growth pace on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Since monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, the probability of inflation exceeding the 5.0% target at end-2014 has increased substantially.
Annual inflation continues its decline in line with the Bank of Russia’s baseline forecast; however, this is largely due to temporary factors.
Lending was largely supported by governmental subsidised lending programmes.
These factors, alongside with a decrease in retail lending, will result in further decline in consumer activity.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia proceeds from the parameters of the federal budget and the budgets of constituent territories reflected in the Guidelines for Fiscal, Tax and Customs and Tariff Policy for 2021 and the 2022-2023 Planning Period, as well as from the announced time frames for the completion of anti-crisis measures of the Government and the Bank of Russia.
This is evidenced by economic activity data for 2023 H2, including recent monthly data for Q4.
Moreover, the increasing complexity of production and supply chains and payments due to external restrictions could lead to both higher import prices and tighter supply-side constraints in the Russian economy.
Consumer prices current growth rates track somewhat below the Bank of Russia forecast.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia forecasts that GDP will grow at 2.2–2.7% in 2023, 0.5–1.5% in 2024, 1.0–2.0% in 2025, 1.5%—2.5% in 2026.
At the same time, these risks might increase if government spending rise in higher oil price scenario.
A considerable labour shortage persists, especially in manufacturing.
The updated Rosstat statistics reflect steadier economic growth in 2017 — early 2018 than previous estimates.
Uncertainty persists over their subsequent movements.
According to companies’ surveys, the labour shortage continues to widen.
On 29 April 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to cut the key rate by 300 basis points to 14.00% per annum.
The factors of inflation decline are exhausted impact of ruble depreciation seen in January-March 2014 on consumer prices, lower scale of increase in administered prices and tariffs, expected good harvest, as well as subdued aggregate demand with aggregate output of goods and services remaining below potential.
However, supply-side limitations in the global economy have exacerbated.
In case of a further budget deficit expansion, pro-inflation risks will rise and tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
Proinflationary risks have increased significantly over the medium-term horizon.
As inflation risks abate further, the Bank of Russia will be ready to continue cutting the key rate.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia took into account the macroeconomic fundamentals which suggest a less severe downturn than previously estimated considering this level of oil prices.
These stem from the current developments in the oil market, persistently high inflation expectations and some uncertainties surrounding budget configuration.
Annual inflation will peak in the first six months of 2019 reaching 5.0-5.5% by the end of 2019.
At the same time, the cumulative contribution of ruble depreciation, restrictions on imports and other factors specific for the markets of several food products, to year-to-year consumer prices growth will account for 4.9 percentage points by the year-end.
Given the current monetary policy stance, annual inflation will return to the Bank of Russia’s target close to 4% in the first half of 2022 and will remain at that level further on.
As a result, growth in domestic demand will continue to outpace the supply expansion capacity, intensifying underlying inflationary pressures in the economy.
However, high-frequency indicators suggest some growth in business activity in the fourth quarter.
The economic recovery may be held back, among other things, by low vaccination rates and the spread of new coronavirus strains, as well as the ensuing tightening of restrictions.
remained overall neutral with a slight tightening despite the cut in the key rate in September.
Against this background, lending activity is decreasing, especially in the retail lending market.
Taking into consideration new data on the changes in economic activity in the baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia forecasts that the GDP growth rate will be 1.5–2.5% in 2023, 0.5–2.5% in 2024, 1.0–2.0% in 2025, and 1.5–2.5% in 2026.
The Bank of Russia Board of Directors will hold its next rate review meeting on 16 December 2016 of Russia Board’s decision is to be published at 13.30 Moscow time.
Current price movements are largely driven by a surge in consumer demand for individual product categories against the background of higher uncertainty and rising inflation expectations, as well as the weakening of the ruble since the beginning of 2022.
Non-price lending conditions are gradually becoming looser for the most reliable borrowers but are still restrictive.
Amid accelerated consumer prices growth, inflation expectations of households and businesses continued to increase imposing additional pressure on prices.
Third, inflationary pressure may stem from changes in households’ behaviour as their propensity to save can become considerably lower.
Over Q2 2014 the moderate recovery of economic activity has been observed.
This is in part related to slower than expected implementation of national projects planned by the Government.
Consumer prices grew at the pace of 2.4% in March, and consumer price growth in April is estimated at 2.3 2.5%.
The Bank of Russia’s key rate decision will speed up the formation of monetary conditions needed to ensure balanced growth in lending and steady disinflationary trends.
Inflation risks emanate primarily from persistently high inflation expectations, aggravation of external economic situation, revision of planned increases in administered prices and tariffs, fiscal policy easing, and accelerated growth in nominal wages, including those in the public sector.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
Nominal lending rates continue to decline influenced by earlier key rate cuts, as well as those expected by market participants.
Persistently elevated inflation expectations and their further increase pose a significant risk.
Key rate decisions will take into account actual and expected inflation movements relative to the target and economic developments over the forecast horizon, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
Amid economic uncertainty and declining producer confidence there is a strong probability of a reduction in fixed capital investment.
Concurrently, the decline in imports as a whole, due to the introduction of external trade and financial restrictions, is still significantly ahead of the decline in exports.
At the same time, the new exchange rate mechanism will set grounds for more rapid adjustment of the Russian economy to changing external conditions.
Alongside with monetary policy, instrumental in the slowdown of consumer prices are the Government decisions as regards indexation of wages and pensions, as well as declining global food prices.
This is largely related to the growth in prices in global commodity markets and the continuing pass-through of the ruble’s earlier weakening to prices.
Unfavourable conditions in the markets for some goods, such as dairy products, sugar, pork, and petrol, also have contributed to higher inflation rates.
Yields on medium- and long-term OFZs are little changed.
Economic activity continues to be constrained by weakening external demand for Russian exports on the back of a global economic slowdown as well as by weak investment activity dynamics, including government investment expenditures.
Low geographic and cross-sectoral labour force mobility is an additional structural constraint.
Although the number of vacancies has decreased, the unemployment rate is near historical lows.
A trend towards growth in loan and deposit interest rates is also emerging, with growth in deposit rates taking place at a slower pace so far.
Under the Bank of Russia estimates, the annual consumer price growth rate is down to 7.3% as of 25 April 2016 / as of 25 April 2016 remained at the level of March 2016 of 7.3%.
The slowdown in private sector investment demand is evolving simultaneously with growing government investment.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that annual inflation will peak in March and go down further on.
January — February 2017 saw an ongoing annual industrial production growth (adjusted for calendar factors) and a gradual rebound in investment activity.
Recent data for the third quarter suggest that the economy is expanding faster than the Bank of Russia expected in September.
Industry, including technology-intensive production types, discovers new opportunities for growth.
The Russian economy continues to grow but at a slower pace than in 2024 H1.
They nevertheless remain elevated, as do businesses’ price expectations.
While the partial mobilisation may mainly create disinflationary pressure in the coming months due to subdued consumer demand, its subsequent effects will be pro-inflationary as it adds to supply-side restrictions in the broader economy.
Underlying inflationary pressures remain high overall and have not yet demonstrated downward trends.
By estimates, the annual consumer price growth fell to 6.6% as of 12 September 2016 compared to 7.2% in July.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, the labour market adjusts to the new conditions mostly through wage decrease and part-time employment.
Yet positive shifts in the economy anticipate the beginning of its growth recovery.
At the same time, persistently high oil prices support domestic economy.
However, the current capacity to expand production in the Russian economy is largely limited by the labour market.
As for domestic conditions, proinflationary effects may be more serious than in the baseline scenario due to changes in the size of the labour force and the employment structure, including amid the partial mobilisation.
The lower — compared to last year’s — indexation of administered prices and rates in July, as well as the expectations for good crops, will contribute to the slowdown of inflation, helping recede inflation expectations.
Given the decision made, the moderately tight monetary conditions and the weak domestic demand will keep putting downward pressure on inflation.
Inflation expectations remain elevated.
Over the next months, prices for goods and services will continue to be affected by depreciation of the ruble.
Moreover, for further expanse of credit institution ability to manage their foreign exchange liquidity it was decided to increase maximum allotment amount for 28-day FX REPO auctions from 1.5 to 5.0 billion USD and to conduct 12-month FX REPO auctions on weekly basis.
In addition, accelerating growth in lending and a significant decline in the savings rate could set the stage for a more rapid expansion of consumer demand that would outstrip the capacity to expand production.
On the one hand, amid growing global oil prices coupled with the increase in excises early this year, the prices of oil products in the domestic market saw a tangible rise.
However, some funds were transferred from current accounts to time deposits.
The Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks and compliance of economic performance and inflation with the baseline scenario when it makes its key rate decision in the upcoming months.
have remained broadly neutral.
The domestic financial market has stabilised in the time since the previous Board meeting.
The labour market is adapting to the new economic conditions and unemployment remains persistently low.
Given the current recovery dynamics and the economy’s growing resilience to the fluctuations in the external economic climate, the Bank of Russia expects that the GDP will grow in 2017-2019 even if the conservative oil price scenario materialises.
High-frequency indicators point to steady growth of consumer and investment demand.
A tightening in a number of macroprudential measures and the rollback of most regulatory relaxations in banking regulation are also working to tighten bank lending conditions.
These trends will persist amid further gradual easing of the monetary policy and low risk appetite of lenders and borrowers.
Moving forward, the Bank of Russia’s key rate decisions will be based on its assessment on the balance of risks for inflation significantly and persistently deviating in either direction from the target, as well as the dynamics of economic activity against the forecast.
Annual inflation temporarily accelerated in July, which was expected and caused by a greater increase in utility tariffs compared with 2014.
It will consequently result in growing household income contributing to the revival of consumer demand in 2018.
Meaningful inflation risks are related to geopolitical tensions affecting foreign trade terms.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses’ price expectations remain elevated.
Due to demographic trends the impact of this factor will persist in the long run.
Given the moderately tight monetary policy, the 4% inflation target will be achieved before the end of 2017 and will be maintained close to this level in 2018-2019.
Also growing are restrictions in the labour market, driven in part by the partial mobilisation.
High-frequency indicators of economic activity suggest that the economic recovery in early 2021 is ongoing.
The situation in the domestic financial market remained stable in November and the first half of December and did not pose any additional inflation risks.
Growing yields of medium- and long-term OFZs largely reflect the increase of interest rates in global financial markets.
On 10 June 2016, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate from 11.00 to 10.50 The Board of Directors notes the positive trends of more stable inflation, decreased inflation expectations and inflation risks against the backdrop of imminent growth recovery in the economy.
In 2018 Q3, annual GDP growth slipped to 1.5%, consistent with the Bank of Russia’s forecast, mostly due to the high base effect in agriculture.
Given the situation, the potential for lowering the short-term rates is greater than for the long-term ones.
A further significant reduction in inflation expectations also contributes to the inflation slowdown.
The effect of the VAT increase on inflation can be fully captured no sooner than this April.
The VAT hike slightly constrains business activity.
Inflation is to slow down to the 4% target by late 2017 and hold close to this level in the sequel.
High market interest rates support the propensity to save but do not sufficiently constrain lending.
On 27 July 2018, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.25% per annum.
Specific fiscal consolidation measures, including wage and social payments indexation, remain uncertain over the horizon.
The Bank of Russia has lowered its annual inflation forecast for 2019 from 4.0–4.5% to 3.2–3.7%.
The weakening of the ruble has resulted in Russian products gaining competitiveness, while it also helped economic growth in individual industries.
A more rapid adaptation of the economy, accompanied by an active recovery of imports among other things, may also have a disinflationary effect.
However, given the contracting number of employees and the labour force, it does not create any additional inflationary pressure.
Inflation expectations of households remain elevated compared to the pre-pandemic period.
Consumer demand is shored up by real wage growth driven by inflation slowdown.
Going forward, the advancing processes of import substitution and non-energy export expansion will help a gradual economic recovery.
Against this background the adopted decision will set conditions for a decline in annual consumer price growth rates to 6.0-6.5% by the end of 2014 and to the target level of 4.0% in the medium term.
Capacity utilisation indicators have improved.
It is attested, among other things, by the on-going decline in production capacity and labour force utilisation, and a certain rise in the unemployment rate.
According to the baseline scenario, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will come in at 4.5–6.5% in 2023, return to 4% in 2024 and will be close to 4% further on.
First, investments in agriculture and an increase in its production capacity reduce harvest’s dependence on weather conditions and have a restraining influence on food price growth.
The GDP growth rate will enter positive territory in 2017, but will be low.
For the moment, it is premature to judge the pace of future disinflationary trends.
The Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2018 annual GDP growth forecast of 1.5-2% The Bank of Russia’s view of the Russian economy’s growth prospects has also remained mainly unchanged.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements, possible changes in consumer behaviour and budget expenditures.
Consumer demand remains subdued.
Higher inflationary pressure is seen across an increasingly broader range of goods and services.
On 19 March 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 25 b.p.
On 16 December 2016, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 10.00% per annum.
Their impact may be further strengthened by elevated inflation expectations and the associated secondary effects.
Economic recovery is also supported by external demand which continues to grow despite the still complex epidemic conditions in the world.
Nevertheless, inflation and inflation expectations are forecasted to decrease as the economy gradually adjusts to changing external conditions and the impact of the exchange rate dynamics on prices exhausts.
The latter are invariably marked with mixed trends across sectors, as a notable drop in price expectations in agriculture comes with their increase in trade and manufacturing.
The Bank of Russia’s forecast has been substantially revised, including the inflation forecast for 2024, which has been raised to 6.5–7.0%.
This decision is aimed at limiting substantially increased ruble depreciation risks and inflation risks.
Inflation slowdown is continuing.
At the same time, the Bank of Russia expects GDP growth in 2023 to outperform its October forecast and exceed 3%.
At the same time, the impact of one-off supply-side drivers of inflation translates into growing prices for a wider range of goods and services as inflation expectations of households and businesses remain high and unanchored.
Inflation, both monthly and annual, is expected to gradually decline.
Inflation expectations do not decline so far, hitting multi-year highs.
Over the medium-term horizon, the balance of inflation risks is still significantly tilted to the upside.
The aggregate output of goods and services remains somewhat below potential.
Consumer price growth rates will keep on going down further, primarily influenced by the demand-side restraints.
There persists uncertainty over future external conditions and certain food price dynamics.
That said, there was an increase in the heterogeneity of trends in businesses’ price expectations across industries: since the beginning of 2023, a notable drop in price expectations in agriculture has come with their increase in retail and wholesale trade.
The Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario rests on the decisions already made regarding the expenditure path of the federal budget and the fiscal system as a whole.
Interest rates in the deposit and credit market have risen slightly.
A further aggravation of external trade and financial restrictions may have a proinflationary effect, thereby leading to a sharper decline in the potential of the Russian economy than expected in the baseline scenario.
Subsequent economic growth may be held back by, among other things, low vaccination rates and the spread of new coronavirus strains, as well as the ensuing tightening of restrictions.
On 26 April 2024, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 16.00% per annum.
Disinflationary risks to the baseline scenario are mostly linked to the possible additional tightening of monetary conditions in the economy due to a consistently high risk premium in credit rates and elevated banks’ requirements for borrowers amid high uncertainty.
Overall lending growth remains high, despite the deceleration in the retail segment.
External demand movements will be mostly dependent on fiscal support measures in individual advanced economies as well as the pace of vaccination world-wide.
Inflation will stay around the current level until the mid-2014.
Money supply (М2) growth rates remain low.
In February, annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.2% (vs 5.0% in January 2019).
Fixed capital investments will continue to contract due to economic agents’ negative expectations with regard to the Russian economic outlook and tight lending conditions.
The prospects for global economic recovery are improving amid gradual normalisation of epidemic conditions in the world.
Stripping out the impact of one-off factors, the monthly growth pace of prices was also up but remained low.
Third, inflationary pressure may stem from changes in households’ behaviour as the propensity to save becomes much lower.
Credit activity remains high in both the corporate and retail segments.
A gradual decline in nominal interest rates and the easing of non-price bank lending conditions will remain.
Unemployment was close to its natural level.
As a result, only net exports will make a positive contribution to output growth.
Domestic demand trends and the depreciation of the ruble since the beginning of 2023 significantly amplify proinflationary risks.
In this environment, given that inflation expectations are up again, the balance of risks for inflation is markedly tilted to the upside.
Consumer lending dynamics does not pose any risks for inflation.
Opening up the borders concurrently with a gradual lifting of restrictions may lead to a recovery in the consumption of foreign services and weaken supply-side constraints, including in the labour market owing to an inflow of foreign labour force.
Despite a slowdown in early 2023, credit activity has been high overall, primarily in the corporate segment.
Recent data suggest a rise in price expectations of businesses, which are invariably close to multiyear highs.
According to the estimates as of 24 April, annual inflation stands at 4.2-4.3%.
Short-term proinflationary risks have abated compared to March.
Significant proinflationary risks have crystallised, namely the domestic demand growth outpacing the output expansion capacity and the depreciation of the ruble in the summer months.
This in large measure reflects a strong rebound in domestic demand.
If pro-inflation risks intensify, the Bank of Russia will consider the necessity of key rate increase in the key rate at its upcoming meetings.
The recent weakening of the ruble is putting pro-inflationary pressure and causes inflation expectations to grow, despite a slowdown in annual inflation.
In the second half of 2014, economic growth is expected to accelerate slightly against the backdrop of alleviated geopolitical tension and improving producer sentiment.
Unemployment continues to be close to its all-time low.
This means that by the end of 2024 the Russian economy will reach the level of late 2021.
The Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario is based on the decisions already made regarding the expenditure path of the federal budget and the fiscal system as a whole.
Labour shortages are increasing in many industries amid the effects of the partial mobilisation and a general increase in corporate demand for labour force.
Their impact is short-term and will be exhausted before the end of 2015.
Substantial investment demand is supported by both fiscal incentives and high profits of businesses.
The unemployment rate is close to its record lows, with the number of vacancies at its record highs.
On 18 March 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 20% per annum.
At the same time, banks still report ongoing inflows of household funds to current accounts and deposits.
The OFZ yield curve has shifted upwards at all maturities.
Investment activity remains low amid economic uncertainty, declining profits in the real sector and tightened non-price lending conditions.
The Bank of Russia’s inflation forecast for 2021 has been increased to 4.7–5.2%.
Their level supports balanced demand for loans.
The Bank of Russia forecasts assume the economic downturn to slow down to 1.3%-1.5% in 2016.
Meanwhile, price growth rate for certain food items flattened out due to the increase of supply by the Russian companies and new import contracts.
Annual inflation did not change significantly since the beginning of March and, as of April 22, amounted to 7.8%.
The increase of the key rate will help maintain real interest rates on deposits in the positive territory, which will support the attractiveness of savings and the balanced growth in consumption.
On 15 June 2018, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.25% per annum.
On 16 June 2014 the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to maintain the Bank of Russia key rate at 7.5 percent per annum.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that annual inflation will temporarily fall below 4% in the coming months under the influence of last year’s high base effect.
In these conditions, the growth in domestic demand does not result in a proportional expansion of the supply of goods and services but rather increases the costs of businesses and, consequently, intensifies inflationary pressures.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia will determine the timeline and pace of a return to neutral monetary policy taking into account the still high heterogeneity of current economic and price movement trends, actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target, economic developments over the forecast horizon, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, the year-on-year GDP growth rate is to decline to 0.2% in 2014 Q3 and amount to 0.4% as of the end of 2014.
Economic activity remains weak.
Although survey data show some deterioration in current business sentiment, businesses’ expectations for future demand remain high.
Inflation expectations of businesses have not changed materially after growing over previous months.
According to the forecast of the Bank of Russia, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 4.0–4.5% in 2024 and stay close to 4% further on.
Retail trade turnover growth continued to decline YoY amid falling real disposable household incomes.
Persistent inflationary pressures have increased in recent months.
The recent weekly data on inflation are indicative of a still feeble response of consumer prices to the ruble weakening.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, the GDP growth rate was close to zero in Q2 following negative figures earlier.
This is partially attributed to temporary factors — the ruble exchange rate and last year’s heavy crop.
Households’ inflation expectations remain elevated.
In March, the annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.8% (vs 5.7% in February).
OFZ yields have decreased.
That said, the dynamics of OFZ yields limits the potential for further growth of deposit and credit rates and creates conditions for their decline in the future.
Current price growth rates are increasing, having accelerated since the beginning of 2023.
However, deferred effects may manifest themselves in the months to come.
This is driven by weakening external demand for Russian exports on the back of a global economic slowdown as well as by weak investment activity dynamics, including government investment expenditures.
Growth in household consumption expenditures went up along with the increase in investment and production.
The effect of proinflationary factors may be strengthened by elevated inflation expectations and accompanying secondary effects.
However, inflation expectations of market actors for late 2017 hold above the Bank of Russia’s 4% inflation target.
The main reason for inflation acceleration was the effect of the observed ruble depreciation on prices of a wide range of goods and services.
In mid-2016, the annual consumer price growth is likely to accelerate temporarily owing to the low-base effect of the previous year.
As a result, net exports will be the only component to make a positive contribution to output growth.
The market mortgage segment has also seen a slowdown, although the overall mortgage lending portfolio has been expanding fast, including due to a large volume of loans issued under government-subsidised programmes.
An excessive reduction in households’ propensity to save may lead to consumer demand outstripping the capacity to expand output.
Inflation has accelerated and is developing significantly above the Bank of Russia’s April forecast.
Accelerating food inflation is largely bouncing back after a considerable drop in the second half of 2017 and the first half of 2018.
The development of import substitution and expansion of non-commodity exports make a positive contribution to industrial production dynamics.
Annual inflation grew from 8.6% in June to 9.0% as of 22 July.
The Bank of Russia estimates GDP decrease in 2015 Q2 compared with the similar quarter last year to be more significant than that in Q1 2015.
In February, the annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.7% vs 5.2% in January and, according to the 15 March assessments, reached 5.8%.
The anchoring of inflation close to 4% will require both further decrease in inflation expectations and making them less susceptible to price changes.
Hence, we see softening of monetary conditions, impacted by reduced structural deficit of liquidity even if the key rate is unchanged.
July saw some signs of stabilisation in production and consumption decline.
With respect to external conditions accelerated yield growth in advanced economies and geopolitical factors may cause surges in volatility in financial markets and affect expectations for the exchange rate and inflation.
This is mainly driven by the planned Reserve Fund spending to finance the budget deficit and the ensuing changeover in the banking sector to a liquidity surplus.
At the same time, credit activity has remained high, especially in the corporate sector.
The unemployment rate is close to its record lows, while the number of vacancies is at its record highs.
At the same time, a more confident drop in non-food price growth is necessary for sustainable inflation decline.
The seasonally adjusted measure of core inflation was up to 7.7% in annualised terms in February (from 6.8% in January).
The adopted decision on the key rate would ensure the decline in inflation to no more than 6.0% by the end of 2014 and help to maintain the appropriate balance of inflation risks and the risks of further economic slowdown.
As predicted by the Bank of Russia’s forecast, annual retail sales growth declined in January—February as a result of the VAT increase and a slowdown in wage growth.
Q2 saw further growth in manufacturing output; construction began to rise.
Proinflationary risks have considerably increased and are now prevailing over the entire forecast horizon.
There is a balance between proinflationary and disinflationary risks over a short-term horizon.
Medium-term risks of inflation overshooting the target dominate over the risks of its persistent downward deviation.
Positive trends in the economy are not accompanied by a higher inflationary pressure.
Domestic demand movements will be predominantly shaped by the rate of growth in private demand.
However, they are still unable to ensure that overall production dynamics remains sustainably positive.
June results show that annual core inflation declined for the first time since March 2018 and reached 4.6%.
Further substantial decrease of output is expected amid the deterioration of external conditions resulting from oil price drop and foreign financial markets inaccessibility for Russian borrowers.
In view of the extension of the agreement to reduce oil production, the Bank of Russia has raised its GDP growth forecast for 2018 in comparison to the previous baseline scenario.
Elevated inflation expectations increase the inertia of underlying inflation.
The stabilisation in the domestic financial market comes with continuing uncertainty over future external conditions and their impact on financial asset prices.
As inflation showed a substantial slowdown, inflation expectations of both households and businesses declined considerably.
This increase will have a one-off effect on price dynamics.
The effects of prior key rate rises on lending are expected to strengthen in the next few months.