In the coming quarters, demand for imports in ruble terms will continue to adjust to recent key rate decisions.
The Bank of Russia forecasts the growth rate of the Russian economy in 2021 in the range of 3.0–4.0%.
have tightened since the previous meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors.
The Bank of Russia’s assessment of the medium-term economic development remains the same.
On 28 October 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.50% per annum.
Despite the fact that inflation expectations of households and businesses notably declined in February and March, they remain elevated.
Inflation fell perceptibly; however, the trend bears risks of instability.
Annual inflation will slow down to 4% in the first half of 2020 when the effects of the ruble’s weakening and the VAT rise peter out.
In 2015, GDP is expected to contract by 3.2%.
At the end of 2018, inflation is expected to be close to 4%, which corresponds to the Bank of Russia’s target.
Lending to non-financial organizations showed stable dynamics despite a persistent tightening of requirements for a borrower’s financial standing and a loan collateral quality.
Significant short-term proinflationary effects may also be caused by a deterioration in the global economic outlook and a further rise in volatility in global financial markets.
Over the medium-term horizon, the balance of inflation risks is significantly tilted to the upside.
Given the balance of risks for inflation the Bank of Russia’s ongoing transition from moderately tight to neutral monetary policy will be gradual.
A deterioration in the global economic growth outlook can also have significant short-term pro-inflationary effects, in particular given volatility in foreign financial markets.
The expansion of private demand along with a continuously high level of public demand is facilitating strong growth in domestic demand.
The current economic slowdown is predominantly structural by nature and thus does not exert any noticeable downward pressure on inflation.
Survey data show that enterprises are still struggling to fix production and logistics — despite the nascent diversification in suppliers of finished products, raw materials and components, as well as in sales markets.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that in the coming months, annual inflation will temporarily fall below 4% under the influence of last year’s high base effect.
While making its decision hereinafter, the Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks, the inflation dynamics and economic developments against the forecast.
During the transformation of the economy, a change in the structure of aggregate demand is taking place.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements, prices of individual food products, and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
Continuing growth of interest rates on household deposits stimulates the propensity to save and increases the attractiveness of deposits.
For the trend towards inflation slowdown to become sustainable, according to Bank of Russia estimates, it is necessary to hold the current key rate throughout 2016, with its potential downgrades due in 2017 Q1-Q2.
These risks are implied by the inertia of inflation expectations, as well as a possible rapid decline in households’ propensity to save.
OFZ yields are essentially unchanged since the end of October.
In 2019, the forthcoming VAT increase might have a slight constraining effect on business activity, mostly in the beginning of the year.
Monetary conditions evolve, among other things, under the influence of earlier decisions to cut the key rate.
The Bank of Russia leaves unchanged its estimates of risks associated with consumer and oil price volatility, wage movements and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
The disinflationary effect on the short-term horizon may be caused by the persistence of households’ high propensity to save in the conditions of general economic uncertainty, prolonged habituation to the new structure of supply in consumer markets, and expectations of further price decline amid the strengthening of the ruble since the beginning of the year.
Weekly estimates show that inflation has significantly accelerated since early March.
An additional disinflationary factor was the expansion of supply in a number of goods markets as external and domestic export restrictions remained in place.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy pursued will create the conditions for returning the economy to the balanced growth path.
Variations in the dynamics of economic activity persist, with differing trends observed across industries.
Economic growth resumed in early 2018, following the decline due to temporary headwinds in late 2017.
Moving forward, should inflation risks fall as much as to ensure with greater certainty that the Bank of Russia achieves its inflation target, the Bank of Russia will resume a gradual lowering of its key rate at one of its forthcoming Board meetings.
Concurrently, higher incomes allow households to simultaneously increase savings and consumption.
Given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will return to the Bank of Russia’s target in the second half of 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
Second, inflationary pressure may stem from households’ shrinking propensity to save.
The Bank of Russia takes into consideration the oil market uncertainty and keeps pursuing a conservative approach to the forecast, which assumes an oil price reduction to $40 per barrel by the end of 2017 and its further staying near this level.
This factor’s influence on inflation is abating amid the relatively stable exchange rate.
On 18 March 2016, the Board of Directors of the Bank of Russia decided to keep its key rate at 11.00% p.a.
Consumer lending dynamics do not entail material inflation risks so far.
According to the updated forecast of the Bank of Russia, annual inflation will stay at 6.0–7.0% in 2023.
Current inflationary pressure has intensified, also because of the pass-through of the ruble weakening to prices.
Monetary conditions have continued to ease since the last Board meeting.
At the same time, inflation risks have increased due to a combination of factors, including, inter alia, the aggravation of geopolitical tension and its potential impact on the ruble exchange rate dynamics, as well as potential changes in tax and tariff policy.
Surveys suggest that a significant proportion of enterprises are still confronted by difficulties in production and logistics.
A slowdown in annual consumer price growth will be conducive to inflation expectations decrease.
This may bring about a more substantial and prolonged upward deviation of inflation from the target.
At the same time, there has been a stop in the decline of core inflation, seasonally adjusted monthly growth rates of consumer prices and inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses edged down but remain elevated.
Acceleration of inflation in 2013 Q4 was largely attributed to rise in prices of fruits and vegetables, along with some milk and poultry products.
The key rate decision and the potential for its decrease in the future will contribute to further easing of monetary conditions, thus supporting domestic demand and creating prerequisites for inflation to approach 4%.
An accurate assessment of the VAT increase effect on inflation can be made in the second quarter of the current year.
Given the weak economic activity observed since the beginning of this year, the Bank of Russia has lowered its GDP growth rate forecast for 2019 from 1.0-1.5% to 0.8-1.3%.
Annual inflation registered an expected short-term increase against this backdrop standing at an estimated 4.2% as of 13 June 2017.
The balance of risks has further shifted towards proinflationary risks.
Amid economic uncertainty and declining producer confidence this year there is a high probability of a reduction in fixed capital investment.
The labour market remains tight.
Accelerated vaccination rates, as well as expectations of additional fiscal support measures in certain countries, contribute to the growth of prices in financial and commodity markets.
Overall, the actual decrease in economic activity in 2022 Q2 is less pronounced than the Bank of Russia assumed in its April baseline scenario.
This reinforces persistent inflationary pressure in the economy.
Maintenance of moderately tight monetary conditions will constrain inflation risks, including the short-term ones, coming from the launch of the Finance Ministry-conducted purchase of foreign currency in the FX market.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will reduce to 5.0-6.0% in 2022 to return to the target in the middle of 2023.
The current conditions continue to encourage savings and ensure that consumption growth is balanced.
An increase in structural staff shortages may cause labour productivity growth to considerably lag behind wage growth.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, to strengthen the trend to a steady decline in inflation the current key rate needs to be maintained till end-2016 with a possibility to cut it in 2017 Q1-Q2.
With regard to external conditions, accelerated yield growth in advanced economies and geopolitical factors may cause surges in volatility in financial markets and affect expectations for the exchange rate and inflation.
This led to a moderate decrease in interest rates on bank loans and on household deposits.
Considering the change in the external and internal environment, the Bank of Russia’s capability to downgrade its key rate in the course of the first half of 2017 has diminished.
The revisions of the expected paths of monetary policy tightening by the US Federal Reserve and other central banks in developed markets reduce the risks of persistent capital outflows from emerging markets.
If the external conditions improve and inflation and inflation expectation show a stable downward trend, the Bank of Russia will be ready to start monetary policy easing.
No legislative decision has yet been taken with regard to specific medium-term fiscal consolidation measures, including the indexation of wages in the public sector and social benefits.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of further key rate increase at its upcoming meetings.
Growing domestic demand is supporting an improvement in business sentiment despite persistently challenging external conditions.
The risks remain that inflation may exceed the target in late 2017.
Unsecured consumer lending is supported by higher households’ incomes.
Significant labour shortages may lead to labour productivity growth lagging behind growth in real wages.
This may become an additional source of higher volatility in global financial markets.
In accordance with the updated baseline forecast, GDP is projected to grow 2.0-3.0% in 2022.
For all the elevated inflation expectations and ongoing improvements in consumer sentiment, Russian consumers have sustained a cautious stance.
The deterioration in the global commodity markets will require a further adjustment of the Russian economy.
Under these conditions, a further rise in interest rates is progressing in the deposit and credit market.
Given this decision and considering that the moderately tight monetary policy is maintained, annual growth in consumer prices is set to total less than 4.5% for October 2017, dropping to the target level of 4% by the end of 2017.
Against the background of a drastic change in external conditions, the sharp increase in the Bank of Russia key rate of 28 February helped sustain financial stability and prevented uncontrolled price rises.
The Bank of Russia still assumes that monetary policy will become neutral in 2018.
Moving forward, the Bank of Russia’s key rate decisions will be based on its assessment of the balance of risks of inflation’s material and sustainable deviation in either direction from the target, as well as the dynamics of economic activity against the forecast.
2 Starting from 01.07.2016 auctions were discontinued.
Lending gained support from both the key rate reduction since spring and government-subsidised lending programmes.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, as of 27 April, annual consumer price growth rate stood at 16.5%.
The Russian economy reached its pre-pandemic level in 2021 Q2.
Fourth, inflation expectations remain highly sensitive to changing prices for individual groups of goods and services and exchange rate movements.
As to a medium-term horizon, proinflationary risks still dominate and have grown slightly since mid-September.
Moreover, there were a number of specific factors affecting the markets for some food items and boosting their prices.
Major macroeconomic indicators demonstrate further economy cooling.
At the same time, corporate lending is continuing to grow at rates close to recent years’ highs.
In these circumstances, the Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2019 GDP growth forecast in the range of 0.8–1.3%.
Inflationary pressure in the Russian economy remains high.
Banks continue to adhere to a conservative policy by mitigating price and non-price lending conditions primarily for reliable borrowers.
The expansion of government spending, including investment expenditures, in the second half of 2019 will support economic growth.
The FIFA World Cup made a positive contribution to the annual GDP growth rate in Q2 The Bank of Russia forecasts that in 2018 the Russian economy will post a 1.5–2% growth rate, which corresponds to its potential amid the remaining structural limitations.
According to Rosstat’s tentative estimates, the annual pace of GDP drop decreased in Q3.
The dominating influence of proinflationary factors could lead to a more substantial and prolonged deviation of inflation upwards from the target.
Within the next months, the Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks and economy and inflation dynamics’ consistence with the baseline forecast.
Russian economy’s growth rates remain low while industrial output continues to stagnate.
According to the estimate as of 3 June, annual inflation stood at 8.1% after 7.8% at the end of April.
At the same time, the trend towards sustainably low inflation remains in place.
Its expansion is largely based on the non-food sales.
Following the Board of Directors’ key rate meeting on 16 February 2024, the Bank of Russia releases its medium-term forecast
Volatility in global commodity and financial markets may produce a negative impact on exchange rate and inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations of households continue to grow, remaining close to their highest level for the last four years for more than six months.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that the annual growth rate of consumer prices will be less than 5% in July 2017, to reach the target of 4% in late 2017.
A growing risk premium in bond yields and lending rates may further tighten monetary conditions, which will restrain lending in the economy.
Annual GDP growth is predicted to enter positive territory in 2017.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy helps make deposits more attractive, increasing households’ propensity to save.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy stance will accelerate the formation of tight monetary policy stance needed to return inflation to the target and limit the influence of the currently high inflation on long-term interest rates.
Concurrently, labour market tightness has increased again.
Consumer demand continues to recover, but it is still moderate.
The Bank of Russia forecasts annual inflation to be 3.5 4% in late 2018 and increase for a short-term period to 4 4.5% in 2019.
Labour productivity growth is sluggish, while fixed capital investment continues to contract because of declining profits in the real sector, limited access to long-term financing in both international and domestic markets, as well as low producer and consumer confidence.
The increase in consumer prices growth caused by the aforementioned factor is unlikely to be protracted.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 5.0–7.0% in 2023, return to 4% in 2024 and stabilise close to 4% further on.
At the same time, inflation expectations of households have declined significantly in March.
However, for the trend towards sustainable decline in inflation to strengthen, according to the Bank of Russia’s estimates, the current value of the key rate needs to be maintained till end-2016 with its further possible cuts in 2017 Q1-Q2.
The April weakening in the ruble against the backdrop of geopolitical tension will be a factor for consumer price growth paces to quicken as they move closer to 4%.
Should inflation pressures in the global economy strengthen further, central banks in advanced economies may attempt an earlier normalisation of their monetary policies.
Flash data including business survey results show that the labour market remains tight.
In February 2018 it stood at 2.2%.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia proceeds from the fiscal policy normalisation path stipulated by the Guidelines for Fiscal, Tax and Customs and Tariff Policy for 2021 and the 2022–2023 Planning Period, which implies a return to the fiscal rule parameters in 2022.
The extension of the agreement between oil-exporting countries lowers the uncertainty of energy prices’ dynamics and related pro-inflationary risks over a one-year horizon.
In June 2014, the year-on-year consumer price growth rate increased to 7.8% and core inflation grew to 7.5%.
Further GDP growth above 1.5-2% a year is attainable if structural reforms are put in place.
Significant inflation acceleration in February‑May 2014 was prompted by a number of unforeseen factors, i.e.
Since the previous key rate review meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors OFZ yields have risen and the slope of the OFZ curve has increased.
Fixed capital investments will continue to contract due to high prices for the imported investment goods, deterioration in companies’ financial performance, tighter lending conditions, and high economic uncertainty.
Inflationary pressures, including underlying ones, were close to the maximum values since the beginning of the year.
There are still risks associated with the persistently high inflation expectations and the upward deviation of the Russian economy from a balanced growth path.
This is set to be a protracted process.
However, current monetary conditions set the ground for inflation decline in the medium run.
Factors that led to acceleration of inflation at the end of 2013 are expected to exhaust their influence in the first half of 2014.
At the same time, current rates of price growth in the greater part of the consumer basket, although having dropped, are still significantly above 4% annualised.
Current rates of price growth remain moderate, including in the stable components of inflation.
Analysts’ medium-term inflation expectations are anchored close to 4%.
According to the Bank of Russia’s monitoring, increasingly more businesses report that their production rate has returned to the pre-pandemic level.
The slowdown in inflation comes largely on the back of a stronger ruble and a cooling of consumer activity.
Real wage decrease and a slowdown in retail lending growth will result in lower consumer demand.
Import substitution steps up and non-commodity exports expand for certain items.
At the end of 2022, an increase in budget expenditures made a significant contribution to the growth of current accounts.
Recent data also indicate that businesses’ price expectations are holding close to multi-year highs.
Supply-side factors in the oil market may amplify the volatility of global oil prices.
On 17 December 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 100 b.p.
Higher nominal interest rates have had a minor effect on lending amounts as yet.
Inflation movements The current rate of price growth is about 4% (on an annualised basis).
The OFZ curve has flattened.
This is helped by the economic environment including steady Russian financial market, persistently weak consumer demand and the indexation of administered prices and rates as previously planned.
In September, the current seasonally adjusted price growth rose to 9.8% in annualised terms from 7.5% in August.
The ruble appreciation since the beginning of the year alongside with inflation slowdown in Russia’s trading partners limits the price growth of imports.
Faster growth of food prices to 5.9% (vs 5.5% in January 2019) played a significant role in the inflation rise in February.
Annual consumer price growth rate declined to 4.3% in August (from 4.6% in July 2019).
March saw a slowdown in price growth across all core groups of goods and services.
The revision of the interest rate paths by the US Fed and other central banks in advanced economies in 2019 H1 reduces the risks of persistent capital outflows from emerging markets.
Disinflationary risks are primarily related to domestic demand slowing down faster due to monetary policy tightening already in place.
The dynamics of the major macroeconomic indicators show a considerable GDP contraction in 2015 Q1.
Risks of a global economic slowdown have increased.
In certain sectors, the capacity for output expansion is lagging behind the expanding demand, including due to lack of labour force.
This decline will be mainly driven by supply-side factors, thereby producing a limited disinflationary effect.
In August, households’ inflation expectations somewhat decreased but still remain elevated.
Annual inflation will return to 4% in the first half of 2020 when the effects of ruble’s weakening in 2018 and the VAT rise peter out.
Annual consumer price growth rate declined to 4.0% in September (from 4.3% in August 2019) and was close to 3.8% according to the estimate as of 21 October.
In the first quarter, the rate of consumer price growth has been higher than the Bank of Russia’s forecast.
Inflation slowdown was broadly facilitated by the ruble appreciation amid relatively higher oil prices, persistent interest in investment in Russian assets among external investors, and a drop in the sovereign risk premium.
This will result in a more sizable GDP contraction in 2016 than forecast previously in the baseline scenario.
Annual inflation in general corresponds to the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
Households’ inflation expectations and businesses’ price expectations have increased.
In the majority of economic sectors, which specialise in meeting domestic demand, output has either reached or exceeded pre-crisis levels.
However, indicators reflecting the most sustainable price movements appreciably exceed 4% (annualised), Bank of Russia estimates show.
Amid persistently restricted access to the international capital markets for Russian companies and relatively cheap energy resources, fixed capital investments will continue to edge lower.
The Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2018 annual GDP growth forecast of 1.5-2%.
The Bank of Russia’s forecast also takes into account decisions made by the Russian Federation Government to invest the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund.
The annual inflation has stabilised at 7.3% and the annualised monthly inflation, seasonally adjusted, is about 5%.
Structural factors continue to exert a restraining influence on economic growth, however, its slowing is becoming more and more cyclical.
In recognition of this, the Bank of Russia assumed in its baseline scenario the average forecast oil price of $30 per barrel in 2016, with its gradual rise to $40 per barrel to 2018.
Inflation expectations of households are down.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia admits the possibility of turning to cutting the key rate in Q2-Q3 2019.
This is primarily related to the weak dynamics of domestic and external demand.
Despite elevated inflation expectations and an increased share of the most liquid assets (current accounts and cash rubles) in the structure of savings, households maintained a high propensity to save.
The expansion of domestic demand is reflected, among other things, in increased demand for imports, which has substantially contributed to the weakening of the ruble since the beginning of 2023.
These months saw food inflation unusually low for this period, supported by the high level of supply including bumper harvests of 2015-2016.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, GDP growth rate in 2015 will amount to 0.9-1.1%.
Besides, inflation reduction can be hampered by persistently high inflation expectations, and an upward revision, planned for 2016-2017, of rates and prices in the regulated sector, an upward revision of social payments indexation, as well as overall budget policy easing.
Its influence on price growth rates is enhanced by restrictions on foreign travel.
OFZ yields and interest rates in the credit and deposit market have turned downwards.
This primarily concerns energy commodities and food markets.
Over the medium term, the balance of inflation risks is still tilted to the upside.
Overall growth in corporate lending is below the peak levels of autumn 2023, though fiscal stimuli back up high corporate sector demand for loans.
Due to the long-term demographic trends labour supply decreases.
In line with the pursued monetary policy, the Bank of Russia has lowered its end-of-year annual inflation forecast for 2019 from 4.7-5.2% to 4.2-4.7%.
On 23 April 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 50 bp to 5.00% per annum.
This was instrumental in restoring the inflow of funds into fixed-term ruble deposits and stabilised household demand for cash.
In September, business and consumer sentiment slightly worsened due to a rise in overall uncertainty.
Taking into account Q1 GDP data and the negative changes in external conditions, output is forecast to contract by 3.9-4.4% in 2015.
In terms of stable components, however, the current price growth rates remain moderate.
Alongside with accommodative monetary conditions, lending dynamics are influenced by the preferential programmes implemented by the Government as well as by regulatory relaxations.
The Bank of Russia forecasts annual inflation to be 3-4% in 2018 and close to 4% in 2019.
At the same time, labour shortages are emerging in many sectors, despite the inflow of foreign labour.
The Russian economy’s growth rate still remains subdued.
This decline will be in significant part driven by supply-side factors.
The annual rate of consumer price growth is estimated at 7.6% as of 9 June 2014.
Nominal and real interest rates continue to increase.
Price growth becomes more homogeneous in regions and for major groups of goods and services.
Real wage growth has sped up, which is, however, associated with large payments of annual bonuses in 2024 Q1.
The sources of medium-term risks remain unchanged.
Estimates as of 23 October 2017 indicate that annual inflation is 2.7%.
A number of factors bear the risk of inflation deviating from the target both upwards and downwards.
However, signs emerged in October of a slowdown in credit activity including in the context of the tightening in non-price bank lending conditions, particularly in the retail segment.
Having said that, the application of the transitional budget rule, accompanied with the Finance Ministry-conducted purchases/sales of foreign currency in the FX market will help lower the dependence of the Russian economy, particularly in terms of monetary conditions and inflation dynamics, on fluctuating oil prices.
This means that a steady rise in domestic demand is progressively exceeding the capabilities to expand the production of goods and the provision of services.
Pro-inflation risks from the labour market persist.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that the annual consumer price growth rates in the second quarter will be close to their first quarter values.
Under these conditions, the continuing growth of the most liquid assets in the structure of household savings may spur a rise in consumer demand in the future.
Due to limited labour resources, labour productivity growth may lag further behind an increase in real wages.
In order to maintain the propensity to save and anchor sustainable inflation slowdown driven by demand-side restrictions, monetary conditions should remain moderately tight.
At the same time, economic growth is nearing its potential level.
The combination of slowdown in real wages growth and a decline in household lending growth rates will have a dampening effect on consumer activity.
Slack domestic demand will facilitate the continuation of annual inflation reduction in years 2015-2017.
This is reflected in the high propensity to save and the increased share of liquid assets (current accounts and ruble cash) in the savings structure.
In case of a further expansion in the budget deficit, proinflationary risks will increase and tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
The main proinflationary risks are associated with changes in terms of trade (including as a result of the geopolitical tensions), persistently high inflation expectations and upward deviation of the Russian economy from a balanced growth path, as well as with the fiscal policy normalisation path.
The high debt load of Russian companies and interest rate risks for banks and their borrowers have also been factored in.
Quarterly GDP growth is expected no later than 2016 H2.
First, increased structural labour shortage may cause labour productivity growth to considerably lag behind wage growth.
The Bank of Russia has reviewed the inflation forecast upwards considering the planned increase of the value added tax in 2019.
Taking into account domestic and global economic developments as well as the nature of supply-side constraints, the Bank of Russia expects GDP to grow 4.0–4.5% in 2021.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy will limit the upward deviation of inflation from the target.
Based on the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will edge down to 4.0–4.5% by late 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
According to Bank of Russia forecasts, in 2016, GDP growth will stand at 0.7%, if oil prices recover to US$70 per barrel by late 2016.
This comes as a result of ruble exchange rate movements and the tailing-off of the surge in consumer demand in the context of a marked decline in inflation expectations of households and businesses.
The rapid recovery of demand and elevated inflationary pressure call for an earlier return to neutral monetary policy.
The dominating influence of inflationary factors could lead to a more substantial and prolonged upward deviation of inflation from the target.
However, their sentiment is continuing to improve as suppliers of finished products, raw materials and components diversify, as do sales markets.
As a result, consumer price growth rate is likely to remain exceeding 7% till the end of 2014.
A faster — relative to the baseline scenario — normalisation of production and logistics chains in the Russian and global economies may become another source of downward pressure on prices.
In September, monthly prices increased their growth pace on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Since monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, the probability of inflation exceeding the 5.0% target at end-2014 has increased substantially.
Annual inflation continues its decline in line with the Bank of Russia’s baseline forecast; however, this is largely due to temporary factors.
Lending was largely supported by governmental subsidised lending programmes.
These factors, alongside with a decrease in retail lending, will result in further decline in consumer activity.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia proceeds from the parameters of the federal budget and the budgets of constituent territories reflected in the Guidelines for Fiscal, Tax and Customs and Tariff Policy for 2021 and the 2022-2023 Planning Period, as well as from the announced time frames for the completion of anti-crisis measures of the Government and the Bank of Russia.
This is evidenced by economic activity data for 2023 H2, including recent monthly data for Q4.
Moreover, the increasing complexity of production and supply chains and payments due to external restrictions could lead to both higher import prices and tighter supply-side constraints in the Russian economy.
Consumer prices current growth rates track somewhat below the Bank of Russia forecast.
In its baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia forecasts that GDP will grow at 2.2–2.7% in 2023, 0.5–1.5% in 2024, 1.0–2.0% in 2025, 1.5%—2.5% in 2026.
At the same time, these risks might increase if government spending rise in higher oil price scenario.
A considerable labour shortage persists, especially in manufacturing.
The updated Rosstat statistics reflect steadier economic growth in 2017 — early 2018 than previous estimates.
Uncertainty persists over their subsequent movements.
According to companies’ surveys, the labour shortage continues to widen.
On 29 April 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to cut the key rate by 300 basis points to 14.00% per annum.
The factors of inflation decline are exhausted impact of ruble depreciation seen in January-March 2014 on consumer prices, lower scale of increase in administered prices and tariffs, expected good harvest, as well as subdued aggregate demand with aggregate output of goods and services remaining below potential.
However, supply-side limitations in the global economy have exacerbated.
In case of a further budget deficit expansion, pro-inflation risks will rise and tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
Proinflationary risks have increased significantly over the medium-term horizon.
As inflation risks abate further, the Bank of Russia will be ready to continue cutting the key rate.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia took into account the macroeconomic fundamentals which suggest a less severe downturn than previously estimated considering this level of oil prices.
These stem from the current developments in the oil market, persistently high inflation expectations and some uncertainties surrounding budget configuration.
Annual inflation will peak in the first six months of 2019 reaching 5.0-5.5% by the end of 2019.
At the same time, the cumulative contribution of ruble depreciation, restrictions on imports and other factors specific for the markets of several food products, to year-to-year consumer prices growth will account for 4.9 percentage points by the year-end.
Given the current monetary policy stance, annual inflation will return to the Bank of Russia’s target close to 4% in the first half of 2022 and will remain at that level further on.
As a result, growth in domestic demand will continue to outpace the supply expansion capacity, intensifying underlying inflationary pressures in the economy.
However, high-frequency indicators suggest some growth in business activity in the fourth quarter.
The economic recovery may be held back, among other things, by low vaccination rates and the spread of new coronavirus strains, as well as the ensuing tightening of restrictions.
remained overall neutral with a slight tightening despite the cut in the key rate in September.
Against this background, lending activity is decreasing, especially in the retail lending market.
Taking into consideration new data on the changes in economic activity in the baseline scenario, the Bank of Russia forecasts that the GDP growth rate will be 1.5–2.5% in 2023, 0.5–2.5% in 2024, 1.0–2.0% in 2025, and 1.5–2.5% in 2026.
The Bank of Russia Board of Directors will hold its next rate review meeting on 16 December 2016 of Russia Board’s decision is to be published at 13.30 Moscow time.
Current price movements are largely driven by a surge in consumer demand for individual product categories against the background of higher uncertainty and rising inflation expectations, as well as the weakening of the ruble since the beginning of 2022.
Non-price lending conditions are gradually becoming looser for the most reliable borrowers but are still restrictive.
Amid accelerated consumer prices growth, inflation expectations of households and businesses continued to increase imposing additional pressure on prices.
Third, inflationary pressure may stem from changes in households’ behaviour as their propensity to save can become considerably lower.
Over Q2 2014 the moderate recovery of economic activity has been observed.
This is in part related to slower than expected implementation of national projects planned by the Government.
Consumer prices grew at the pace of 2.4% in March, and consumer price growth in April is estimated at 2.3 2.5%.
The Bank of Russia’s key rate decision will speed up the formation of monetary conditions needed to ensure balanced growth in lending and steady disinflationary trends.
Inflation risks emanate primarily from persistently high inflation expectations, aggravation of external economic situation, revision of planned increases in administered prices and tariffs, fiscal policy easing, and accelerated growth in nominal wages, including those in the public sector.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
Nominal lending rates continue to decline influenced by earlier key rate cuts, as well as those expected by market participants.
Persistently elevated inflation expectations and their further increase pose a significant risk.
Key rate decisions will take into account actual and expected inflation movements relative to the target and economic developments over the forecast horizon, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
Amid economic uncertainty and declining producer confidence there is a strong probability of a reduction in fixed capital investment.
Concurrently, the decline in imports as a whole, due to the introduction of external trade and financial restrictions, is still significantly ahead of the decline in exports.
At the same time, the new exchange rate mechanism will set grounds for more rapid adjustment of the Russian economy to changing external conditions.
Alongside with monetary policy, instrumental in the slowdown of consumer prices are the Government decisions as regards indexation of wages and pensions, as well as declining global food prices.
This is largely related to the growth in prices in global commodity markets and the continuing pass-through of the ruble’s earlier weakening to prices.
Unfavourable conditions in the markets for some goods, such as dairy products, sugar, pork, and petrol, also have contributed to higher inflation rates.
Yields on medium- and long-term OFZs are little changed.
Economic activity continues to be constrained by weakening external demand for Russian exports on the back of a global economic slowdown as well as by weak investment activity dynamics, including government investment expenditures.
Low geographic and cross-sectoral labour force mobility is an additional structural constraint.
Although the number of vacancies has decreased, the unemployment rate is near historical lows.
A trend towards growth in loan and deposit interest rates is also emerging, with growth in deposit rates taking place at a slower pace so far.
Under the Bank of Russia estimates, the annual consumer price growth rate is down to 7.3% as of 25 April 2016 / as of 25 April 2016 remained at the level of March 2016 of 7.3%.
The slowdown in private sector investment demand is evolving simultaneously with growing government investment.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that annual inflation will peak in March and go down further on.
January — February 2017 saw an ongoing annual industrial production growth (adjusted for calendar factors) and a gradual rebound in investment activity.
Recent data for the third quarter suggest that the economy is expanding faster than the Bank of Russia expected in September.
Industry, including technology-intensive production types, discovers new opportunities for growth.
The Russian economy continues to grow but at a slower pace than in 2024 H1.
They nevertheless remain elevated, as do businesses’ price expectations.
While the partial mobilisation may mainly create disinflationary pressure in the coming months due to subdued consumer demand, its subsequent effects will be pro-inflationary as it adds to supply-side restrictions in the broader economy.
Underlying inflationary pressures remain high overall and have not yet demonstrated downward trends.
By estimates, the annual consumer price growth fell to 6.6% as of 12 September 2016 compared to 7.2% in July.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, the labour market adjusts to the new conditions mostly through wage decrease and part-time employment.
Yet positive shifts in the economy anticipate the beginning of its growth recovery.
At the same time, persistently high oil prices support domestic economy.
However, the current capacity to expand production in the Russian economy is largely limited by the labour market.
As for domestic conditions, proinflationary effects may be more serious than in the baseline scenario due to changes in the size of the labour force and the employment structure, including amid the partial mobilisation.
The lower — compared to last year’s — indexation of administered prices and rates in July, as well as the expectations for good crops, will contribute to the slowdown of inflation, helping recede inflation expectations.
Given the decision made, the moderately tight monetary conditions and the weak domestic demand will keep putting downward pressure on inflation.
Inflation expectations remain elevated.
Over the next months, prices for goods and services will continue to be affected by depreciation of the ruble.
Moreover, for further expanse of credit institution ability to manage their foreign exchange liquidity it was decided to increase maximum allotment amount for 28-day FX REPO auctions from 1.5 to 5.0 billion USD and to conduct 12-month FX REPO auctions on weekly basis.
In addition, accelerating growth in lending and a significant decline in the savings rate could set the stage for a more rapid expansion of consumer demand that would outstrip the capacity to expand production.
On the one hand, amid growing global oil prices coupled with the increase in excises early this year, the prices of oil products in the domestic market saw a tangible rise.
However, some funds were transferred from current accounts to time deposits.
The Bank of Russia will assess inflation risks and compliance of economic performance and inflation with the baseline scenario when it makes its key rate decision in the upcoming months.
have remained broadly neutral.
The domestic financial market has stabilised in the time since the previous Board meeting.
The labour market is adapting to the new economic conditions and unemployment remains persistently low.
Given the current recovery dynamics and the economy’s growing resilience to the fluctuations in the external economic climate, the Bank of Russia expects that the GDP will grow in 2017-2019 even if the conservative oil price scenario materialises.
High-frequency indicators point to steady growth of consumer and investment demand.
A tightening in a number of macroprudential measures and the rollback of most regulatory relaxations in banking regulation are also working to tighten bank lending conditions.
These trends will persist amid further gradual easing of the monetary policy and low risk appetite of lenders and borrowers.
Moving forward, the Bank of Russia’s key rate decisions will be based on its assessment on the balance of risks for inflation significantly and persistently deviating in either direction from the target, as well as the dynamics of economic activity against the forecast.
Annual inflation temporarily accelerated in July, which was expected and caused by a greater increase in utility tariffs compared with 2014.
It will consequently result in growing household income contributing to the revival of consumer demand in 2018.
Meaningful inflation risks are related to geopolitical tensions affecting foreign trade terms.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses’ price expectations remain elevated.
Due to demographic trends the impact of this factor will persist in the long run.
Given the moderately tight monetary policy, the 4% inflation target will be achieved before the end of 2017 and will be maintained close to this level in 2018-2019.
Also growing are restrictions in the labour market, driven in part by the partial mobilisation.
High-frequency indicators of economic activity suggest that the economic recovery in early 2021 is ongoing.
The situation in the domestic financial market remained stable in November and the first half of December and did not pose any additional inflation risks.
Growing yields of medium- and long-term OFZs largely reflect the increase of interest rates in global financial markets.
On 10 June 2016, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate from 11.00 to 10.50 The Board of Directors notes the positive trends of more stable inflation, decreased inflation expectations and inflation risks against the backdrop of imminent growth recovery in the economy.
In 2018 Q3, annual GDP growth slipped to 1.5%, consistent with the Bank of Russia’s forecast, mostly due to the high base effect in agriculture.
Given the situation, the potential for lowering the short-term rates is greater than for the long-term ones.
A further significant reduction in inflation expectations also contributes to the inflation slowdown.
The effect of the VAT increase on inflation can be fully captured no sooner than this April.
The VAT hike slightly constrains business activity.
Inflation is to slow down to the 4% target by late 2017 and hold close to this level in the sequel.
High market interest rates support the propensity to save but do not sufficiently constrain lending.
On 27 July 2018, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.25% per annum.
Specific fiscal consolidation measures, including wage and social payments indexation, remain uncertain over the horizon.
The Bank of Russia has lowered its annual inflation forecast for 2019 from 4.0–4.5% to 3.2–3.7%.
The weakening of the ruble has resulted in Russian products gaining competitiveness, while it also helped economic growth in individual industries.
A more rapid adaptation of the economy, accompanied by an active recovery of imports among other things, may also have a disinflationary effect.
However, given the contracting number of employees and the labour force, it does not create any additional inflationary pressure.
Inflation expectations of households remain elevated compared to the pre-pandemic period.
Consumer demand is shored up by real wage growth driven by inflation slowdown.
Going forward, the advancing processes of import substitution and non-energy export expansion will help a gradual economic recovery.
Against this background the adopted decision will set conditions for a decline in annual consumer price growth rates to 6.0-6.5% by the end of 2014 and to the target level of 4.0% in the medium term.
Capacity utilisation indicators have improved.
It is attested, among other things, by the on-going decline in production capacity and labour force utilisation, and a certain rise in the unemployment rate.
According to the baseline scenario, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will come in at 4.5–6.5% in 2023, return to 4% in 2024 and will be close to 4% further on.
First, investments in agriculture and an increase in its production capacity reduce harvest’s dependence on weather conditions and have a restraining influence on food price growth.
The GDP growth rate will enter positive territory in 2017, but will be low.
For the moment, it is premature to judge the pace of future disinflationary trends.
The Bank of Russia keeps unchanged its 2018 annual GDP growth forecast of 1.5-2% The Bank of Russia’s view of the Russian economy’s growth prospects has also remained mainly unchanged.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with wage movements, possible changes in consumer behaviour and budget expenditures.
Consumer demand remains subdued.
Higher inflationary pressure is seen across an increasingly broader range of goods and services.
On 19 March 2021, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 25 b.p.
On 16 December 2016, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 10.00% per annum.
Their impact may be further strengthened by elevated inflation expectations and the associated secondary effects.
Economic recovery is also supported by external demand which continues to grow despite the still complex epidemic conditions in the world.
Nevertheless, inflation and inflation expectations are forecasted to decrease as the economy gradually adjusts to changing external conditions and the impact of the exchange rate dynamics on prices exhausts.
The latter are invariably marked with mixed trends across sectors, as a notable drop in price expectations in agriculture comes with their increase in trade and manufacturing.
The Bank of Russia’s forecast has been substantially revised, including the inflation forecast for 2024, which has been raised to 6.5–7.0%.
This decision is aimed at limiting substantially increased ruble depreciation risks and inflation risks.
Inflation slowdown is continuing.
At the same time, the Bank of Russia expects GDP growth in 2023 to outperform its October forecast and exceed 3%.
At the same time, the impact of one-off supply-side drivers of inflation translates into growing prices for a wider range of goods and services as inflation expectations of households and businesses remain high and unanchored.
Inflation, both monthly and annual, is expected to gradually decline.
Inflation expectations do not decline so far, hitting multi-year highs.
Over the medium-term horizon, the balance of inflation risks is still significantly tilted to the upside.
The aggregate output of goods and services remains somewhat below potential.
Consumer price growth rates will keep on going down further, primarily influenced by the demand-side restraints.
There persists uncertainty over future external conditions and certain food price dynamics.
That said, there was an increase in the heterogeneity of trends in businesses’ price expectations across industries: since the beginning of 2023, a notable drop in price expectations in agriculture has come with their increase in retail and wholesale trade.
The Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario rests on the decisions already made regarding the expenditure path of the federal budget and the fiscal system as a whole.
Interest rates in the deposit and credit market have risen slightly.
A further aggravation of external trade and financial restrictions may have a proinflationary effect, thereby leading to a sharper decline in the potential of the Russian economy than expected in the baseline scenario.
Subsequent economic growth may be held back by, among other things, low vaccination rates and the spread of new coronavirus strains, as well as the ensuing tightening of restrictions.
On 26 April 2024, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 16.00% per annum.
Disinflationary risks to the baseline scenario are mostly linked to the possible additional tightening of monetary conditions in the economy due to a consistently high risk premium in credit rates and elevated banks’ requirements for borrowers amid high uncertainty.
Overall lending growth remains high, despite the deceleration in the retail segment.
External demand movements will be mostly dependent on fiscal support measures in individual advanced economies as well as the pace of vaccination world-wide.
Inflation will stay around the current level until the mid-2014.
Money supply (М2) growth rates remain low.
In February, annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.2% (vs 5.0% in January 2019).
Fixed capital investments will continue to contract due to economic agents’ negative expectations with regard to the Russian economic outlook and tight lending conditions.
The prospects for global economic recovery are improving amid gradual normalisation of epidemic conditions in the world.
Stripping out the impact of one-off factors, the monthly growth pace of prices was also up but remained low.
Third, inflationary pressure may stem from changes in households’ behaviour as the propensity to save becomes much lower.
Credit activity remains high in both the corporate and retail segments.
A gradual decline in nominal interest rates and the easing of non-price bank lending conditions will remain.
Unemployment was close to its natural level.
As a result, only net exports will make a positive contribution to output growth.
Domestic demand trends and the depreciation of the ruble since the beginning of 2023 significantly amplify proinflationary risks.
In this environment, given that inflation expectations are up again, the balance of risks for inflation is markedly tilted to the upside.
Consumer lending dynamics does not pose any risks for inflation.
Opening up the borders concurrently with a gradual lifting of restrictions may lead to a recovery in the consumption of foreign services and weaken supply-side constraints, including in the labour market owing to an inflow of foreign labour force.
Despite a slowdown in early 2023, credit activity has been high overall, primarily in the corporate segment.
Recent data suggest a rise in price expectations of businesses, which are invariably close to multiyear highs.
According to the estimates as of 24 April, annual inflation stands at 4.2-4.3%.
Short-term proinflationary risks have abated compared to March.
Significant proinflationary risks have crystallised, namely the domestic demand growth outpacing the output expansion capacity and the depreciation of the ruble in the summer months.
This in large measure reflects a strong rebound in domestic demand.
If pro-inflation risks intensify, the Bank of Russia will consider the necessity of key rate increase in the key rate at its upcoming meetings.
The recent weakening of the ruble is putting pro-inflationary pressure and causes inflation expectations to grow, despite a slowdown in annual inflation.
In the second half of 2014, economic growth is expected to accelerate slightly against the backdrop of alleviated geopolitical tension and improving producer sentiment.
Unemployment continues to be close to its all-time low.
This means that by the end of 2024 the Russian economy will reach the level of late 2021.
The Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario is based on the decisions already made regarding the expenditure path of the federal budget and the fiscal system as a whole.
Labour shortages are increasing in many industries amid the effects of the partial mobilisation and a general increase in corporate demand for labour force.
Their impact is short-term and will be exhausted before the end of 2015.
Substantial investment demand is supported by both fiscal incentives and high profits of businesses.
The unemployment rate is close to its record lows, with the number of vacancies at its record highs.
On 18 March 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 20% per annum.
At the same time, banks still report ongoing inflows of household funds to current accounts and deposits.
The OFZ yield curve has shifted upwards at all maturities.
Investment activity remains low amid economic uncertainty, declining profits in the real sector and tightened non-price lending conditions.
The Bank of Russia’s inflation forecast for 2021 has been increased to 4.7–5.2%.
Their level supports balanced demand for loans.
The Bank of Russia forecasts assume the economic downturn to slow down to 1.3%-1.5% in 2016.
Meanwhile, price growth rate for certain food items flattened out due to the increase of supply by the Russian companies and new import contracts.
Annual inflation did not change significantly since the beginning of March and, as of April 22, amounted to 7.8%.
The increase of the key rate will help maintain real interest rates on deposits in the positive territory, which will support the attractiveness of savings and the balanced growth in consumption.
On 15 June 2018, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.25% per annum.
On 16 June 2014 the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to maintain the Bank of Russia key rate at 7.5 percent per annum.
The Bank of Russia forecasts that annual inflation will temporarily fall below 4% in the coming months under the influence of last year’s high base effect.
In these conditions, the growth in domestic demand does not result in a proportional expansion of the supply of goods and services but rather increases the costs of businesses and, consequently, intensifies inflationary pressures.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia will determine the timeline and pace of a return to neutral monetary policy taking into account the still high heterogeneity of current economic and price movement trends, actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target, economic developments over the forecast horizon, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, the year-on-year GDP growth rate is to decline to 0.2% in 2014 Q3 and amount to 0.4% as of the end of 2014.
Economic activity remains weak.
Although survey data show some deterioration in current business sentiment, businesses’ expectations for future demand remain high.
Inflation expectations of businesses have not changed materially after growing over previous months.
According to the forecast of the Bank of Russia, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 4.0–4.5% in 2024 and stay close to 4% further on.
Retail trade turnover growth continued to decline YoY amid falling real disposable household incomes.
Persistent inflationary pressures have increased in recent months.
The recent weekly data on inflation are indicative of a still feeble response of consumer prices to the ruble weakening.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, the GDP growth rate was close to zero in Q2 following negative figures earlier.
This is partially attributed to temporary factors — the ruble exchange rate and last year’s heavy crop.
Households’ inflation expectations remain elevated.
In March, the annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.8% (vs 5.7% in February).
OFZ yields have decreased.
That said, the dynamics of OFZ yields limits the potential for further growth of deposit and credit rates and creates conditions for their decline in the future.
Current price growth rates are increasing, having accelerated since the beginning of 2023.
However, deferred effects may manifest themselves in the months to come.
This is driven by weakening external demand for Russian exports on the back of a global economic slowdown as well as by weak investment activity dynamics, including government investment expenditures.
Growth in household consumption expenditures went up along with the increase in investment and production.
The effect of proinflationary factors may be strengthened by elevated inflation expectations and accompanying secondary effects.
However, inflation expectations of market actors for late 2017 hold above the Bank of Russia’s 4% inflation target.
The main reason for inflation acceleration was the effect of the observed ruble depreciation on prices of a wide range of goods and services.
In mid-2016, the annual consumer price growth is likely to accelerate temporarily owing to the low-base effect of the previous year.
As a result, net exports will be the only component to make a positive contribution to output growth.
The market mortgage segment has also seen a slowdown, although the overall mortgage lending portfolio has been expanding fast, including due to a large volume of loans issued under government-subsidised programmes.
An excessive reduction in households’ propensity to save may lead to consumer demand outstripping the capacity to expand output.
Inflation has accelerated and is developing significantly above the Bank of Russia’s April forecast.
Accelerating food inflation is largely bouncing back after a considerable drop in the second half of 2017 and the first half of 2018.
The development of import substitution and expansion of non-commodity exports make a positive contribution to industrial production dynamics.
Annual inflation grew from 8.6% in June to 9.0% as of 22 July.
The Bank of Russia estimates GDP decrease in 2015 Q2 compared with the similar quarter last year to be more significant than that in Q1 2015.
In February, the annual consumer price growth rate rose to 5.7% vs 5.2% in January and, according to the 15 March assessments, reached 5.8%.
The anchoring of inflation close to 4% will require both further decrease in inflation expectations and making them less susceptible to price changes.
Hence, we see softening of monetary conditions, impacted by reduced structural deficit of liquidity even if the key rate is unchanged.
July saw some signs of stabilisation in production and consumption decline.
With respect to external conditions accelerated yield growth in advanced economies and geopolitical factors may cause surges in volatility in financial markets and affect expectations for the exchange rate and inflation.
This is mainly driven by the planned Reserve Fund spending to finance the budget deficit and the ensuing changeover in the banking sector to a liquidity surplus.
At the same time, credit activity has remained high, especially in the corporate sector.
The unemployment rate is close to its record lows, while the number of vacancies is at its record highs.
At the same time, a more confident drop in non-food price growth is necessary for sustainable inflation decline.
The seasonally adjusted measure of core inflation was up to 7.7% in annualised terms in February (from 6.8% in January).
The adopted decision on the key rate would ensure the decline in inflation to no more than 6.0% by the end of 2014 and help to maintain the appropriate balance of inflation risks and the risks of further economic slowdown.
As predicted by the Bank of Russia’s forecast, annual retail sales growth declined in January—February as a result of the VAT increase and a slowdown in wage growth.
Q2 saw further growth in manufacturing output; construction began to rise.
Proinflationary risks have considerably increased and are now prevailing over the entire forecast horizon.
There is a balance between proinflationary and disinflationary risks over a short-term horizon.
Medium-term risks of inflation overshooting the target dominate over the risks of its persistent downward deviation.
Positive trends in the economy are not accompanied by a higher inflationary pressure.
Domestic demand movements will be predominantly shaped by the rate of growth in private demand.
However, they are still unable to ensure that overall production dynamics remains sustainably positive.
June results show that annual core inflation declined for the first time since March 2018 and reached 4.6%.
Further substantial decrease of output is expected amid the deterioration of external conditions resulting from oil price drop and foreign financial markets inaccessibility for Russian borrowers.
In view of the extension of the agreement to reduce oil production, the Bank of Russia has raised its GDP growth forecast for 2018 in comparison to the previous baseline scenario.
Elevated inflation expectations increase the inertia of underlying inflation.
The stabilisation in the domestic financial market comes with continuing uncertainty over future external conditions and their impact on financial asset prices.
As inflation showed a substantial slowdown, inflation expectations of both households and businesses declined considerably.
This increase will have a one-off effect on price dynamics.
The effects of prior key rate rises on lending are expected to strengthen in the next few months.
The inflow of funds to fixed-term ruble deposits is moderate.
The decision made by the Bank of Russia will accelerate the formation of monetary conditions required to boost saving activity and return lending to balanced growth.
In 2020 Q4, households’ real income continued to recover and unemployment started to decline.
Since the previous key rate meeting of the Board, OFZ yields and credit and deposit market rates have been essentially unchanged.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, at the end of 2017, the economy’s growth rate will be close to the potential at 1.7-2.2%.
Given further intensification of inflationary pressure in the world economy, the central banks of advanced economies are forced to implement a faster normalisation of monetary policy.
In turn, the negative effect of the existing external restrictions on the Russian economy’s potential may prove to be stronger, which is also a significant pro-inflation risk.
Inflation remains low, driven by long-term factors including, in the first place, a moderate recovery in domestic demand.
Consumer price growth is starting to be affected by the VAT increase scheduled to take effect from 1 January 2019.
Inflation holds at 2.5% and will gradually draw near 4% by late 2018.
Businesses’ price expectations, on the contrary, rose slightly after several months of decline.
Later on, as import substitution expands, sources of funding gradually diversify, lending conditions ease, and oil prices rise to some extent, the quarter-on-quarter GDP growth is expected to recover.
In April, annual inflation started to slow down and declined to 5.1%, according to the estimate as of 22 April.
Banks tend to ease non-price lending conditions on a case-by-case basis and continue to thoroughly select borrowers.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, most annual inflation indicators reflecting the most sustainable price movements are growing.
Accelerating fiscal spending increases the contribution of fiscal policy to the expansion of aggregate demand.
The contraction in imports due to the introduction of external trade and financial restrictions is considerably outstripping the decline in exports.
Given gradually rising inflationary pressures, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of increasing the key rate at its next meetings to stabilise inflation close to 4% in 2024 and further on.
Based on Bank of Russia estimates, indicators characterizing the most sustainable price movements substantially overshoot 4% (annualised).
Besides, restrictions on the import of certain food items support the relevant industries.
The fiscal rule will set off the impact of the oil market conditions on inflation and the domestic economic environment as a whole.
The emerging signs of recovery in investment activity are persistently weak.
Inflation declines ahead of the forecast.
On 26 April 2019, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.75% per annum.
Growth of interest rates on household deposits contributes to increase in propensity to save and increase attractiveness of deposits for cash holdings.
The economic recovery may be held back by a slower rollout of vaccination programmes, the spread of new virus strains, and the entailing toughening of restrictions, among other factors.
Overall, the contribution of fiscal policy to the expansion of domestic demand is still increasing, including due to growing government investment.
Further upward pressure on prices may continue to come from temporary disruptions in production and supply chains.
The recovery in consumption is becoming steadier.
However, annual inflation may accelerate temporarily in the middle of the year as a result of the low base effect.
These factors, along with low retail lending, will further contain consumer spending.
Recent weekly data indicate a slowdown in current price growth rates on the back of a strengthening of the ruble and a cooling of consumer activity.
These factors, along with low level of retail lending, will result in further contraction of consumer spending.
The drastic change in external conditions for the Russian economy that occurred at the end of February has created threats to financial stability.
The Board of Directors notes that the dynamics of inflation and economic activity are overall in line with the forecast.
The economic activity is rebounding.
Significantly increased profits of companies and positive business sentiment, including due to the fiscal stimulus, support high investment demand.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, GDP will fall by 3.5-4.0% in 2015.
In its baseline scenario, given the current trends in economy, the Bank of Russia forecasts GDP decline by 4.0–6.0% in 2022.
Also, prices are adjusting to the ruble exchange rate that has weakened since the beginning of the year.
Annual inflation in January climbed to 8.7% (vs 8.4% in December 2021).
Moreover, inflation expectations of households increased in July.
Inflation will begin to gradually return to the target in the second half of the year, supported by further recovery of domestic demand.
Yields of medium- and long term OFZs are also up somewhat under the influence of trends in global financial markets.
Short-term pro-inflationary risks have abated.
On 26 October 2018, The Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.50% per annum.
Consumer demand growth slowed down, as compared to previous months.
On 25 September 2024
The downturn in annual inflation is further explained by the sharp increase in consumer prices seen one year ago (the base effect).
While structural factors are still curbing economic growth, current drop in production is of a cyclical nature.
Yields of medium- and long-term OFZs remain near their late-March levels, reflecting the expectations of the Bank of Russia’s return to neutral monetary policy and the movements of interest rates in global financial markets.
Tighter monetary conditions haven’t offset the influence of the aforementioned factors on inflation expectations yet though monetary aggregates dynamics sets the ground for inflation decline in the medium run.
The key rate decisions will take into account actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target and economic developments over the forecast horizon, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
According to the estimate as of 21 October, annual inflation equalled 8.4% and is expected to be in the range of 8.0–8.5% by the end of 2024.
A sharp surge in uncertainly weighs heavily on the sentiment and expectations of households and businesses.
Inflation has demonstrated a noticeable decline in line with the Bank of Russia’s baseline forecast.
In 2024 Q2, the average seasonally adjusted core inflation went up to 9.2% in annualised terms from 6.8% in the previous quarter.
Inflation is expected to be within the range of 7.4–7.9% as of the end of 2021.
Medium-term inflation is largely impacted by fiscal policy.
In addition to external sanctions on imports, the key supply-side constraint on the Russian economy is related to labour market conditions.
On the short-term horizon, among these factors are food price movements triggered by the supply of farm produce.
Approving of conservative budget consolidation strategy, including moderate indexation of wages and pensions in the medium-term horizon, makes an uncertainty and inflation risks from fiscal policy subside.
According to the Bank of Russia forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will edge down to 5.0–7.0% in 2023, and return to 4% in 2024. continued to ease, but generally remained tight, including as inflation expectations declined.
At the same time, given the short-term factors and due to the low base effect, annual inflation will grow with a peak in the second quarter of 2015.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, in 2022–2024, the Russian economy will grow 2.0–3.0% per annum.
Analyst expectations for 2022 have increased slightly, but are anchored close to 4% for the medium term.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, the annual rate of consumer price growth stood at 15.6% as of 8 June 2015.
This determines the inertia of current high price growth.
These factors, alongside with a decrease in retail lending, will result in further decline in consumer spending.
Seasonally adjusted monthly inflation was down from 0.9% between August and October to 0.7% in November.
On 26 July 2024, the Bank of Russia’s Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 200 basis points to 18.00% per annum.
High and unanchored inflation expectations, which are particularly sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations, are also a source of risk.
The Russian economy still shows a significant upward deviation from a balanced growth path.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses have significantly decreased, reaching the levels of spring 2021.
However, unemployment remains low amid the negative demographic trends, while the labour market adjusts to the new conditions largely through wage decrease and growing part-time employment.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, in 2022–2023, the Russian economy will grow 2.0–3.0% annually.
The contribution of the VAT increase to annual consumer price growth has largely materialised.
Domestic demand will be also influenced by the process of fiscal policy normalisation in view of the announced additional social and infrastructure measures.
January 2015 saw a continued fall in real wage growth and a sharp decline in consumer expenditures which exerts a restraining influence on the prices of goods and services.
In February—March 2019, inflation is holding somewhat lower than the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, the annual growth rate of consumer prices is set to drop from 12.9% for December 2015 to approximately 10% for January 2016.
This largely reflects the fact that steady growth in domestic demand exceeds supply expansion capacity in a wide range of sectors.
Anaemic economic growth is mostly caused to a significant degree by structural reasons.
This impact is likely to run its course in the second quarter, which is attested by weekly price growth data for April that suggests that prices on fruit and vegetables accelerated.
Positive real interest rates are held at the level which ensures demand for loans without increasing inflationary pressure and upholds incentives for saving.
The high level of annual inflation is caused primarily by the supply-side factors, i.e.
Moving on, according to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, annual inflation will stay close to 4%.
While assessing evolving inflation dynamics and economic developments against the forecast, the Bank of Russia admits the possibility of cutting the key rate gradually in coming Q2-Q3.
On 3 February 2017, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 10.00% p.a.
Going forward, the rise in government expenditures, including investment ones, and their impact on economic growth will be more distributed over time.
Against this backdrop inflation expectations may increase, exerting upward pressure on consumer prices.
A certain tightening in monetary conditions is ongoing.
Despite the key rate cut, it remains rather high for the deposit rates to support the public’s propensity to save.
Economic activity trends evolve better than the Bank of Russia’s October forecast.
Third, a change in the household behaviour model connected with a substantial decrease in their propensity to save can be a source of inflationary pressure.
This was caused by weak investment activity dynamics and a significant drop in annual export growth rates, including on the back of weaker external demand.
Import substitution is advancing together with certain non-commodity exports and new lines of industrial growth, including the high-tech development.
However, the overall GDP change in 2023 will be within the range of (-3.0)—0.0% due to the base effect of 2022 Q1.
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, planned tax revisions will make about a 1 percentage point contribution to inflation.
Most measures of underlying current price growth, according to the Bank of Russia’s estimates, are in the 6–7% range on an annualised basis.
Labour shortages are increasing in many industries amid the effects of the partial mobilisation as growth in businesses’ demand for labour continues.
Expanding demand continues to exceed the capacity to build up output.
The contribution of persistent factors to inflation increased due to faster growth of demand compared to output expansion capacity.
However, the current rate of price growth is up slightly, in part due to steady components of inflation.
Short-term proinflationary risks are also associated with the stronger volatility in global markets caused in part by various geopolitical developments, which may affect exchange rate and inflation expectations.
The impact of one-off supply-side drivers of inflation is translating into growing prices for a wider range of goods and services as inflation expectations of households and businesses remain high and unanchored.
The inflation dynamics may also be affected by fiscal policy parameters, including decisions on the use of the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund in excess of the threshold level set at 7% of GDP.
Taking into account new data on economic trends and the ongoing structural transformation of the Russian economy, the Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario forecasts that GDP growth will be 0.5–2.0% in 2023 and 0.5–2.5% in 2024.
The Bank of Russia will continue to take measures aimed at stabilising inflation expectations and slowing down consumer prices growth to the target in the medium term.
Based on current trends in the Russian and global economy, GDP is projected to grow 4.5% in 2021.
Under these conditions, labour productivity growth may lag behind real wage growth.
Lending and deposit rates show a downward trend under the influence of the Bank of Russia’s previous decisions to cut its key rate.
The GDP growth forecast for 2024 has been raised to 2.5-3.5%.
As of 18 March, annual inflation remains at its February level of 7.7%.
With regard to tax policy measures the Bank of Russia will pay special attention to the estimation of secondary effects (including the response of inflation expectations), which are difficult to capture at the moment.
As a result, net exports will be the only positive contributor to the annual output growth.
The unemployment rate has dropped to a record low, while the number of vacancies is at a record high.
The interest rate dynamics were a key contributor to easing of monetary conditions.
When making its key rate decisions, the Bank of Russia will assess the impact of cancelling these anti-crisis measures on monetary conditions.
Despite the progressing decline in annual inflation, inflation expectations of households and businesses are high and have slightly grown relative to the summer months.
Growth in domestic demand is still outstripping the capabilities to expand the supply of goods and services.
The Bank of Russia will factor in the implications for the forecast of potential investment decisions as regards the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund in excess of the 7% GDP threshold.
To alleviate these risks, the Bank of Russia has to keep rates at a level that encourages saving, brings down inflation expectations and promotes sustainable inflation reduction to the target level.
In late 2022 and early 2023, flash data suggest that business and consumer activity trends, as well as those of foreign trade, are evolving better than forecast by the Bank of Russia in October.
However, the slowdown in consumer prices occurred somewhat slower than predicted.
External inflation is stable and does not exert a noticeable influence on domestic prices.
A disinflationary effect may also be caused by a faster economic transformation, accompanied by an active recovery of imports among other things.
Despite the relatively low price growth rates in the previous months, inflation expectations of households and price expectations of businesses are high.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, most inflation indicators reflecting the most sustainable price movements are growing.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors proceeded from the following: Annual inflation continues to decline in line with the Bank of Russia’s baseline forecast.
have continued to ease.
The dynamics of domestic demand contribute to a rise in demand for imports.
Considering the decision made and persistent moderately tight monetary policy, the annual inflation, as forecast by the Bank of Russia, will be around 4.5% in September 2017 to reach the 4% target by late 2017.
Should inflation risks amplify, the Bank of Russia cannot rule out a tightening of its monetary policy.
External economic conditions have restraining effect on the Russian economy: oil prices see a significant decline while economic activity of most Russia’s trading partners remains weak.
Russian economy’s growth rate since the beginning of the year has been lower than the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
Medium-term pro-inflationary risks still prevail over the risks of inflation’s sustainable deviation downward from the target.
The Board of Directors notes that inflation is close to 4% while the economy keeps growing.
It means that the Russian economy will return to its pre-crisis level in the second half of 2021.
Current growth rates of consumer prices as a whole remain low, contributing to a further slowdown in annual inflation.
The recovery of demand is becoming increasingly steady and in certain sectors exceeds their output expansion capacity.
The annual pace of consumer price growth in the end of 2016 is estimated to be about 6%, on the way to reach the target of 4% in 2017.
In 2017 Q4, increased supply of farm produce on the back of growing crop productivity and the shortage of long-term storage facilities continued to exert a downward pressure on consumer price growth.
A slowdown in the global economy and a further escalation of external trade and financial restrictions may weaken foreign demand for Russian exports and have a pro-inflation effect via exchange rate dynamics.
If these factors continue to exert their influence over the coming quarters, inflation might return to the Bank of Russia’s target slower than expected.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will slow down to 5.0–7.0% in 2023 to return to 4% in 2024.
The Bank of Russia estimates the annual growth rate of consumer prices to decline, as of 25 July 2016, to 7.2%.
Inflation expectations of households and businesses’ price expectations remain high.
remain accommodative and have not changed substantially since the previous meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors.
Unemployment is at its record lows, whereas the number of openings was the highest on record.
Pro-inflationary risks posed by budget expenditures growth in the second half of 2019 — early 2020 hold low because the rise in expenditures is likely to be more distributed over time.
This was supported by changes in the balance of supply and demand in certain food markets and the past year’s low base effect.
Short-term inflation risks are also associated with intensified volatility in global markets caused by, among other factors, a range of geopolitical events, which may affect exchange rate and inflation expectations.
In this environment, the balance of risks has tilted even more towards proinflationary ones.
In January, price expectations of businesses increased on the back of the earlier weakening of the ruble and the VAT increase.
A recovery was seen in unsecured consumer lending, alongside with significant growth in mortgage loans.
Investment activity continued to rise in the third quarter.
The decision taken is proactive in nature and is aimed at limiting inflation risks that remain elevated, especially over the short-term horizon.
The additional fiscal easing announced by the Government will support economic activity in 2023.
The increase in mortgage and consumer lending does not pose any risks for inflation to rise above 4% so far.
The consumer price index has shown diverging trends in terms of components: a notable slowdown in goods price growth came with an acceleration in services price growth.
Due to the budget rule, the decrease in the 2019 average annual oil price from 63 to 55 US dollars per barrel in the baseline scenario will have little influence on macroeconomic fundamentals.
Inflation movements will be shaped including by such impactful factors as the efficiency of import substitution processes and the scale and speed at which imports of finished goods, raw materials and components will be recovering.
That said, uncertainty is in place over how inflation expectations will respond to the April developments in financial markets.
On 16 September 2022, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to cut the key rate by 50 basis points to 7.50% per annum.
The most significant disinflationary risk for the baseline scenario is the continued high propensity of households to save amid increased general uncertainty, as well as the duration of households’ adaptation to the new supply structure in consumer markets.
Positive trends in industrial production are gaining momentum, freight turnover is growing, and construction has turned to recovery.
Annual inflation remains low.
In its key rate decision-making, the Bank of Russia will determine if the increases of the key rate in September and December 2018 were sufficient to bring annual inflation back to the target in 2020, taking into account inflation and economic performance against the forecast, as well as the risks associated with external conditions and financial markets’ response to them.
Labour shortages continue to grow.
This, among other things, suggests that in 2024 the proinflationary effect of broader fiscal stimulus on domestic demand will be offset by a decrease in the credit impulse.
In August, inflation totalled 3.3% following a short-lived rise to 4.4% in June.
The economic growth forecast for 2019-2021, included in the baseline scenario, was updated to take into account changes in external conditions and the estimated influence of the set of fiscal and structural measures to be taken by 2024 on economic performance.
This creates the necessity of further increases in the key rate at the upcoming meetings.
On 27 October 2023, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to increase the key rate by 200 basis points to 15.00% per annum.
High-frequency indicators point to a halt in the decline in business activity in May after it dropped sharply in April.
Main risks stem from highly uncertain external conditions and their impact on financial markets.
In these conditions, a decline in quarterly GDP growth is expected to be more protracted than previously forecast.
In this case, lending will continue to expand at an accelerated rate, while household propensity to save will decrease.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast and given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will return to the target in 2025 and stabilise close to 4% further on.
The dominating influence of inflationary factors has led to a more substantial and prolonged upward deviation of inflation from the target.
Also, the good harvest helped lower food price growth.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 4.5–5.0% in 2025, 4.0% in 2026, and stay at the target further on.
Seasonally adjusted core inflation rose to 8.3% in annualised terms from 7.1% (on average) in 2024 Q1.
This mainly results from inertial inflation expectations, possible weakening of households’ propensity to save, and higher real wages not supported with a rise in labour productivity.
Second, the implementation of the budget rule lowers the sensitivity of domestic economic conditions, including exchange rate and inflation dynamics, to changes in oil prices.
However, maintaining current monetary policy stance will ensure a slowdown in consumer price inflation to the target levels in the medium term.
These shocks include aggravation of geopolitical tension, adjustments in monetary policy of foreign central banks and the potential impact of those factors on national currency exchange rate dynamics, tax and tariff policy changes under discussion.
Flash estimates indicate a recovery in retail lending following a temporary slowdown in October, in large measure on the back of stabilisation in consumer sentiment.
Moving forward, in its key rate decision-making the Bank of Russia will take into account actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target and economic transformation processes, as well as the risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
Yields of medium- and long-term OFZs have remained steady.
Besides structural factors, increased external political uncertainty has an adverse impact on economic activity.
The household services sector is actively recovering.
Households’ inflation expectations went up again in December to a fresh five-year high.
Rising market rates following the increase in the key rate have so far had a limited effect on lending in the context of high inflation expectations.
Annual inflation rose to 6.68% (vs 6.46% in July).
The purchases/sales of foreign currency in the FX market, which Russia’s Finance Ministry intends to carry out under a transitional budget rule, will not bring considerable inflation risks given the Bank of Russia sticks to its moderately tight monetary policy.
However, they remain high, on the one hand, contributing to attractiveness of ruble savings, and, on the other hand, alongside with tighter borrower and collateral requirements, resulting in lower annual lending growth.
Polling data reflects an improvement in business and household sentiments, supporting favourable economic dynamics.
This enables positive real interest rates on deposits to sustain in positive territory, which will support the attractiveness of savings and balanced growth in consumption.
The Bank of Russia’s baseline scenario rests on the Government’s decisions which have already been made regarding the medium-term expenditure path of the federal budget and overall the fiscal system.
In recent months, the acceleration of inflation was partially driven by one-off factors.
Economic growth is getting closer to its potential level.
The increase in the key rate by the Bank of Russia will help maintain real interest rates on deposits in the positive territory, which will support the attractiveness of savings and balanced growth in consumption.
OFZ yields declined on the back of the improved situation in global financial markets and revised expectations of market participants with regard to the future Bank of Russia’s key rate path.
In January, households’ inflation expectations slightly abated, though remaining close to six-year highs.
In the months ahead, as new harvest comes in, prices for fruit and vegetables are set to show a seasonal downward trend.
Fifth, the likely tax manoeuvre may result in a temporary acceleration of inflation.
The balance of risks remains skewed towards pro-inflationary risks, especially over a short-term horizon, driven by the VAT increase and price movements in individual food products.
Moving forward, in its key rate decision-making, the Bank of Russia will take into account actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target and economic transformation processes, as well as the risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy stance is aimed to limit this risk and return annual inflation to 4%.
When making its key rate decisions, the Bank of Russia will consider the impact of cancelling these anti-crisis measures on monetary conditions.
In May, seasonally adjusted consumer price growth accelerated significantly, with annual inflation growing to 6.0% (vs 5.5% in April).
Ruble appreciation made a considerable contribution to consumer price growth slowdown since the start of the year.
This shows that current monetary conditions are moderately tight.
Under the baseline scenario, annual inflation will edge down to 4.0–4.5% by the end of 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
Poor substitution of external funding sources with domestic ones caused by shallow Russian financial market and high debt burden will also contain investment demand.
The decline in business activity is slower than the Bank of Russia expected in June.
The Bank of Russia forecasts annual inflation to be 3-4% in late 2018 and remain close to 4% in 2019.
Concurrently, underlying inflationary pressures also rose.
In making its decision on the key rate, moving forward, the Bank of Russia will assess the probability of the baseline scenario implementation (where oil prices drop to $40 per barrel) and the scenario with rising oil prices, alongside with assessing inflation and the economy dynamics relative to the forecast.
Significant shortages of labour force in some industries may lead to labour productivity growth lagging behind growth in real wages.
In particular, the risk of a slowdown in global economic growth still looms caused, among other things, by the further tightening of international trade restrictions.
However, should oil prices remain persistently low, this will further escalate inflation and financial stability risks and will require a more extensive adjustment of the economy to the new conditions.
During September-October significant changes in external conditions have taken place: considerable fall in oil prices and stricter sanctions imposed by certain countries against several large Russian companies.
The Bank of Russia has slightly raised the oil price in its baseline scenario.
Therefore, monetary conditions generate low inflationary pressure without restricting economic growth.
The recovery in retail trade and services is supported by a gradual lifting of restrictions.
At the same time, a growing risk premium factored into lending rates and more stringent borrower requirements of banks trigger the emergence of tight price and non-price bank lending conditions.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 4.0–4.5% in 2025 and stay close to 4% further on.
The labour market creates no additional inflationary pressure.
With deposit rates dropping, the inflow of funds into term ruble deposits has slowed.
In June, annual inflation fell to 15.9% (after 17.1% in May) and, according to estimates as of 15 July, fell to 15.5%.
OFZ yields grew somewhat amid rising inflation expectations, climbing long-term interest rates in global financial markets, and remaining geopolitical tensions.
In February—March 2019, annual inflation is holding lower than the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
However, the overall consumer price index in August, on a monthly seasonally adjusted basis, was decelerating slower, and core inflation went up slightly.
Ruble exchange rate dynamics will remain a meaningful factor shaping the path of inflation and inflation expectations.
July has seen signs of inflation slowdown.
The time period since the Bank of Russia Board meeting in December saw risks to price stability escalating.
The upward deviation of the Russian economy from the balanced growth path has been mainly driven by domestic demand.
This partially results from last year’s high base effect of food inflation.
The main reason for inflation acceleration is the effect of the observed rouble depreciation on prices of a wide range of goods and services.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will come in at 4.5–6.5% in 2023 to return to 4% in 2024.
Investment activity will remain weak amid the persisting economic uncertainty and the relatively tough lending conditions.
As a result annual consumer price growth rate will return to 4% in early 2020. are close to neutral.
Given lending rates hike and tighter borrower and collateral requirements, lending growth (adjusted for currency revaluation) slows down.
have seen no considerable changes since the previous meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors.
The Bank of Russia estimates that the ruble weakening will quicken inflation movement to 4% without the risks of overpassing this level, unless the external environment changes considerably.
Export volumes are expected to grow slightly, against the background of the floating exchange rate.
Concurrently, price expectations of businesses have shown some growth since late summer.
If high inflation risks persist, the Bank of Russia will continue raising the key rate.
Current rates of price growth have increased since late 2022 but remain moderate, including in the stable components of inflation.
The Bank of Russia leaves mostly unchanged its estimates of risks associated with oil price volatility, wage movements and possible changes in consumer behaviour.
The expectations with regard to external demand are also improving on the back of additional fiscal support measures in certain countries and accelerating vaccination paces of the population.
In the context of growing deposit rates since late September, credit institutions have recorded a resumed inflow of household funds, although chiefly to current accounts.
High inflation risks that brought about an increase in the key rate on 3 March 2014 still remain.
This November’s upward movement of inflation was largely driven by annual food price growth accelerating from 2.7% to 3.5%.
Labour market tightness has increased again.
This may pass through to domestic prices for corresponding goods.
If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia holds open the prospect of further key rate rises at its upcoming meetings.
The slack domestic demand and the moderately tight monetary conditions will drag down annual inflation in 2016-2017.
Based on Bank of Russia estimates, this is largely associated with the return of the Russian economy to a balanced growth path.
Unemployment is at a level at which it does not affect inflation.
Due to a limited availability of labour resources, the labour productivity growth may lag more behind the growth in real wages.
to 7.50% per annum.
The disinflationary impact of domestic demand is however going down, which translates into slower deceleration of non-food product prices.
A further toughening of external trade and financial restrictions may also create significant proinflationary risks.
Their decline has yet to become sustainable and consistent.
In turn, a persisting high risk premium in credit rates and higher borrower requirements of banks may restrain the recovery of credit activity.
Annual GDP growth is expected to be close to zero in 2015-2016.
A number of internal conditions continue to pose pro-inflationary risks over a longer-term horizon.
The Finance Ministry’s purchases of foreign currency in the FX market did not have any substantial impact on the ruble exchange rate dynamics as the driving factors of its appreciation remained dominant.
The decline in economic activity is caused by developments in both demand and supply.
According to the Bank of Russia’s estimates, annual consumer prices grew at 15.6% as of 26 October, and at 15.8% in August.
Inflation slowdown paves the way for a future decline in inflation expectations.
Based on Bank of Russia estimates, indicators reflecting the most sustainable price movements are persistently above 4% (annualised).
Amid a considerable reduction in real income slack consumer demand hampers consumer price growth.
Monetary conditions continued to ease since the last Board meeting.
In this environment, given rising inflation expectations, the balance of risks for inflation is markedly tilted to the upside.
Following the July decline in the key rate, yields on short- and medium-term OFZs decreased.
According to the Bank of Russia forecast, the VAT increase and the 2018 weakening of the ruble will temporarily accelerate annual inflation, which will peak in the first half of 2019 and run at 5.0-5.5% by the end of 2019.
Implementation of government anti-recession measures will facilitate investments.
Moderately tight monetary conditions need to be maintained in order to encourage households to save and set the trend towards sustainable inflation reduction under the impact of the demand-side constraints.
According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, gradual easing of internal financial conditions, lower debt burden and improved business sentiment in 2016 H2 will pave the way for investment and production recovery in 2017.
In 2024–2025, GDP will grow by 1.5–2.5% annually.
Inflation slowdown is overshooting the forecast.
The floating exchange rate partially sets off the negative impact of external shocks.
given the inflation slowdown, in line with the forecast, decrease in inflation expectations and unstable economic activity.
Utilisation of production factors — labor force and commercially viable production capacities — is high.
This creates the necessity of further increases in the key rate at upcoming meetings.
Weekly inflation declined to 0.0 — 0.1% again after a significant increase early this month.
This is largely related to the increase in prices for certain everyday goods and exchange rate volatility.
More massive staff shortages may cause labour productivity growth to lag behind wage growth.
Slowing inflation allows more certain reliance on sustainable inflation reduction to less than 5% in May 2017 and the 4% target in late 2017, taking into account the decision just made and the retention moderately tight monetary policy.
Key rate decisions will be made taking into account actual and expected inflation movements relative to the target, economic developments over the forecast horizon as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
Inflation deceleration was mainly caused by lower increases in administered prices and utility tariffs.
In the first half of the year, fiscal policy had additional constraining effect on the economic activity, which is in part related to the shift of implementation schedule of a number of national projects planned by the Government.
In 2023, the Russian economy will begin growing gradually amid a structural transformation.
In the forthcoming months, food price growth will largely depend on crop quality and preservation.
Consumer demand remains the main driver of economic growth.
Food inflation remains relatively low, although since the supply of last year harvest has become exhausted annual growth in prices for fruit and vegetables is currently rising.
Government subsidised programmes are still the key contributor to the growth in banks’ mortgage portfolios, while the dynamics in the market segment are moderate.
That said, significant risks are posed by elevated and unanchored inflation expectations, as well as by several external factors.
The Bank of Russia’s decisions to raise the key rate made in September and December 2018 were sufficient to curb the effects of one-off proinflationary factors.
Economic growth might accelerate to 2-3% by 2022 should the Government’s measures for overcoming structural constraints, including the implementation of national projects, be realised.
Positive real interest rates will be held at the level which will ensure demand for loans without increasing inflationary pressure and will uphold incentives for saving.
A good harvest still facilitates a reduction in food inflation.
This was supported by the dynamics of the ruble exchange rate and generally subdued consumer demand.
Going forward, the economic situation will depend on the global energy prices and the economy’s ability to adjust to external shocks.
Due to the remaining elevated domestic demand, which outstrips the capabilities to expand supply, inflation will return to the target somewhat more slowly than the Bank of Russia forecast in February.
The slowing growth in household deposits was attributable in part to the deposit rate reduction.
This comes as a result of an increase in prices for outbound tourism.
Demand for imports will be adjusting to the weaker ruble and the adopted key rates decisions in the coming quarters.
Consumer demand is gradually recovering but remains subdued overall.
Its contribution to annual inflation was around 0.6-0.7 pp, which corresponds to the lower bound of the Bank of Russia expectations range.
The decision taken by the Bank of Russia is aimed at slowing consumer prices growth to the target of 4% in the medium run.
the considerable impact of exchange rate dynamics on consumer prices, as well as unfavourable conditions in the markets for some goods.
Annual inflation slowdown is continuing.
Key macroeconomic indicators show higher resistance of the Russian economy to fluctuations in oil prices.
The increase in the key rate is proactive in nature and will help limit the risks of firm inflation anchoring at the level significantly exceeding the Bank of Russia’s target.
The Board of Directors notes that the dynamics of inflation and economic activity are overall in line with the forecast and inflation risks have subsided somewhat.
Economic slack does not have considerable restraining effect on consumer prices growth as it is mostly caused by structural factors.
The Bank of Russia forcasts that, consistent with the decision, annual inflation will total less than 6% in March 2017, to reach the 4% target in late 2017.
Further proinflationary pressure may be caused by remaining disruptions in production and logistics chains, labour shortages, as well as structural changes in the labour market caused by the pandemic.
On 26 July 2019, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to cut the key rate by 25 bp to 7.25% per annum.
Households’ and businesses’ funds in current accounts and bank deposits have increased, with fiscal spending still a meaningful contributor to this growth.
Proinflationary risks continue to abate, though remaining considerable.
Despite some slowdown, consumer activity remains high.
Based on the Bank of Russia’s forecast, given the monetary policy stance, annual inflation will reduce to 5.0-6.0% in 2022 to return to the target in the middle of 2023.
The ruble appreciation will have additional restraining influence on consumer prices.
In case of a further expansion in the budget deficit, pro-inflationary risks will increase and tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
Core inflation increased to 7.0% in May 2014.
The Bank of Russia sees room for cutting the key rate in the second half of 2017.
GDP data for 2024 Q1 and high-frequency indicators for 2024 Q2 show that the Russian economy continues to grow rapidly.
Sluggish investor and consumer activity will result in low demand for imports.
Economic slack does not have considerable restraining effect on consumer prices increase as it is mostly caused by structural factors.
The Bank of Russia’ forecast will also factor in the impact of the decisions to invest the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund in excess of the threshold level of 7% of GDP.
Its downward deviation against the forecast is driven mainly by temporary factors.
Annual retail sales growth rate has been slowing down since February on the back of moderate dynamics of household income.
December saw a further slowdown in growth of prices for staple goods and services, as well as lower monthly inflation (seasonally adjusted).
In the second half of 2019, the incremental budget revenues will be used to raise government spending, including investment.
In February — early March 2014, the year-on-year growth rate of consumer prices rose and reached 6.4% as of 11 March 2014.
The Russian economy is growing at rates close to its potential.
This slowdown in annual inflation is in line with the previous forecasts.
At the same time, the revision of the interest rate paths by the US Fed and other central banks in advanced economies in the first quarter constrains the risks of persistent capital outflows from emerging markets.
Recent data indicate that business price expectations are growing, reaching new multi-year highs.
The Bank of Russia will decide whether it is appropriate to change the key rate considering the risks for achieving medium-term inflation target taking into account economic development prospects.
Legislative consolidation of a budget rule will contribute to mitigating this risk.
According to the Bank of Russia forecast, given these factors annual inflation will fall to less than 7% in June 2016 to reach the target of 4% in 2017.
Lending activity remains high in both retail and corporate segments.
Some additional inflationary pressure has come from a temporary surge in consumer demand for non-food goods amid the rise of inflation expectations.
Output growth continued throughout March, including industrial output, and capacity utilisation increased.
The GDP growth rate will gradually increase from 0.8–1.3% in 2019 to 2–3% in 2022.
However, the medium-term prospects of the Russian economy saw no changes.
As a result, net exports will be the only component to make a positive contribution to annual output growth.
The price expectations of businesses remain heightened, triggered by the weakening of the ruble which took place since the beginning of the year and the forthcoming VAT rise.
On 11 September 2015, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to maintain the key rate at 11.0 percent per annum, due to the higher inflation risks amid persistent risks of considerable economy cooling.
Given the volatility in the financial markets of advanced economies, a deterioration in the global economic growth outlook can also have significant short-term pro-inflation effects.
Monetary conditions will still be moderately tight, despite a slight easing due to the lowering banking sector liquidity deficit.
Business activity keeps on expanding and is hardly posing any disinflationary pressure on consumer price movements.
In 2024 Q2, lending activity remained high in both retail and corporate segments.
Besides, the medium-term balance of risks for inflation dynamics will depend on potential budgetary and tariff decisions in 2019–2020.
remain accommodative given elevated inflation expectations and actual inflation.
As of 26 January, annual consumer price growth rate was 13.1%.
On 15 June 2015, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate from 12.50 to 11.50 percent per annum, taking account of lower inflation risks and persistent risks of considerable economy cooling.
Given the current monetary policy stance, annual inflation will decline to 4.0–4.5% in 2024 and stay close to 4% further on.
First, they are connected with the further dynamics of oil prices which under reached the agreements began to take shape at a lower level than expected.
This in large part reflects the gradually strengthening effects of monetary tightening.
At the same time prices growth for non-food items was observed in certain commodity groups of imported goods and was caused by more prolonged than supposed influence of ruble depreciation at the end of 2013 — in early 2014.
High-frequency estimates suggest that economic activity continued to grow in Q3 albeit at a somewhat slower pace.
Medium-term inflation is significantly impacted by fiscal policy.
According to an estimate as of 18 October, it went up to 7.8%.
Legislative consolidation of a budget rule will also mitigate medium-term inflation risks.
That said, significant risks are posed by elevated and unanchored inflation expectations, as well as by external factors.
This is expected to additionally constrain lending growth in 2024.
On 8 February 2019, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.75% per annum.
OFZ yields have declined as external financial markets regained a stable footing.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy stance is aimed to limit this risk and return inflation to 4%.
Based on the above specified trends and given the current key rate level, the Bank of Russia expects the downward trend in consumer price growth to continue with inflation rate converging to the target level of 5.0% in late 2014.
Since the previous meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors, interest rates in the credit and deposit market, as well as short- and medium-term OFZ yields, have continued to decline.
The overall balance of inflation risks has remained essentially the same since the previous Board meeting.
Implementation of government anti-recessionary measures will facilitate investments.
The Bank of Russia predicts that, consistent with this decision, annual inflation will total less than 6% in March 2017, to reach the 4% target in late 2017.
In early 2014, the annual growth of consumer prices decelerated and stood at 6.1% as of 10 February 2014.
Uncertainty persists over how strongly the tax measures may affect inflation expectations and how the external conditions will develop.
The labour shortage is growing in many industries.
Households’ inflation expectations have continued to decline in April.
The labour market tries to adjust to new economic conditions, and the unemployment remains stable and low.
Annual inflation dynamics were also influenced by base effects.
Inflation expectations show mixed dynamics but generally remain elevated.
The contribution of the VAT increase to annual consumer price growth in January was moderate.
In December and January, prices continued to grow at an elevated pace.
Meanwhile, inflation slowdown is continuing.
Over the medium-term horizon, the balance of inflation risks has shifted even more towards proinflationary ones.
The economy is rising faster than the Bank of Russia’s February forecast assumed.
Yields on medium- and long-term OFZs have also increased mainly due to elevated geopolitical tensions.
The Bank of Russia will be ready to continue cutting the key rate as consumer price growth declines further in compliance with the forecast but the potential of monetary policy easing will be limited by inflation risks in the next few months.
Further economic recovery may be held back by, among other things, low vaccination rates and the spread of new coronavirus strains, as well as the ensuing tightening of restrictions.
Lending and deposit rates are adjusted downwards under the influence of previous Bank of Russia decisions to reduce the key rate.
This largely points to the expansion of the government borrowing programme.
Current inflationary pressures have significantly increased to a level above the Bank of Russia’s expectations.
A more rapid adaptation of the economy, accompanied by an active recovery of imports among other things may also have a disinflationary effect.
This is also the reason behind a persistently elevated demand for imports.
However, in 2024 Q1, the calendar effect of a leap year partly contributed to the annual GDP growth rate.
The risks that inflation will not reach the target of 4% in 2017 declined, but still remain at a heightened level.
It is forecast to edge down to 4.0-4.5% in 2022 and will remain close to 4% further on.
Real sector lending continues to grow on the back of eased monetary conditions.
The Bank of Russia forecast assumes consumer price growth rate at 3.8–4.2% by the end of 2018.
This forecast takes into account the decisions taken with regard to the key rate and to the suspension of foreign currency purchases in the domestic market under the fiscal rule.
In 2023, the GDP growth rate will remain negative at (-4.0)—(-1.0)%.
Growth in consumer lending may be strengthened by the easing of banks’ non-price requirements for borrowers and lower risk premiums in interest rates.
On 14 December 2018, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to raise the key rate by 0.25 pp to 7.75% per annum.
Despite growing oil prices and ruble strengthening in the latest period, the accumulated weakening of the ruble, impacted by the drop in oil prices, between late 2015 and early 2016, is still putting pro-inflationary pressure on the economy, contributing to continued high inflation expectations.
Net export contribution to GDP growth will stand close to zero.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, Q3 GDP growth continued in line with the forecast.
This primarily concerns the labour market.
Household consumption is on the rise alongside with the growth in investment and industrial output.
As inflation slows down in line with the forecast, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors will continue with a downward revision of its key rate, at one of its forthcoming meetings.
Business price expectations showed mixed dynamics amid August ruble depreciation.
The ruble’s depreciation caused prices for a wide range of goods and services to accelerate, which was the reason for elevated inflation expectations, along with the July indexation of utility tariffs.
Signs have emerged of small inflows of funds into fixed-term ruble deposits.
With regard to the above, the impact on prices from the depreciation of the ruble since the beginning of the year can be more pronounced than expected in the baseline scenario.
Their restraining effect on business activity may strengthen in the context of the spread of new coronavirus strains and the associated tightening of anti-pandemic measures.
Price expectations of businesses have increased most significantly in recent months.
As a result, according to the Bank of Russia forecast, GDP growth in 2019 will range between 1.2% and 1.7%.
Accommodative monetary policy will continue to support the economy throughout 2021.
The next regular meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors, where the key rate level will be considered, is scheduled for 25 April 2014 1 Standing facilities (fixed rates) REPO Overnight loans Lombard loans Loans secured with gold Loans secured with non-marketable assets and guarantees FX swaps (rouble leg) 1 day 8.00 Open market operations (minimum interest rates) Loans secured with non-marketable assets, auctions 2 3 months 7.25 3 7.00 3 Standing facilities (fixed rates) 1 day, call 6.00 For reference: 8.25 1 Complete information on interest rates on Bank of Russia operations is given in Table 2 A floating interest rate, linked to the level of the Bank of Russia key rate.
Core inflation increased to 16.8% in February, while monthly consumer price growth declined from 3.9% in January to 2.2% in February.
Weak economic growth in the countries that are Russia’s trading partners curbs demand for Russian exports and restrains the national economy.
That risk is related to rouble exchange rate dynamics affected by, inter alia, monetary policy measures of the foreign central banks and geopolitical situation.
The ruble’s depreciation is related to capital outflow due to changes in external conditions.
For inflation to become anchored close to the 4% target, sustainable decline in inflation expectations in required.
The constraining effect of the worsening epidemic situation on the economy in Russia and worldwide was much less than expected.
Inflation pressure from the labour market intensifies.
Moving forward, in its key rate decision-making the Bank of Russia will take into account actual and expected inflation dynamics relative to the target and economic transformation processes, as well as risks posed by domestic and external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
The ongoing economic slowdown does not have a considerable restraining effect on consumer price growth since it is caused largely by structural factors.
In this context, businesses find it easier to pass higher costs, including on the back of rising global prices, on to consumers.
According to estimates as of 19 April, annual inflation slowed down to 5.5%.
That said, significant risks are posed by elevated and unanchored inflation expectations.
These risks stem largely from the inertia of inflation expectations and a decrease in household propensity to save.
Inflation remains close to the target.
is rising faster than the Bank of Russia’s April forecast assumed.
Short-term inflation expectations of analysts and long-term expectations calculated based on financial market instruments increased as well.
At the same time, many sectors show labour shortages, despite the inflow of foreign labour.
Seasonally adjusted monthly consumer price growth rate slowed down to 0.1% in June vs 0.3-0.4% in February-May.
The Bank of Russia will continue to take measures aimed at slowing down consumer prices growth to the target of 4% in the medium run.
In its forecast, the Bank of Russia will also factor in decisions to invest the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund in excess of the threshold level of 7% of GDP.
The Bank of Russia’s decisions to increase the key rate and the rise in OFZ yields observed since the beginning of the year will create prerequisites for further growth in loan and deposit rates.
However, their business sentiment is gradually improving as suppliers of finished products, raw materials and components, as well as sales markets, diversify.
Elevated demand for corporate loans has been driven by both high price expectations and expectations of future changes in domestic demand.
In March - April 2014, household rouble deposit rates began to grow.
Rapid growth in lending, one-off budget payments, rising real wages and households’ low propensity to save, driven by high inflation expectations, support expansion in consumer activity, especially in non-food markets.
Further changes in food prices will largely depend on the volume and quality of this year’s crops and post-harvest quality preservation both in Russia and abroad.
tightened in response to both the July increase in the key rate and a significant upward revision of its forecast path in the baseline scenario.
Annual inflation will fall below 7% in July 2016 and reach the 4% target in 2017.
Given interest rates hike and tighter borrower and collateral requirements, lending growth sees a slowdown (adjusted for currency revaluation).
Inflation will be in the range of 4.7–5.2% as of the end of 2021.
Employment data and production capacity utilisation have recently been steady.
In its forecast, the Bank of Russia also factors in decisions made by the Government of the Russian Federation to invest the liquid part of the National Wealth Fund.
According to the estimates as of the 1 of December 2014, annual money supply (M2) growth rate decreased to 4.8% from 16.3% a year earlier.
Both credit and deposit rates have increased.
Annual inflation holds close to 4%.
On 27 October 2017, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate by 25 bp to 8.25% per annum.
Interest rates in individual segments of the domestic financial market have showed mixed trends.
The labour market is adjusting to the new economic environment, and unemployment remains stable and low.
Concurrently, labour market tightness continues to increase.
Changes in external conditions observed since the previous meeting of the Board of Directors have significantly increased proinflationary risks.
However, in certain sectors, the capacity for output expansion is lagging behind the expanding demand.
Annual money supply (M2) growth rate decreased considerably as compared with the beginning of 2014.
Growing domestic and external demand and high corporate profits are shoring up investment activity.
Consumer expenditures are expected to restore gradually as real disposable incomes continue to show weak growth.
Inflation movements Higher inflationary pressures are seen across an increasingly broader range of goods and services.
The Bank of Russia will continue its gradual transition from moderately tight to neutral monetary policy and holds open the prospect of some key rate reduction in the first half of 2018.
According to Bank of Russia estimates, monthly consumer price growth will moderate slightly in January 2015, but annual inflation will continue the upward trend with a peak in the Q2 of 2015.
On 31 July 2015, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate from 11.50 to 11.00 per cent per annum, taking into account that the balance of risks shifts towards the considerable economy cooling despite a slight increase in inflation risks.
These include agriculture, the food industry, chemicals and mining.
Later, as the economy gradually adjusts to external trade restrictions and the impact of exchange rate dynamics on prices reduction, inflation and inflation expectations are expected to see a renewed decrease.
Taking into account GDP growth statistics for 2018 — 2019 Q1 published by Rosstat, the Bank of Russia lowered its GDP growth forecast for 2019 from 1.2-1.7% to 1.0-1.5%.
According to the Bank of Russia forecast, consumer price growth will continue to slow amid slack domestic demand.
The pass-through of the ruble weakening to prices is speeding up due to high inflation expectations.
At the same time a weaker internal demand will cause a more significant decrease in imports in value terms.
In case of a further budget deficit expansion, tighter monetary policy may be required to return inflation to target in 2024 and keep it close to 4% further on.
Annual inflation slowdown is also influenced by the high base effect in respect of the price dynamics of principal types of motor fuel.
This resulted from a slower than expected growth of fixed capital investment, including a decline in construction, together with the review of the data for 2017 by Rosstat.
Investment demand in the private sector is slowing down amid growing government investment.
The Bank of Russia maintains its 2019 GDP growth forecast in the range of 1.2-1.7%.
Inflation is projected to be close to 3% by late 2017; going forward, as the temporary factors run their course, it will approach 4%.
The Bank of Russia will consider the necessity of further increases in the key rate, taking into account inflation and economic dynamics against the forecast, as well as risks posed by external conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
In making its key rate decision, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors was guided by the following considerations: First.
However, this is related to the high base effect of April 2020.
Money supply (M2) growth rates increased but still remain low.
Current monetary policy stance will ensure deceleration of inflation to the target of 4% in the medium term.
The Bank of Russia’s monetary policy will curtail inflation’s upward deviation from the target and is aimed at bringing inflation back to 4% in 2024.
The Bank of Russia considers that monetary policy is highly likely to shift to a neutral stance in 2019.
In an unfavourable environment in the global commodity markets, exports in value terms are expected to go down.
Since the previous key rate review meeting of the Bank of Russia Board of Directors, yields on short-term OFZs have slightly declined.
Although October saw inconsistent trends in the dynamics of economic activity, producer sentiment remains at a relatively high level.
Consumption will remain weak.
This may bring about a more sustained deviation of inflation from the target.
With price and financial stability risks no longer on the rise, conditions have allowed for the key rate reduction.