The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held the 2nd Quarterly Meeting of 2006in Beijing days ago. Itwas agreed that since 2006 the economy had maintained a steady and relativelyfast growth momentum. In line with the arrangement of the CPC Central Committeeand the State Council, the PBC has continued to pursue a sound monetary policy,closely monitored the economic and financial performance, strengthened the adjustmentof money and credit, and strove to improve credit structure. The overallperformance of the financial sector has remained sound. The Committeeconducted an in-depth analysis of current economic and financial situation bothat home and abroad. It was concurred that efforts should be made to promote theeconomic and social development in a scientific approach, further deepen thefinancial reform, and improve macro financial management. It was stressed thatsteps should be taken to coordinate macroeconomic policies, boost domesticconsumption demand, optimize the investment structure, and curb the highinvestment growth. Measures should be taken to actively advance industrial andinternational trade restructuring, promote the equilibrium of the BOP, fosterthe transformation of economic growth pattern, and improve the efficiency ofeconomic growth. In discussingmonetary policy stance and policy measures to be adopted in the coming period, theCommittee consented that the sound monetary policy should be continued, and effortsshould be made to promote coordination between domestic and foreign currencypolicies and strengthen the preemptive nature of financial macro-management.While strengthening the liquidity management of banking system, an excessivelyrapid growth of money and credit should be further prevented and commercialbanks should be guided to properly control the scale and pace of mid andlong-term lending. Meanwhile, efforts should be made to quicken the steps inthe development of direct financing and promote a coordinated development offinancial market. Measures should also be taken to improve the managed floatingexchange rate regime in a self-initiated, controllable, and gradual way andenable the market supply and demand to play a fundamental role in the formationof the RMB exchange rate so as to keepthe RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.