The Monetary Board decided to: a) Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at 6.00 percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 8.00 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios. The policy decision to keep interest rates steady was arrived at in the process of balancing the BSP’s concern over price stability and its resolve to undertake policy actions that will ensure the soundness and stability of the financial system. - The Monetary Board noted that while the recent coordinated rate cuts by central banks signaled the strong commitment of the international central banking community to address the macroeconomic implications of the global financial turmoil, country specific factors remain the major consideration in the monetary policy assessment. - The Monetary Board considered the various arguments for a policy rate cut and for keeping rates steady. It decided to keep policy rates unchanged based on the following considerations: information available at the time of the policy meeting. The sets of economic information were provided by the technical secretariat of the Advisory Committee (AC). The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four members, namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director of the Treasury Department, and the Managing Director of the Monetary Policy Sub-sector. The highlights of the discussions on the 20 November 2008 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 11 December 2008. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on monetary policy issues is scheduled on 18 December 2008. the policy horizon, but still shows a breach of inflation targets for and the persistent upsurge in core inflation indicate that generalized domestic price pressures are still in the pipeline although they have been tempered as reflected in the decelerating month-on-month trend. following: shown some moderating. on the stability of foreign exchange market conditions. A weaker peso impacts the prices of imported commodities and utility rates, among other things, and therefore on inflation and on inflation expectations. commodities remain, as considerable demand from emerging economies is expected to continue, while supply responses to rising relative prices have been slow to adjust. wage adjustments under the salary standardization law and new calls for a legislated across-the-board adjustment in private sector wages. they point to the underlying strength in demand conditions, providing a reasonable impetus to keep monetary policy settings steady. was that the growth slowdown and financial stress are not expected to be as severe in the Philippines as in those countries that have already cut rates. In those countries that have cut rates and have announced financial packages, one of the most potent sources of the economic drag is the wealth effect which operates through equities and pensions. This is not the case for the Philippines. the policy horizon, but still shows a breach of inflation targets for - The Board believes that a decline in policy rates will not remedy the problem of liquidity distribution. Recent policy measures (the reduction in reserve requirement and the increase in the rediscounting budget) should ensure an adequate funding environment even without a rate cut. - The Board recognized that the BSP faced multiple and contemporaneous challenges of stabilizing the financial system, nursing the economy through a period of slower growth, and closely monitoring the inflation outlook. However, with the underlying resilience in domestic demand as reflected in demand indicators, the Board believed that the Philippine economy may still see respectable growth this year and in 2009. - The Board concluded that keeping policy rates steady would provide the BSP with more flexibility in responding to future shocks that could besiege the economy going forward. III. Recent Developments in Economic Indicators The Monetary Board’s decision took into account the recent developments in various economic indicators: - Headline inflation dropped further to 11.2 percent year-on-year in October from 11.8 percent in September, with lower price increases seen in food and petroleum products. - However, core inflation was higher in October at 7.8 percent compared to 7.5 percent in the previous month. - Recent surveys showed inflation expectations leveling off from previous sharp increases. with less respondents expecting inflation to move up. in inflation expectations in Q3 2008 from Q2 2008. the monthly trend increase in inflation expectations is less steep relative to the second quarter and in the early part of the third quarter. Latest data showed a moderation in demand conditions amid the global economic downturn and the still high prices of fuel and food. - GDP grew at a slower rate of 4.6 percent in Q2 2008 compared to the quarter and the comparable period last year, respectively. GNP also decelerated to 5.5 percent. - Monthly NSO data showed merchandise imports increased marginally by 1.1 percent in August 2008, compared to their month- and year-ago growth rates of 16.0 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively. - Meanwhile, exports growth decelerated in September at 1.2 percent from the month-and year- ago growth of 6.1 percent and 5.1 percent, respectively. - Selected demand indicators suggest some moderation in demand conditions. in September relative to month-ago and year-ago levels of 20.6 percent and 17.9 percent, respectively. Meanwhile, sales of commercial vehicles posted a lower decline of 0.8 percent from a negative growth of 3.1 percent in August, but still substantially lower than the 26.8 percent year-on-year growth in September percent year-on-year in September, from the 2.7 percent growth posted in August 2008, but was lower than the 11.4 percent growth registered in September last year. after shrinking by 1.3 percent in the previous month, but was still lower than the 9.3 percent growth posted in the comparable period a year ago. Year-to-date sales registered a 1.3 percent growth, although lower than the 5.2 percent expansion recorded in the same period in 2007. September, from the 1.5 percent growth recorded in the same period last year and almost double the 9.4 percent growth in August. Likewise, year-to-date appliance sales increased by 8.0 percent year-on-year compared to 6.9 percent in the period January to September 2007. percent year-on-year in August 2008 albeit slower than the 14.2 percent growth (revised) in July 2008. Likewise, the volume of production index grew slower year-on-year in August 2008 at 6.5 percent from the 8.0 percent growth (revised) in July. compared to 2007. Developments in Agriculture - Latest data from the National Income Accounts showed that the agriculture, fishery and forestry sector grew by 4.9 percent in Q2 2008 from 4.2 percent in the same period last year. - The decline in the average retail prices of commercial rice, which began around the second week of July, continued up to the first week of November. - International cereal prices continued to fall in October. Oil Price Developments - Dubai crude oil prices continued to ease up to mid-November on heightened fears of deteriorating global demand for oil. The spot price of Dubai crude oil was lower in mid-November at $54.12 per barrel from US$67.42 per barrel in October. - Latest estimated futures prices of Dubai crude oil are lower for 2008 and 2009. - Oil companies again reduced the prices of gasoline products, diesel, and kerosene by P1.00 per liter each on 20 November. The price of LPG likewise fell by P1.26 per liter. - In the transport sector, a provisional reduction in the minimum fare for jeepneys and buses nationwide was implemented on November 7 and Developments in the Utilities Sector - The Energy Regulatory Commission deferred the implementation of its earlier decision allowing Meralco to increase its distribution charge by November 2008 under the performance-based rate (PBR) application. - In the telecommunications sector, the National Telecommunications Commission mandated telecommunication companies to interconnect their backhaul networks to all cable landing stations to lower service rates as this will dismantle the monopoly in landing stations and backhaul facilities. - Risk aversion and global economic uncertainty continued to dictate financial market sentiment. Market Interest Rates - The Fed’s easing of its policy rates and the decline in US T-bill rates widened interest rate differentials with the BSP’s policy rate. However, risk-adjusted differentials narrowed as sovereign risk spreads increased. Meanwhile, real lending rates remained negative even with the lower September inflation outturn. Stock Market - The local bourse was at its worst in October. The Philippine Stock Exchange Index fluctuated in the first two weeks of November, breaching the 1,900-index support level on 18 November. Year-to-date, the index had declined by 48.0 percent. Foreign Exchange - The peso continued to weaken amid market concern that the contagion effect of the global financial crisis could lead to a worldwide recession. - On a year-to-date basis, the peso had depreciated against the US dollar by 17.3 percent on 18 November 2008, closing at P49.94/US$1 as the global economic slowdown deterred investment in emerging markets Global Bond and Credit Default Spreads - The EMBI+ Philippines spread narrowed on 10 November following China’s announcement of a US$586 billion stimulus package to spur growth in its economy. The Philippine five-year credit default swap spread likewise moved in tandem with the region’s general easing trend. - The coordinated liquidity measures by major central banks provided market relief as spreads eased from their peak levels. - The growth of domestic liquidity or M3 accelerated further by 13.5 percent year-on-year in September from 9.8 percent in the previous month and 11.5 percent a year ago. The expansion in domestic liquidity was due to the build-up of both net domestic assets and net foreign assets. - Outstanding loans of commercial banks including reverse repurchase agreements or RRPs, increased in September by 24.1 percent yearon-year, growing at the same pace as in the previous month. Bank lending net of banks’ RRP placements with the BSP accelerated to - The equity raised in the Philippine Stock Exchange for the first ten months of 2008 was only one-fourth of the level reached in the same period in 2007. Meanwhile, bond issuances by the corporate sector in January-October 2008 reached P104.3 billion, 68.1 percent higher relative to the comparable period last year, suggesting that local firms have been turning to the corporate bond market to raise funds. - The fiscal deficit reached P62.3 billion for the period January-October year. - Global activity is slowing quickly. Governments across advanced economies were swift to take early, decisive action to shore up confidence and revive credit in their financial markets by unprecedented coordinated rate cuts, rescue packages, and extraordinary liquidity provisioning: economy has already become apparent. In response, the Federal Reserve cut its policy rate by another 50 bps on 29 October. the world acted as one to soothe tensions in the financial system by pumping liquidity in global credit markets. seems to have peaked. Japan, but the downside risks remain high.