The Advisory Committee [1] submitted the following recommendations for the consideration of the Monetary Board: overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 7.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate; and six-month tenors; and Tenors From To One Week 5.09375 5.0625 Two Weeks 5.18750 5.1250 One Month 5.25000 5.1875 concerned government agencies involved in monitoring prices and ensuring adequate supply of commodities. - The discussion presented herein reflects the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on the information available at the time of the policy meeting. The highlights of the discussions of the 13 March namely: the Deputy Governor for the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director of the Treasury Department, and the Managing Director of the Monetary Policy Sub-sector. Effective 21 January 2008, the Director of the Department of Economic Research continues to serve as Head of the Technical Secretariat for the Advisory Committee, but is no longer a member of the Advisory Committee. The recommendation to keep monetary policy settings unchanged was based on the following assessments: economy, a steady monetary policy stance now would be in response to the within-target inflation outlook for 2009. shocks. On balance, the risks to the inflation outlook are manageable as there are also mitigating factors, such as the relative firmness of the peso, the slowdown in the US economy and the oil import tariff reduction scheme. to wait until more information on the factors affecting domestic inflation becomes available and in the meantime, allow enough time for previous easing moves to work their way through the real sector. The Monetary Board then proceeded to review the recent developments and the key considerations in the formulation of the BSP’s monetary policy stance. - Headline inflation rose to 5.4 percent year-on-year in February from percent. Except for fuel, light, and water, all major commodity groups registered higher inflation rates relative to the previous month. - Core inflation, which measures the underlying trend in inflation by excluding specific food and energy items, was also higher in February. The official core inflation measure published by the National Statistics Office (NSO) climbed to 4.0 percent in February from 3.4 percent in January. - It was noted that inflation is on the rise not only in the Philippines but also in other countries (China, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, South Africa, Brazil, and Chile) due largely to the rise in energy and food prices. - Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased by 7.4 percent in Q4 2007, sustaining the third quarter’s revised growth rate and exceeding the growth was boosted by household spending and capital investments The recommendation to keep monetary policy settings unchanged was based on the following assessments: on the expenditure side, and by the services sector from the production side. - Full-year GDP growth for 2007 was 7.3 percent, higher than the upper end of the Government’s full-year growth target of 6.1-6.7 percent. - For Q1 2008, the business cycle path remained broadly steady, indicating a continuing expansion phase. - NSO data showed that merchandise imports continued to accelerate year-on-year for the fourth consecutive month in December 2007, registering a 19.7 percent increase. Merchandise exports likewise grew by 21.3 percent year-on-year in the same month. - Selected indicators of demand indicated a broad strengthening trend. values in Q4 2007 rose by 30.3 percent year-on-year for the Makati central business district and 20.9 percent year-on-year for the Ortigas Center. percent increase in the same period last year. year-on-year in December compared to 22.2 percent in November. in the same period last year. year-on-year in December, a slowdown from the month- and yearago growths of 1.0 percent and 3.6 percent, respectively. Year-todate energy sales were up by 4.6 percent in 2007 from the 1.1 percent growth in 2006. compared to the P8.5 billion average monthly sales posted in the comparable month of the previous year. Data is based on the sales of top ten taxpayers in retail trade for the period January to November 2007. December, a turnaround from the 2.9 percent decline registered in the same month last year and higher than the 12.5 percent growth in November. on the expenditure side, and by the services sector from the production side. percent in December 2007 from 80.5 percent (revised) in October and November 2007 based on the NSO’s Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI). activity in December as the value of production index (VAPI) and volume of production index (VOPI) became less negative. - The Q1 2008 overall business confidence index (CI) remained positive at 29.9 percent as respondent firms with a positive outlook continued to outnumber those with a negative outlook. This index, however, was lower compared to the levels in the previous quarter and a year ago by 18.1 index points and 15.0 index points, respectively. - The Q1 2008 CES results showed improved consumer confidence after the downturn in the past quarter. The nationwide consumer index - Based on the preliminary results of the October 2007 Labor Force Survey, the unemployment rate declined to 6.3 percent in October - The National Wage and Productivity Commission has completed the round of wage and cost of living adjustments in all regions in 2007, increasing the minimum compensation of workers by an average of around 3.3 percent nationwide. Meanwhile, the proposal for the P125 daily wage hike for private sector employees and the Salary Standardization Law III for government workers remained pending in Congress. Developments in Agriculture - Latest data from the National Statistical Coordination Board showed that agriculture, fishery and forestry (AFF) output grew by 5.8 percent in Q4 2007 from 1.7 percent in the same period a year ago. AFF accounted for 18.3 percent of total GDP and contributed 1.2 percentage points to total GDP growth. The main growth drivers were palay, corn, fishery, and other crops subsectors. - Meanwhile, the Department of Agriculture is carrying out “oil pricecushioning” programs not only to mitigate the adverse impact of surging crude oil prices on consumers but also to perk up farm productivity that will, in turn, improve rural income. - Recent equatorial Pacific sea surface temperature trends and model forecasts indicate that La Niña conditions will continue up to MarchMay. However, half of these forecasts show a possibility that the La Niña episode would persist up to June-August. - Latest data from NFA indicate that as of 29 February, the country’s total rice inventory at 1.9 million metric tons (MT) is roughly the same as the previous month’s level but higher than the previous year’s level at 1.8 million MT. - Retail prices of commercial rice continued to increase in January outside Metro Manila rose as a result of reduced supply coming from the major producing regions following the end of the harvest season. - World rice prices sustained an upward trend (since January 2007) as the new supplies harvested during the last quarter of 2007 by several major producing countries had already been committed for sale. Oil Price Developments - International spot and futures prices were higher in February and early March due to lingering geopolitical concerns and speculation of declining OPEC output ahead of its 5 March 2008 meeting. In the domestic scene, the oil import tariff was increased to two percent effective 1 March, from one percent in the previous month. Meanwhile, pump prices of some petroleum products increased anew on 8 March 2008. - In the transport sector, petitions for fare increases remained pending with the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board. Developments in the Utilities Sector - National Power Corporation (NPC) rates were higher beginning January, reverting to its dry-season rates. In addition, the Energy Regulatory Commission’s final order on the 8th Generation Rate Adjustment Mechanism increased NPC’s effective rates starting January 2008. - However, despite the hike in NPC rates, the electricity rate for final consumers in Metro Manila was still lower by 27 centavos in February due to lower prices in the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM). surging crude oil prices on consumers but also to perk up farm productivity that will, in turn, improve rural income. - For water rates, the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System Company, Inc. starting January 2008 as a result of the rate rebasing mechanism. Meanwhile, the Maynilad rates were reduced. Interest Rates - During the 18 February 2008 auction, the Bureau of the Treasury high bid rates. The Government was able to reject the bids because of its stable cash position. - Relative to their 31 January levels, secondary market yields of GS on over the financial market uncertainties, the weak performance of the US economy, the high domestic inflation outturn for January and February 2008, and the ongoing Senate investigation of the ZTE broadband deal. Stock Market - Lackluster trading at the local bourse which started in December 2007 continued in January to early March 2008 on the possibility of a sharperthan-expected US economic slowdown. In January, the Philippine Stock Exchange Index (PSEi) closed 9.8 percent lower compared to the previous month’s level to reach 3,266.0 index points. In February, the PSEi dropped month-on-month by 4.3 percent to close at 3,130 index points. During the first week of March, the PSEi declined and closed at Foreign Exchange - The peso appreciated by 0.6 percent in February 2008 to average P40.67/US$1 relative to its January 2008 level. Furthermore, the peso reached an eight-year high on 28 February to average P40.36/US$1, supported by the sustained inflows of remittances and improved investor sentiment after Moody’s Investors Service upgraded its credit outlook for the Philippines. However, market uncertainty rose in February amid the turbulence in the global market and the political noise during the month. - On a year-to-date basis, a majority of Asian currencies remained firm against the US dollar as of 11 March 2008, led by the Japanese yen's - For water rates, the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System Thailand baht (offshore), Indian rupee and Korean won. Global Bond and Credit Default Spreads - Debt spreads reached new peaks amid growing financial sector strains. From end-January 2008, debt spreads widened to their highest levels during the year as the market digested the recent economic developments in the US along with the developments in domestic political scene. - Philippine credit default swap (CDS) spreads widened to 258 basis points on 10 March from the end-January level of 210 basis points. The EMBI+ Philippine spreads mirrored the trend, widening to 279 basis points from - Domestic liquidity or M3 grew by 7.2 percent year-on-year in January, a slowdown from the previous month’s 9.0 percent. The steady rise in net foreign assets of depository corporations continued to drive the expansion in domestic liquidity. - Outstanding loans of commercial banks, thrift banks, and rural banks year-on-year in December 2007, from the year-ago and month-ago growth of 6.3 percent and 6.9 percent, respectively. - Bank lending, gross of banks’ RRP placements with the BSP, increased by 9.2 percent year-on-year in December from 7.5 percent in November. This, however, was lower than the 11.2 percent expansion in the same month of 2006. - Corporate bond issuances surged during the first two months of 2008. Meanwhile, capital-raising activity in the PSE was lower in January PSE reached P5.7 billion for the past two months of 2008, P5.1 billion lower than the level in the same period in 2007. - Meanwhile, issuances of equity capital and bonds by the private sector including banks totaled P167.8 billion in 2007. Excluding issuances by banks, the total amount of equity and bonds issued in Thailand baht (offshore), Indian rupee and Korean won. - The National Government’s (NG) fiscal position posted a deficit of P22 billion in December, bringing the full-year deficit to only P9.4 billion, an overperformance of P53.6 billion compared to the programmed level. The fiscal deficit was also P55.4 billion lower than last year’s P64.8 billion. The favorable fiscal performance can be attributed to the P15.9 billion excess revenues due to privatization and lower-than-expected expenditures. - For the full year of 2007, revenue collections amounted to P1,134.6 billion, higher than the comparable figure in 2006 by P155.0 billion. - Simultaneous deterioration in the real and financial sectors characterized the global economy in the first two months of 2008. - The synchronized falls in the global financial market in January indicated that financial markets consider the global economy as still firmly “coupled.” This implies that emerging markets and developing countries, which sustained strong growth in 2007, remain vulnerable to an export-led slowdown, which could have multiplier effects on domestic demand. - However, a US recession and a global slowdown may be softened by the policy actions of major central banks combined with strong fundamentals. Further downside risks are expected to stem from additional price increases in oil and other commodities. - During its scheduled 30 January meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to lower further its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 3 percent. The Bank of England reduced its Official Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 5.25 percent on 7 February disruptions in the global financial markets. Meanwhile, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan maintained their key policy rates on concerns over rising inflationary pressures. - The Monetary Board noted that the outlook for inflation provides a strong case to keep monetary policy settings steady. - The Monetary Board observed that the outlook for inflation in 2008 is influenced by elevated prices of global food and energy products, which could be largely transitory. Since the key risks to the outlook for the remainder of the year are linked to imported oil and non-oil commodity prices, these risks cannot be effectively addressed by monetary policy. - The supply-side developments are best addressed by non-monetary measures. These include keeping a close watch on the trends in the global commodities market, coordinating closely with concerned government agencies involved in monitoring prices and ensuring the adequate supply of commodities, and communicating carefully the inflation outlook. - The Monetary Board noted that the emerging inflation outlook for 2009 is consistent with the 3.5 percent (+1 percentage point) target for that year, even as external supply shocks pose risks to the 4 percent (+1 percentage point) target for 2008. Given the lag in the impact of monetary policy, any policy move at this time is expected to affect the inflation outcome for 2009. - After considering the balance of risks to the inflation outlook and the evidence that has become available since its previous meeting on monetary policy, the Monetary Board approved the recommendations of the Advisory Committee. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is scheduled on 24 April 2008.