Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at two levels. The first takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the various economic departments of the Bank (Research Department, Monetary Department, Foreign Currency Department, Foreign Exchange Activity Department) and economists from different departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their recommendations regarding the interest rate, and following a discussion, the Governor makes his decision. The data presented on real activity indicated that the economy was recovering rapidly from the impact of the fighting in the north. In October the Central Bureau of Statistics published its forecast of growth in 2006––4.5 percent. Companies’ responses to the Bank of Israel’s Companies Survey for the third quarter of 2006 also support the assessment that the economy is making a swift recovery following the shock occasioned by the war. The survey shows that the impact of the war on economic activity was short-lived and moderate, and that it affected different industries to different degrees. Tourism and the business services sector in the north suffered most severely. In the third quarter of companies reported a steady level of activity in the third quarter, following increases in the previous two months. Analysis of the responses of all the participating companies shows that in most industries, the increase in activity is expected to continue in the fourth quarter, the exceptions being in the hotel and commerce sectors. According to data from the Manpower employment agency, demand for employees in September was 10.3 percent higher than in August, and 3.3 percent higher than in September 2005. The increased demand for labor included most industries. Tax revenues in 2006 are expected to exceed the budget forecast by some NIS 9.5 billion. The budget deficit is expected to be 1.5 percent of GDP. The budget for 2007, approved by the government and still to be passed by the Knesset, includes an increase in the deficit to 2.9 percent of GDP and a rise in the expenditure ceiling to The Consumer Price Index (CPI) posted a large drop of 0.9 percent in September, more than that expected by private economic forecasters, whose estimates were of a drop of between 0.3 percent and 0.6 percent. The decline in the index was due mainly to the appreciation of the shekel, the fall in fuel prices, and seasonal price reductions. Dollar prices of owner-occupied apartments stabilized in September, in contrast to the increases in the previous three months. The CPI rose by 1.3 percent in the last twelve months, and by 0.8 percent since the beginning of 2006, close to the lower limit of the seasonal path consistent with the target range of inflation. Inflation expectations to one year ahead derived from the capital market have declined from their level in the last ten days of September, and in October they averaged about Forecasters’ lowered their assessment of one-year inflation to 1.3 percent, from The break-even inflation rate for ten years, calculated from the returns on nominal and real bonds, fell by about 0.2 of a percentage point to about 2.3 percent. This exceeds the expectation of the ten-year inflation rate by a risk premium that is about 0.3-0.5 percent. Following the publication of the most recent CPI, there was a consensus among all forecasters that the Bank of Israel would lower the interest rate for November by a quarter of a percentage point. Most of them expect a further similar reduction in December. The _makam curve (see below) reflects expectations of a cut in the interest rate_ over the next year. In the month prior to the interest rate decision, short-term real interest rates rose by about 0.2 of a percentage point to a level of 4 percent (up to 4 years) while long-term real interest rates reached a level of 3.8 percent (10 years). The nominal yield curve dropped in the month prior to the interest rate decision by 0.4 of a percentage point for the short run and by 0.2 of a percentage point for 10 years. The makam curve dropped along its entire length by 0.3 of a percentage point, and is flat at 5.6 percent. Before this interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate exceeded that of the Fed by 25 basis points. US capital market data indicate a strong probability of no change in the US federal funds rate in the coming months and a cut in the first half of The gap between the unindexed shekel yield curve and the US 10-year bond curve contracted during October to 127 basis points (from about 173 basis points in the middle of September). The narrowing of the gap reflects the fall of the _Shahar_ unindexed bond yield curve. The expected real interest rate for one year forward rose in October by 0.4 of a percentage point to 4.1 percent because of the decline in inflation expectations. Since the beginning of the year the expected real interest rate has risen by 1.4 percentage points. The growth rate of the money supply (M1) over the past twelve months has been slowing since the beginning of the year and in September it stood at 11.6 percent. The growth was led by the demand deposit component, which grew in September at an annual rate of 14.7 percent, down from 16 percent in August. The cash element, which has been contracting since April, expanded by 7.6 percent over the past year. The various scenarios that were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models showed that achievement of the inflation target over the next twelve months would require a cut in the interest rate, as a result of the appreciation of the shekel and the fall in energy prices. their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate. The shekel appreciated against the background of a surplus in the balance-ofpayments current account that is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and foreign investment in Israel. The strengthening of the shekel was also partly due to the activity of nonresidents, who bought shekels in forward transactions, where most of the contracts were short term (up to three months). In October the shekel continued to appreciate: in the days immediately preceding the interest rate decision the exchange rate was around NIS 4.28 to the dollar. The shekel appreciated at a similar rate also against the currency basket. Israel’s share indices have been rising since the first third of September. Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread edged down in October to 29 basis points. Other emerging-market economies showed no change in their CDS levels. Investment houses’ surveys showed that the strength of the shekel and of the capital market during and after the war in the north reinforced nonresidents’ confidence in Israel’s economy, and as soon as it became clear that the hostilities had had only a limited effect on the economy and that the government coalition was more stable, investors returned to Israel. The strength of the shekel led many nonresidents to the conclusion that a reduction in the interest rate was imminent, and they therefore bought Shahar bonds and boosted their activity in the interest rate derivatives market. Apparently many of them considered Israel a safe haven among the emerging markets, partly due to its strong economic fundamentals. Global growth is holding firm and, against the slowdown registered recently in the pace of growth in the US, the economies of Europe, Japan, and the developing countries––particularly China and India––are expanding and increasing their share. Expectations are that the Fed will keep its interest rate unchanged in the coming months, but will cut the rate in the first half of 2007. The European Central Bank is expected to raise its interest rate to 3.5 percent by the end of the year. The inflation rate in the last twelve months, 1.3 percent, was below the mid-point of the target range. The inflation estimates and expectations to twelve months ahead are also lower than the mid-point. The major factors behind the reduction in the inflation environment are the strengthening of the shekel and the drop in global energy prices. As a result of the drop in the inflation rate, private forecasters and the players in the capital market expect a cut in the Bank of Israel interest rate for November and a further reduction for December, which would take the rate at the end of the year to 5.0 percent. The data on real activity continue to indicate that the economy is recovering rapidly from the shock caused by the war, that led to reduced activity, mostly in the third quarter. The CBS revised its forecast of growth in 2006 to about 4.5 percent, and the Bank of Israel’s forecast of growth in 2007 is about 4 percent. At the same time no inflationary pressures from the labor market are evident, as unit labor cost is showing a gentle downward trend due to the rapid rise in labor productivity. As in last month’s discussions on the interest rate, assessments of the fiscal cost of the hostilities and the implications for budget policy were discussed this time too. As a result of the cost of the war and the economic damage suffered, the government decided to increase its expenditure and to spread the increase over three years. This is expected to bring the government deficit to about 1.5 percent of GDP in 2006 and to improve Israel’s defenses and to tackle welfare-related issues created uncertainty about the final shape of the budget. This uncertainty may persist for the next few months, until the Knesset approves the budget. Israel’s financial indicators strengthened further in the past month. Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, contracted slightly. The yield gap between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term declined to 127 basis points from 173 basis points in mid-September. The shekel continued to appreciate, against the background of the surplus in the balance-of-payments current account, which is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and substantial foreign investment in Israel. The strengthening of the shekel in the last few months follows a period since 2002 when a trend of real depreciation of the shekel against the currency basket––depreciation adjusted for differences in inflation rates in Israel and abroad–– was evident; that depreciation totaled more than 25 percent. Prior to the Bank of Israel decision for November, the Bank of Israel interest rate exceeded that of the Fed by The Bank of Israel’s assessments and models indicate a high probability that the rate of inflation in the next few months will drop below the lower limit of the target range. Participants in the discussion related to scenarios tested by the various econometric models according to which it was reasonable to assume that, even after a cut in the interest rate for November of 25 basis points, the inflation environment would enable a further reduction in the interest rate. The participants considered the possibility of a larger reduction in the interest rate for November but decided that it was important to pursue a gradual approach, both to avoid shocks in the financial markets and given the possibility of rapid changes in the inflationary environment. To summarize: the decline of inflation to the lower part of the target range, the high probability of a temporary drop in the inflation rate (over the past twelve months) to below the lower limit of the target range, the appreciation of the shekel in the foreign-currency market as a factor affecting inflation, and the decline in global energy prices continue to constitute important factors that support a lowering of the interest rate. On the other hand, economic activity is continuing to expand rapidly, and pressures are being exerted to increase budget expenditure, and these are reflected in fiscal uncertainty that will persist until the budget is passed by the Knesset. The objective of the Bank of Israel’s monetary policy is to bring inflation gradually back to around the mid-point of the target range. In view of these various considerations, all the department directors who took part in the discussion recommended that the interest rate for November be cut by 0.25 of a percentage point. The Governor decided to reduce the rate for November to 5.25 percent.