Before the Governor makes the monthly interest-rate decision, discussions are held at two levels. The first takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the various economic departments of the Bank (Research Department, Monetary Department, Foreign Currency Department, Foreign Exchange Activity Department) and economists from different departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. In the narrow forum, the department heads present their recommendations regarding the interest rate and following a discussion, the Governor makes his decision. In analyzing the state of the economy on the real side, the discussants related to data reflecting both the situation shortly before the fighting in the north began and the situation expected after the fighting. The data on real activity indicate that output recovered swiftly from the shock caused by the fighting. eve of the hostilities, the economy was in the midst of rapid growth. According to National Accounts data, the economy grew at a 5.7 percent pace and the business sector by 7.5 percent in the first half of the year (both rates in annual terms). occasioned by the hostilities will be felt in inbound tourism. The GDP growth forecast for 2006 is estimated at 4.6 percent as against 5.4 percent before the fighting; the from a deceleration in the growth rate of the output of public-services.. The surplus on balance-of-payments current account continued to grow in the first half of 2006, and reached $3.6 billion (almost 5.5 percent of mid-year GDP). The favorable foreign-trade data for August show that the economy recovered rapidly from the fighting. Total exports (seasonally adjusted and excluding ships, aircraft, and diamonds) grew by 4.2 percent in August relative to July, [NB PLS CHECK THIS the beginning of the year. Imports of goods (seasonally adjusted and excluding ships, aircraft, and diamonds) increased by 17.8 percent in August relative to July, and by The unemployment rate was largely unchanged, at 8.9 percent as against 8.8 percent in the previous half-year. The slight increase in unemployment was caused by an upturn in the labor-force participation rate; had the participation rate remained stable, the unemployment rate would have fallen to 8.3 percent. According to National Insurance data, the average real wage per employee post increased by 1.3 percent in the first half of 2006 relative to the year-earlier period. Unit labor cost declined slightly during the first half of 2006 due to an increase in productivity. Tax revenues in 2006 are expected to exceed the budget outlook by NIS 10 billion expected to be 1.4 percent of GDP, or 1.7 percent including civil compensation that is not covered by the property tax fund. In the 2007 budget as approved by the government, the deficit target was raised to 2.9 percent of GDP and the limit on expenditure growth was increased by 1.6 percent, temporarily, due to expenses related to the war in the north and by 0.5 percent due to expenses related to the disengagement. The government’s budget proposal must be approved by the Knesset. The August Consumer Price Index was flat, affected mainly by increases in the prices of fuel and recreation and vacation services and a seasonal decrease in clothing prices. Dollar-denominated owned housing prices increased, following upturns in June and July. The total CPI rose by 2.2 percent in the past twelve months and by 1.7 percent since the beginning of the year, which is consistent with keeping inflation within the target range. Inflation expectations for the next twelve months,, as derived from the capital market, have been close to the mid-point of the target range in recent months. In September, expectations stood at 1.9 percent on average, unchanged from the previous month. After the CPI data for August were released, the forecasters lowered their estimates of inflation for the next twelve months from 1.9 percent to 1.7 percent. The average inflation outlook for 2007 also declined, to 1.8 percent. Interest-rate expectations as derived from the money market (the makam curve) indicate that the markets expect no significant change in the Bank of Israel rate during the coming year. . Nominal and real yields shifted moderately in September. The real curve dipped (by up to 0.1 percentage point) at the short end and rose slightly at the long end,, resulting in a term structure that was essentially flat, at 3.9 percent. Nominal yields climbed by up to 0.1 percentage points at almost all maturities, from 5.9 percent at the short end to 6.5 percent at the long end (ten years). The NIS/$ interest spread stands at 0.25 percentage point. U.S. capital market data indicate a strong probability of no change in the U.S. federal funds target rate in the coming months. The nominal yield gap between Israeli shekel denominated bonds (Shahar) and the U.S. dollar bonds at the ten year maturity continued to widen during the past month, rising by more than 20 basis points to slightly above 170 basis points (4.79 percent as against 6.52 percent) as against 150 basis points a month earlier and 125 basis points shortly before the fighting erupted. The gap between U.S. bonds and those of other emerging-market economies also widened in the past month. The expected short-term real interest rate was unchanged in September at 3.7 percent and has hardly changed since the beginning of the year The annual growth rate of the money supply (M1) has been trending downward since the beginning of the year and fell from 14.3 percent in July to 12.2 percent in August. The growth was led by the increasing in deposit component in the money supply, which grew by 15.2 percent, as against the cash component, which expanded by 8.3 percent. The various scenarios that were generated using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models show a strong connection between the behavior of the exchange rate and the fact that their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate. inflation. (The results of the models are referred to in the section of this report on the narrow-forum discussion, below). Activity in all major market segments was rather moderate in the past month. This behavior traces to the strong economic fundamentals that were in place immediately before the fighting began, including the credibility of macroeconomic policy. The shekel continued to appreciate in the past month—from around NIS 4.40 to the dollar shortly before the fighting began in July to around NIS 4.32 in the days immediately preceding the interest-rate decision. The shekel appreciated by a similar amount against the currency basket. The share market lost ground during the first days of the fighting but afterwards recovered to pre-hostilities levels. Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread was unchanged in September at 31 basis points. Other emerging-market economies also showed no change in their risk-premium as measured by this metric. S&P, Fitch, and Moody’s surveyed Israel’s fiscal situation in view of the new government budget. Their announcements indicated that they accept the widening of the budget framework and the deficit due to the costs of the fighting, but they noted that this will slow the reduction of Israel’s debt/GDP ratio. The ratings companies left their Israel ratings and outlooks unchanged but stressed the need for the government to stay within the new budget limits if the rating is to be maintained. Global growth is holding firm and is expected to remain vigorous in 2007. The composition of global growth is becoming more balanced as growth in Europe, Japan, and the developing countries—especially China and India—is expected to increase and offset the current and expected slowdown in U.S. growth. OCTOBER 2006 Inflation over the past twelve months has fallen to 2.2 percent, around the mid-point of the target range. The inflation estimates and expectations for twelve months ahead are presented in the Appendix. and longer are also close to the mid-point of the target range. According to expectations derived from the markets, and to private forecasts, the markets expect no significant change in the Bank of Israel interest rate during the next year. The GDP loss occasioned by the fighting is believed to be temporary and is not expected to have a long-lasting effect on future growth and inflation. In other words, the GDP gap is expected to continue narrowing and the unemployment rate to decline gradually. Continued long-term capital inflows and the large surplus on balance-ofpayments current account is expected to continue to subject the shekel to appreciation pressure, thereby dampening inflation. A considerable part of the discussion this month was devoted to consideration of the effects of the hostilities in the north on domestic economic activity. The data on real activity point to a rapid recovery of activity after the fighting, with the negative impact of the fighting on economic activity expected to be concentrated in the third quarter of the year. On the eve of the hostilities, the economy had been on a rapid growth trajectory accompanied by a narrowing of the GDP gap. In the first half of the year, GDP grew at a 5.7 percent rate and the business sector by 7.5 percent (both rates annualized). The adjusted growth outlook for 2006 stands at 4.6 percent as against 5.4 percent before the fighting, and the growth rate expected for 2007 is 4 percent. demand because some of the decline in private-sector demand will be offset by an increase in government expenditure. The belief that aggregate demand will not change significantly, coupled with the temporary and limited nature of the supply-side damage, leads to the conclusion that the fighting is unlikely to have a material effect on price developments. The unemployment rate stood at 8.9 percent in the second quarter of 2006. The unemployment rate failed to decline due to an upturn in the labor-force participation rate. Discussants saw no significant inflation pressures arising from the labor market, after a slight decline in unit labor cost in the first half of 2006 due to the rapid increase in productivity. In September, as in August, estimates of the fiscal cost of the fighting and its implications for the state budget were discussed. In view of the costs of the fighting and the attendant economic damage, the government decided to increase its spending. Real government expenditure is projected to grow by nearly 3 percent in 2006. (The increase is composed of a 1 percent real increase in the state budget plus an expected increase in the rate of fulfillment of budget spending plans.) For 2007, it was decided to raise the spending limit by an extra 1.6 percent (beyond the 1.7 percent increase already agreed upon) due to war-related expenditures and 0.5 percent for the costs in government deficit to 1.7–1.8 percent of GDP this year and 2.8–2.9 percent in 2007. Political pressures to increase budget spending both to improve defense preparedness disengagement spending will be lower in 2007 than it was in 2006. and to tackle welfare-related issues increased uncertainty about the government’s budget decision before it was approved in September. . This uncertainty may persist for the next few months, until the Knesset approves the budget. Referring to the budget pressures, the discussants noted the importance of staying within the budget limits in order to help maintain economic stability and bolster the confidence of domestic and foreign investors in the performance of the Israeli economy, especially in view of Israel’s heavy debt burden. The strength of Israel’s financial markets continued to stand out in September. . This stability reflects the strong fundamentals prior to the fighting, the belief that the basic macroeconomic framework would be maintained, and the belief that the economic effects of the fighting will be relatively minor. During the hostilities (except for the first few days) and afterwards, the financial markets displayed robustness. After the fighting, the risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread reverted to prefighting levels and remained stable in the past month. However, the yield gap between ten-year Shahar bonds and U.S. government bonds to the same term widened to 170 basis points as against 125 basis points shortly before the fighting began. In the past month, the shekel continued to appreciate in the foreign-currency market and was stronger than before the fighting began. The NIS/$ central bank interest spread remained steady at 0.25 percentage point. The discussants also noted that after rising oil prices contributed to an acceleration of inflation at the beginning of the year, the downward trend in global energy prices in recent months is expected to mitigate price increases in the short term. The participants referred to scenarios that were run using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models. In scenarios that envisaged the continuation of current exchange and interest rates, inflation was projected to fall to the lower part of the target range by year’s end. The discussants noted that the appreciation of the shekel against the dollar has eased inflation pressures and this effect will continue as long as these developments do. Overall, the receding of inflation to the mid-point of the target range, the appreciation of the shekel in the foreign-currency market, and the decline in global energy prices are important factors that are acting to strengthen price stability, against budget uncertainty originating in demands and pressures for more government spending. In view of these various considerations, all the department directors who took part in the discussion recommended that the interest rate for October be left unchanged. The Governor decided to leave the rate for October at 5.50 percent.