The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the PBC held its fourth quarterly meeting in 2006 in Beijing recently.
The Committee heldthat, performance of the national economy featured relative fast growth,enhanced efficiency and low inflation in 2006. In line with the overallrequirement of the State Council, the PBC closely monitored the economic and financialperformance, made use of various monetary policy instruments to strengthenliquidity management, control credit growth, improve credit structure andsteadily enhance the RMB exchange rate flexibility. Broadly speaking, thefinancial sector performance was stable.
The Committeeanalyzed current domestic and world economic and financial situation and agreedthat despite benign economic situation, China still faced such problems asunreasonable economic structures, extensive growth model and imbalances underbalance of payments. The Committee suggested that guided by the scientificdevelopment approach, measures should be taken to strengthen macro-management,maintain continuity and stability of various macro economic policies, boostdomestic demand, control investment growth at a reasonable level and improveinvestment structure. Efforts will be made to adjust the economic structure andtransform economic growth pattern, promote a basic balance under the BOP andachieve sound and fast economic development.
The Committeediscussed monetary policy stance and relevant measures in the period ahead andagreed to continue the sound monetary policy and strengthen policy coordinationbetween domestic and foreign currencies and banking liquidity management inorder to enhance the forward-looking and scientific approach and effectivenessof monetary policy and maintain price stability. Efforts will be made to keepmoney and credit growth at an appropriate level and promote optimal creditstructure. Measures will be taken to foster financial reform and innovation,improve financial market system and enhance competitiveness of financialinstitutions and efficiency of financial market in resource allocation. The managedfloating exchange rate regime will be further improved in a self-initiated,controllable and gradual manner to give market supply and demand a fundamentalrole in the formation of RMB exchange rate and keep RMB exchange rate broadlystable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
The meeting waschaired by Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy CommitteeZhou Xiaochuan, and attended by committee members Mr. You Quan, Mr. Li Yong,Ms. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Su Ning, Mr. Xie Fuzhan, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Liu Mingkang,Mr. Shang Fulin and Mr. Fan Gang. Mr. Wu Dingfu and Mr. Guo Shuqing submittedtheir written opinions and Mr. Zhu Zhixin was absent due to another officialarrangement. Responsible persons from the PBC Tianjin, Shenyang and Chengdu branches also attended the meeting asobservers.