The MonetaryPolicy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held its first quarterlymeeting of 2006 in Beijing days ago.
It was noted thatthe Chinese economy has continued to display a steady and relatively fastgrowth momentum since 2005. Following the deployment of CPC Central Committeeand the State Council, the PBC continued to implement the sound monetary policyand closely monitored economic and financial developments while at the sametime applying various instruments to appropriately control and adjust money andcredit aggregates. Generally speaking, the financial industry has beenoperating sound, and the new RMB exchange rate regime has been workingsmoothly, with the RMB exchange rate maintained basically stable at an adaptiveand equilibrium level.
The Committeeconducted in-depth analysis of the current economic and financial developmentsboth at home and abroad, agreeing that the scientific development approach mushbe upheld as the overriding principles in guiding the overall economic andsocial progress. The Committee called for strengthening of macroeconomicmanagement to ensure a continuously steady development of the Chinese economyas well as a basic stability of the price level. Appropriate measures should betaken to improve coordination among the macroeconomic policies, focusing on fosteringconcrete progress in the building of the socialist new countryside, expandingdomestic consumption demand, managing the growth of fixed asset investment atappropriate level and optimizing the investment structure. Meanwhile, effortsshould be made to promote restructuring of the industries and foreign trade andto facilitate the transformation of economic growth pattern and the improvementof growth quality.
Weighing monetarypolicy stance and measures for the coming periods, the Committee holds the viewthat the sound monetary policy should be continued while efforts need to bemade to improve the preemptive and fine-tuning actions and the forward-lookingapproach in the making of monetary policy. While ensuring consistency andstability on the aggregate level, measures should be applied to strengthenpolicy coordination between the local and foreign currencies, and improve theeffectiveness of the monetary policy. Besides, forceful actions should be takento push ahead institution building in the financial market, expand directfinancing, and promote a balanced development of the financial markets. RMB exchangerate regime should be further improved and the foreign exchange market shouldbe expanded to increase the floating flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, witha view to keeping the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive andequilibrium level. Foreign exchange management system reform should be deepenedto promote a basic equilibrium of the balance of payments.
Mr. ZhouXiaochuan, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committeechaired the meeting. Other Committee members present or providing writtenopinions at the meeting included Mr. You Quan, Mr. Zhu zhixin, Mr. Li Yong, Mr.Li Deshui, Ms. Wu Xiaoling, Mr. Su Ning, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. Wu Dingfu, Mr. LiuMingkang, Mr. Shang Fulin and Mr. Yu Yongding. Ms. Hu Xiaolian was on businesstrip and did not attend the meeting. Presidents of the PBC Tianjin Branch,Shenyang Branch and Chengdu Branch also joined the meeting.