As advanced economies accelerated vaccination rollout, relaxed pandemic-related restrictions, and kept fiscal and monetary stimulus measures in place, coupled with a lower base effect, international institutions forecasted a significant expansion for the global economy this year before slightly moderating next year. Meanwhile, with the WTO Goods Trade Barometer recently climbing to a new high, the growth rate of world trade volume was also forecasted to rebound markedly this year and edge down somewhat next year. Hurricane disruptions to oil production in the Gulf of Mexico in late August, as well as market expectations of a demand rebound as the pandemic eased, pushed international oil prices back upwards. For this year as a whole, major institutions projected oil prices to rise higher compared to last year, while a modest decline was forecasted for next year. Overall, global commodity prices had posted an uptrend since July as international oil prices fluctuated at a relatively high level and industrial metal prices were driven up by strong demand. In view of elevated international goods prices owing to rising global demand and persisting supply chain bottlenecks, inflation forecasts for major economies this year were broadly higher than those of the previous year but were expected to turn lower next year. In recent months, these economies witnessed a more significant inflation upturn but judged it to be transitory. Looking at policy changes of major economies since the Bank’s last Board Meeting in June, major central banks continued with monetary easing, maintaining policy rate levels and keeping asset purchase programs in place, albeit with tapering signals from the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank. Meanwhile, major economies also remained expansionary in terms of fiscal policy. In global financial markets, government bond yields of the US and Germany climbed out of the bottom as the Fed and the ECB signaled they might reduce bond-buying amid worries about recent elevated inflation. Global equities seesawed at high levels and the US dollar index rebounded, owing to intensifying financial risks in China and an unclear path of the Fed’s tapering plan. Looking ahead, downside risks continue to loom over the global economic outlook, including uneven vaccination progress, a greater impact of new virus strains, pressures for some advanced economies to gradually withdraw monetary easing, potential disasters owing to climate change, and heightened geopolitical conflicts. If these risks materialize or intensify, they could dampen the global economic recovery and hamper financial stability. The six-month outlook subindex under Taiwan’s Manufacturing PMI pointed to further expansion, and the outlook subindex under the Non-Manufacturing Index rose back from July onwards as domestic COVID-19 cases dropped to a steady low. Both readings revealed more positive business sentiment. Regarding external demand, rising global demand and raw material prices significantly boosted export performance of major products this year, with an increase of more than 20% for exports to each major market. Greater final demand benefiting from the gradual normalization of economic activity in major economies was expected to keep Taiwan’s exports enjoying solid real growth in the second half of 2021, with significant expansion for the year as a whole before moderating next year. Regarding domestic demand, Taiwanese tech giants and related supply chain firms stepped up capital expenditure, and investment plans for 5G network technology and for maritime and air transport equipment continued to progress. Solid real growth in private investment was projected for the second half of the year and the entire year, with mild real growth expected next year. In terms of private consumption, a partial lift of restrictions amid an improving pandemic situation, a new consumption stimulus program, and pent-up demand were expected to give private consumption a firmer footing in the second half of the year, with real private consumption growth advancing at a mild pace this year and gathering steam next year. In the labor market, the unemployment rate dropped to 4.24% in August, though it remained high. The number of employed persons stayed below the pre-pandemic level, with the services sector losing more jobs than other sectors. With solid economic growth in the first half of the year and a 3.43% expansion expected for the second half, driven by increased investment by tech firms and the government’s private consumption stimulus program, Taiwan’s economy was forecasted to grow by 5.75% this year and by 3.45% next year. Growth projections by major institutions ranged between 5.00% and 6.40% for this year and between 2.50% and 4.50% for 2022. Market liquidity was ample in August 2021. Short-term interest rates fluctuated narrowly as the pandemic eased, and banks’ average excess reserves stayed above NT$60 billion in recent months. Bank credit conditions were supported by extended export strength and increased policy loans to pandemic-impacted SMEs, resulting in steady growth in total bank lending and SME lending. The annual growth rate of the monetary aggregate M2 trended down in August due to a higher base effect and slower growth in transaction deposits, averaging 8.91% for the January-August period. In the housing market, the price index for new housing projects edged down in the second quarter, while the index for existing homes rose. For the first seven months of the year, the number of ownership transfers for buildings and land increased by 16.0% and 15.2% year-on-year. Trading in the housing market appeared to stabilize as the pandemic eased, and banks maintained a positive outlook for the residential housing market in major cities. Data as of the end of July showed an annual increase of 11.6% in total real estate lending. Housing loan growth slowed slightly to 10.2% year-on-year, while construction loan growth rose to 17.1%, driven mainly by a 26.7% increase in land loans. The ratio of total land loans to construction loans rose to 61.7%, compared to 59.3% at the end of December 2020. The average loan-to-value ratio for newly-extended land loans of domestic banks rose from 42.6% in December 2020 to 63.6% in July 2021. As of the end of June, the number of natural persons with two outstanding housing loans increased by 9.2% compared to March 2016. A significant number of housing loans in this group were collateralized in areas such as the six Special Municipalities, Hsinchu County, and Hsinchu City. International prices for crude oil and other raw materials remained elevated in August, and domestic vegetable prices soared due to torrential rain, sending the annual growth rate of the consumer price index (CPI) to 2.36%. However, this rise was attributed to transitory forces. The core CPI posted an annual growth rate of 1.33%, considered mild. The average annual growth rate of the CPI for the first eight months of the year was 1.64%, driven by increases in domestic fuel prices, airfares, and vegetable prices. Raw material price uptrends and shipping fee surges pushed up import prices and triggered imported inflationary pressures, though there were signs of moderation in recent months. September meeting of the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) still viewed that elevated inflation largely reflected transitory factors but did not completely dismiss concerns. Therefore, the Bank should also continue to closely watch domestic inflation and stay alert. Another board director stated that despite mild inflation at present, the Bank needs to heed the future path of domestic inflation and conduct more research on inflation expectations and survey methodology. The director suggested the Bank give guidance regarding the criteria necessary to warrant a rate hike to bolster public confidence in the Bank’s ability to keep inflation anchored. One board director pointed out that structural factors holding down global inflation have weakened somewhat. Though still not radical in the near term, structural changes, once set off, would have a greater effect in the coming years. Furthermore, it is important to study inflation expectations. For instance, inflation expectations of households could well overshoot actual inflation as the day-to-day shopping experience of goods and services tends to dictate public expectations of inflation. Household inflation expectations might capture the tipping point of structural changes in inflation. When the gap between headline and core inflation readings widens, often discounted as a phenomenon reflecting temporary disruptions, it could actually signal future structural inflation changes that households’ inflation expectations could capture. Several board directors gave their views on future monetary policy deliberations. One noted that, despite the impact from the pandemic, Taiwan’s economic fundamentals were stronger than many other economies. Meanwhile, the recent US FOMC meeting suggested the Fed may start to reduce asset purchases later this year and possibly raise rates as soon as next year. Against this backdrop, Taiwan, being a small open economy, should also begin to ponder over the appropriate timing of a rate liftoff to prepare for likely policy changes in advanced economies. One board director pointed out that the effect from an earlier domestic COVID-19 flare-up had not fully receded, representing a lingering downside risk to the economy. Meanwhile, inflation rose further, albeit judged to be transitory. While the current circumstances did not warrant an inflation-fighting rate hike, the Bank would need to weigh the effect of persisting low interest rates on the economy and, when the timing is right, consider the possibility of raising the policy rates. One board director remarked that domestic consumer price trends were relatively steady, and a rate hike out of step with major economies could amplify the NTD strength. On balance, it seemed the better approach would be to keep the policy rates unchanged. Perhaps the Bank could start to mull a gradual rate liftoff next year if the US Fed begins to raise rates. All board directors were in favor of adjusting the selective credit control measures. One board director pointed out that banks’ real estate lending had made up an increasingly larger share of total bank lending. Among the components, the main contributor was a growing share of construction loans due to rising land loans, whereas the share of housing loans changed modestly. As real estate developers were keen on buying more land, the ensuing land price hikes also pushed up housing prices. In this view, it would be appropriate to lower the LTV ratio ceiling for land loans. One board director stated that although Taiwan’s often-watched housing price indices showed a slower rise in the second quarter of this year, a broad uptrend persisted, justifying the adjustment proposition. Another board director noted that the “consolidated land and housing income tax 2.0” entered into force not long ago, but recent data still showed excessively high annual growth rates of building ownership transfers and land sales. The director supported the adjustment with the aim of cooling down an overheating property market but cautioned that the effectiveness of such adjustments would need further monitoring. Another board director remarked that the selective credit controls might not significantly tamp down housing prices. For instance, the current housing boom in Southern Taiwan was actually due to a favorable outlook bolstered by major investment projects such as new semiconductor plants. Two board directors noted that the Bank had adjusted the control measures twice since December 2020; they hoped this adjustment would also be well-received by the market. Another board director noted that the purpose of selective credit control is to foster a sound housing market and promote financial stability, but the public might have doubts about the effectiveness of this additional tightening, which could impair the Bank’s credibility. In the future, more thought will need to be put into how best to ensure a sound housing market. One board director gave the opinion that a progressive approach to brake gently would make the ride steadier. Moderate policy actions might not reduce housing and land prices but could still be productive by markedly reducing the pace of property price rises. In addition, the current upside pressures on housing and land prices could have been partially fueled by the low interest rate environment. The Bank tackled housing price elevation by increasing the cost and limiting the source of funds for property buyers via LTV ratio caps. Nevertheless, the most effective solution would be taxation policies, albeit not an easy path for such policy changes to happen. Another board director noted that a considerable part of the present housing price strength came from surging raw material prices and wages that fed into the cost of building and construction. Raising the policy rates while advanced economies stay put could prove futile in dampening housing prices and even detrimental to the economy. One board director pointed out that, in addition to increases seen in housing prices and housing loans, Taiwan’s household debt to GDP ratio had also gone high, with real estate purchases as the primary use of this debt buildup. If housing prices keep climbing and real estate loans keep expanding, mortgage borrowers will face even heavier debt burdens once policy rates start rising. Therefore, selective credit control would be the right way to foster a sound real estate market. Another board director expressed the view that selective credit control is not as potent and effective as other measures in cooling the housing market and needs to be deployed early for better results. Protracted monetary easing, including keeping the policy rates low, has significant implications for the housing market. Housing price rises could impact financial stability, cause resource misallocation, and militate against fair distribution of wealth. Some research found that the best way to stabilize the housing market is a mix of macroprudential measures and interest rate policy. Relying solely on interest rate adjustments to tame housing price rises could create serious problems for other sectors in the economy. Nonetheless, this does not mean the Bank should write off interest rate policy completely but consider a policy mix of macroprudential measures and interest rate adjustment when warranted. One board director noted an excessively high level of saving in Taiwan, some of which has flowed into the property market. Housing price deviations have concerned the Bank mainly because they could indirectly affect financial stability. However, this issue also involves housing justice, resource allocation, etc., requiring concerted cooperation to fight the battle on various fronts of supply, demand, and system. Introducing a rate hike and selective credit control simultaneously makes sense, but many factors must be considered when deciding the timing and appropriate policy tools. For instance, a rate hike could add to the current NTD strength; if combined with selective credit control adjustments, such policy tightening could be packing too hard a punch. The Bank’s policymaking cannot and does not aim for an all-around solution but seeks to reach the best possible policy balance given the many factors at play. Monetary Policy Decision: The board directors reached a unanimous vote to keep the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations unchanged at 1.125%, 1.5%, and 3.375%, respectively, and to adjust the Bank’s selective credit control measures. The board directors and supervisors approved unanimously to issue the following press release in the post-meeting press conference, together with the Supplementary Materials for the Post-Monetary Policy Meeting Press Conference prepared by the Bank. Since the Board met in June this year, faster vaccination against the coronavirus (COVID- 19) in major economies, coupled with monetary and fiscal policy support, have led global economic and trade activity to expand continuously. Meanwhile, with increasing global demand and lingering supply chain bottlenecks pushing up international goods prices, major economies have witnessed a pronounced uptick in inflation, judged by their central banks to be transitory. Moreover, some economies recently experienced recurring virus outbreaks and market investors kept a close watch on major central banks’ moves toward asset purchase tapering, both adding to volatility in international financial markets. The global economy is expected to register a strong recovery this year. However, uneven vaccination progress across regions and the spread of new virus variants may lead to divergent recoveries across economies. In addition, adjustments to the accommodative monetary policy stance by some central banks in advanced economies, along with geopolitical conflicts and climate change-related risks, could increase uncertainties over global economic and financial prospects. International institutions project the world economy to grow at a slower pace next year and inflation to drop back. From mid-2021, Taiwan's exports continued to record strong expansion thanks to robust orders for tech products and traditional manufacturing goods. In terms of domestic demand, as tech firms increased capital outlay, private investment posted steady growth. With relaxed restrictions following the downgrade of the health alert amid the easing of the domestic pandemic situation, consumer confidence gradually rebounded. Combined with the government's forthcoming rollout of consumption stimulus measures, it is expected that private consumption would show an upturn. The Bank forecasts Taiwan's economy to expand by 3.43% for the second half of the year and 5.75% for the entire year (Appendix Table 1). As for labor market conditions, the unemployment rate moved down to 4.24% in August, still a high level. The number of employed persons remained below the pre- pandemic level, with the services sector in particular witnessing a more significant decrease in hiring. Looking ahead to next year, bolstered by continuous recovery in major economies and still solid demand for emerging technology applications, Taiwan's exports and private investment are likely to see sustained growth momentum, albeit at slower rates owing to the base effect. Private consumption is anticipated to gather pace as the domestically-oriented services sector shows signs of recovery, helping to boost employment and wage growth. Overall, the Bank forecasts that Taiwan's economic growth would advance at a pace of 3.45% in 2022. 2. As torrential rain caused domestic vegetables prices to surge, along with elevated international oil and other raw material prices, the annual growth rate of the consumer price index (CPI) rose to 2.36% in August while that of the core CPI (excluding fruit, vegetables, and energy items) registered 1.33%. For the first eight months of the year, the average annual growth rates of the CPI and the core CPI were 1.64% and 1.18%, respectively. It is projected that the annual CPI growth rate would remain high in the third quarter, reflecting temporary, weather-induced upside pressures, whereas the annual growth rate of the core CPI would trend down further in the second half of the year. For 2021 as a whole, the Bank forecasts the CPI and core CPI annual growth rates to be 1.70% and 1.17%, respectively (Appendix Table 2). For the year of 2022, given a stable outlook for global oil prices forecasted by international institutions, the Bank projects that the annual growth rates of the CPI and the core CPI would both drop to 0.92%. The forecasts by international and domestic institutions for Taiwan's inflation next year average around 1.37%. In recent months, banks' excess reserves stayed around NT$60 billion and above. The average annual growth rate of the monetary aggregate M2 dropped from the 9.09% of the second quarter to 8.44% in August. Meanwhile, short- and long-term market interest rates fluctuated within a tight range. Overall, financial conditions were accommodative. Since the Bank first introduced the Special Accommodation Facility to Support Bank Credit to SMEs in April 2020 in response to the pandemic's economic impact, financial institutions have so far approved approximately 265 thousand applications totaling NT$399.7 billion. The annual growth rate of SME loans extended by banks stood at 12.27% at the end of July 2021 and the annual growth rate of overall bank lending registered an 8.01% rise. 1. Overall, the current inflation upswing is viewed to be transitory and inflation is expected to be mild for this year as a whole, with next year's inflation outlook tilting to the downside. In terms of economic growth, the global recovery remains on track, though still facing multiple uncertainties. Meanwhile, with the pandemic situation under control at home, the domestically-oriented service activity is likely to gradually rebound and private consumption to pick up. Against this background, Taiwan's economy is expected to continue with mild expansion in the second half of 2021 and the year of 2022. Taking this assessment into account, the Board judged that maintaining the current policy rate levels and monetary easing would help sustain price and financial stability and foster economic growth. At the Meeting today, the Board decided unanimously to keep the discount rate, the rate on refinancing of secured loans, and the rate on temporary accommodations unchanged at 1.125%, 1.5%, and 3.375%, respectively. The Bank will closely monitor the evolution of the coronavirus pandemic, monetary policy stances of major central banks, geopolitical risks, and changes in global financial markets, as well as the implications thereof for Taiwan's economy, financial conditions, and price trends, so as to adopt appropriate monetary policies as warranted to fulfill its statutory duties. 2. To achieve the goals of effective allocation and proper use of credit resources as outlined in the government's Healthy Real Estate Market Plan, the Bank made two successive amendments in December 2020 and March 2021 to its selective credit control measures. Though the amended Regulations Governing the Extension of Mortgage Loans by Financial Institutions have brought down the loan-to-value (LTV) ratios of those loans regulated, banks have continued witnessing marked increases in real estate lending. It is thus deemed necessary for preemptive actions to be taken to curb inordinate flows of credit into the real estate market and further rein in credit risk associated therewith. Removing the grace period for a second home loan taken out by a natural person for housing located in the stipulated specific areas, namely Taipei City, New Taipei City, Taoyuan City, Taichung City, Tainan City, Kaohsiung City, Hsinchu County, and Hsinchu City. Lowering the LTV ratio cap on land loans to 60%. Lowering the LTV ratio ceiling on mortgage loans for idle land in industrial districts to 50%; stipulating that the "well-defined period of time" for the relevant exemptions to apply shall be "one year." The Bank will pay close attention to developments in the housing market and banks' management of credit risk associated with real estate lending. We will also conduct a rolling review on the results of these regulations and measures and make timely adjustments as warranted to ensure sound banking operations and promote financial stability. The NT dollar exchange rate is in principle determined by market forces. Nonetheless, when seasonal or irregular factors (such as massive inflows or outflows of short-term capital) lead to excess volatility and disorderly movements in the NT dollar exchange rate with adverse implications for economic and financial stability, the Bank, in line with its statutory mandates, will step in to maintain an orderly market.