The Monetary Policy Committee of the People's Bank of China (PBC) recently held its third quarterly meeting in 2017. The meeting analyzed the current economic and financial situation both at home and abroad. The participants were of the view that that performance of China's real economy and financial sector as steady with a good momentum for growth, but faced a complicated situation. The world economy continues to undergo profound adjustment in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. The global economy is recovering gradually and the recovery of major developed countries has continued. However, some emerging market economies still face challenges, and the international financial market has potential risks. The meeting stressed the necessity to conscientiously implement the decisions of the eighteenth National Congress of the CPC and the third, fourth, fifth and sixth plenary sessions of the eighteenth CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference, the National Financial Work Conference, and government work report. We will closely monitor the latest development  in the international and domestic economy and financial markets, and changes in international capital flows, adhere to the general principle of seeking progress while maintaining stability, adapt to the new norm of economic development, implement the prudent and neutral monetary policy, and use a variety of monetary-policy instruments, in order to maintain of the volume of liquidity generally stable, and to guide reasonable growth of monetary credit and social financing scale. There will be continued efforts to optimize the financing structure and credit structure, and to increase the proportion of direct financing according to the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform. The reform of the financial system will be deepened further to improve the efficiency of financial sector and abilities of serving the real economy, and to improve risk management. The interest rates liberalization and RMB exchange rate regime reform will be furthered to keep the RMB exchange rate at an adaptive and equilibrium level.