As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, the effects of wholesale prices over consumer inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
For November, statistical adjustments due to the lesser number of working days, compared to the same month of previous years, could determine the retreat of the industrial production index.
However, the trend points to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, which will continue to be favored by the several incentive factors that influence economic activity, such as employment and credit expansion, the monetary easing already implemented, the fiscal impulse and, in some sectors, the reduced inventory levels.
Labor market continues to present favorable developments.
Therefore, in the year through October the average unemployment rate stood 0.6 p.p. below that observed in the same period last year.
In absolute terms, the creation of formal jobs exceeds 1.8 million in the year through October and 1.5 million in the last twelve months.
In line with the positive developments in labor market, and with credit expansion, retail sales continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
The steady growth of retail sales in the year reflects the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the continuity of the current expanding cycle is expected, whose boosting factors will continue to be employment and income growth, credit expansion and the increase in consumer confidence.
Without the seasonal adjustment, the rate stood 2.2 p.p. above the level registered in the same month of 2006, while the average installed capacity utilization rate in the year through October reached 1.7 p.p. above the observed in the same period of 2006, and 0.9 p.p. and 1.5 p.p. above the average rates registered in the same periods of 2004 and 2005, respectively.
The reduction of idle capacity occurs in several sectors, despite the significant increase of investment.
The most recent data indicate that although investment has been contributing to soften the elevation of capacity utilization rates, it has not been sufficient to stop this process.
Considering the recent behavior of capacity utilization rates, the acceleration of investment projects, and particularly their timely maturation, will be crucial to avoid relevant mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to present robust performance in 2007, despite the expected deceleration at the margin, in line with the evaluations present in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes about important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade.
Regarding the external scenario, high uncertainties still remain, particularly concerning the effects of the crisis in the US subprime mortgages market over global economic activity, as well as over the international financial market.
Despite recently issued data were, to some extent, positive, economic activity in Europe and in the US is expected to slow down.
Consequently, the scenario points out to an easing monetary stance in mature economies, at different paces in each region.
On the other hand, strong economic growth of main Asian emerging economies, which were apparently little affected by the US mortgage crisis, as well as the strength and steadiness of current expansion of other emerging economies, even under increasing inflationary pressures and tight monetary cycles, have been fundamental factors to offset the effects of US economic deceleration.
The Brazilian economy, more specifically, does not seem to have been significantly affected by the recent turmoil, and should sustain its growth trajectory, essentially driven by domestic demand.
Oil prices, a systematic source of international uncertainty, not only remained at historically high levels but also continued highly volatile.
This behavior reflects, in addition to structural changes in global energy markets, recurrent geopolitical tensions.
Despite the significant uncertainties inherent to expectations about the future trend for oil prices, the main scenario considered by the Copom remains plausible, in which domestic gasoline prices remain unchanged in However, apart from the trajectory of domestic gasoline prices, one should recognize that the elevation of international oil prices impacts the domestic economy, both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as by the deterioration of inflation expectations.
The prices of other commodities have also presented high volatility in the last months, reflecting the increased uncertainty about the prospects for global demand growth and the turmoil on global financial markets.
In this context, the strong acceleration of food prices in several countries should also be highlighted, as it makes the control of inflation by several central banks a more difficult task.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a -1 bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2007, under the benchmark scenario.
The swap rate trajectory points to a 47bps spread in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This elevation was due to the addition of the October inflation result and the raise of expected inflation in December.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom reaffirms the view expressed in previous Minutes, that in addition to containing short-term inflationary pressures, monetary policy has also contributed significantly for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the intensity of demand expansion continue quite robust and can increase the probability of important pressures over inflation in the short-run.
However, imports growth and the benign investment behavior, which continues to expand robustly, have contributed to slow down this process.
Moreover, despite uncertainties regarding the continuity of the rapid growth recorded in the international economy in the last years and the volatility increase observed in global markets in the last months, the prospects for Brazilian external financing in the forecast period suggest, according to newly available information, that the balance of payments may not represent imminent risk to the inflation scenario.
On the other hand, the relevant inflation increase both in mature and emerging economies in recent months evidences the intensification of the inflationary risks on the global outlook.
Therefore, although inflation prospects remain in line with the targets trajectory, additional uncertainties surround the inflation path.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of positive results reached in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that emerging local inflationary pressures will represent risks to the domestic inflation trajectory has increased, because the heated demand and market of factors can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
The Committee understands that the prospects for this pass-through, as well as for the generalization of the pressures initially focused on consumer price inflation, depend mostly on inflation expectations, which remain carefully monitored.
Additionally, although the external sector can restrain the inflationary pressures in the tradable sector, the heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector, for instance, such as in the services sector.
In this context, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, as well as inflation expectations within the forecast period, discriminating between one-off and persistent or generalized price increases, and promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consolidation of a long-lasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception underway.
As a consequence of this improved perception, the scope for a reduction in real interest rates in the future will naturally follow.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, evolve in a harmonic way.
The Committee emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
Since the beginning of the monetary easing cycle, in September 2005, the Selic rate has already been reduced by 850 b.p., with the bulk of the reduction concentrated in the last nine months.
Consequently, neither has the activity level completely mirrored the effects of the interest rates cuts yet, nor have the effects of the economic activity on inflation completely materialized.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, credit growth and payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, activity level should also reflect the effects of the possibly more intense expansion of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for the next quarters.
Consequently, the lagged effects of interest rates cuts on an increasingly robust aggregate demand will add up to other factors that will continue to contribute to this expansion.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have effects as of The Copom recognizes the important contribution of investment to expand productive capacity.
This factor, together with the external sector, has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures.
However, the Copom evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be sustained, among other factors, by the impulse derived from the monetary policy easing implemented this year, may bring non-insignificant risks to the inflationary dynamics.
In this context, the consistent reduction of the mismatch between the rhythm of expansion of supply of goods and services and demand is even more relevant to the assessment of possibilities of monetary policy stance.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom adopts a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the lags in the transmission mechanisms and has been the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections, the balance of risks associated to the forward-looking scenario and especially the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
Prudence assumes an even more important role in this process, like at the current moment, when the deterioration of the balance of inflationary risks reduces the safety margin of the monetary policy.
This decision aims to preserve the gains in inflation control and to ensure that the strengthening of economic activity continues to be underpinned by solid fundamentals.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine price prospective dynamics and its balance of risks.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up economic activity dynamism, including sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as the monetary easing already implemented, are still not fully perceived.
The contribution of the external sector to a benign inflationary scenario may become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority must remain vigilant to avoid that short-term uncertainties contaminate longer time horizons.
If the risk profile change and imply shifts in the inflation prospective scenario, the Committee will promptly adjust the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The several IPCA-15 core inflation measures increased in November, both on a month-on-month basis and on a twelve-month trailing basis.
Considering the three index components, only the INCC decelerated in November.
The acceleration of IPA-DI in November reflected the higher change in agricultural prices.
Regionally, 22 out of the 27 Federation units reached positive results in September.
Retail sales performance reflects the continuity of payroll growth, better credit conditions, the impacts of social programs and the recovery of the agricultural sector.
On a regional basis, retail sales grew in all states but Piau in 2007, with the most significant expansions in the Northeastern region, mainly due to the impact of the Federal Government social programs.
The comparison between October and September seasonally adjusted data reveals generalized growth among use categories.
In October, the IBGE carried out the first prognosis of planted area and production for the 2008 harvest, including Southeast, South and Middle-West regions and the states of Rondnia, Maranho, Piau and Bahia.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 205 thousand new formal jobs were created in October.
The average tenure of credit operations for individuals reached 419 days in October, compared to 349 in the same month of the previous year.
The average tenure of personal credit operations totaled 443 days, an 88day extension relative to October 2006, reflecting the increasing share of payroll-deducted contracts.
In addition, it bears emphasizing the elevation of the twelve-month trailing average tenure of real estate financing and vehicles acquisition operations, which reached 1909 days and 577 days, up from 1445 days and 524 days, respectively.
Despite this positive evolution, recent data point to a moderation in global growth.
Emerging economies continue to present positive economic performance, with highlights for the strong growth observed in Asia.
A lot of uncertainties still affect the international economy, reflecting the stress provoked by the crisis in the US subprime mortgage market.
Moreover, with the increasing oil and commodities prices, in addition to the dollar weakness, concerns about a less benign scenario for inflation increased.
The main central banks maintained interventions through open market operations during the turmoil financial period, providing short term funding in order to regulate the liquidity and provide an efficient, safe and flexible environment concerning the liquidity management in the banking system.
However, volatility in financial markets remained high.
Concerns about inflationary pressures made several central banks, such as Canada, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, Chile, South Africa, South Korea, India and Russia, increase their basis interest rates.
The central banks in the Euro Area and Japan still keep on waiting the extension of the international financial turmoil to return to their gradual tightening monetary policies stance.
Foreign Trade and International Reserves Between January and November 2007, Brazilian external trade continued the ongoing expansion both in exports and mainly in imports.
Regarding this group, it bears emphasizing the imports of transportation equipment accessories, and also of mineral products, non-food farming products and chemical and pharmaceutical products.
Amongst the imports of capital goods, industrial machines, machines and equipment for office and scientific service, and parts and pieces for capital goods should be highlighted.
In the period between the October and December Copom meetings, the future interest rates increased, especially in longer terms.
In the domestic scenario, strong figures for economic activity and inflation gave support to a steepening of the yield curve.
Moreover, one-, two and three-year rates increased 44 bps, 89 bps and 113 bps, respectively.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 30 borrowing and two lending overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures up to two working days.
