It bears emphasizing that recent inflation acceleration essentially reflects the behavior of market prices, which have increased more rapidly than regulated prices in 2007, a reversal in the dynamics observed in the recent years.
Despite the BRL appreciation in 2007, there are price pressures, among market prices, stemming from tradable goods.
Notwithstanding the recent occurrence of inflation developments less benign than previously anticipated, price dynamics still indicates that inflation should continue to evolve according to the targets path.
However, regarding wholesale industrial prices, there are signs of acceleration at the margin.
As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, the effects of wholesale prices over consumer inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
For August, the few leading and coincident indicators available for industrial production are not inconsistent with the continuity of the industrial expansion cycle, which will be favored by the several stimulus factors that influence economic activity, including the monetary easing already implemented.
The dynamics of durable consumer goods production reflects, to a large extent, the remarkable improvement in credit conditions, when compared to historical levels.
The accelerated expansion of capital goods production is due to the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of domestic demand growth, which has reflected not only the improvement of income and the expansion of credit, but also the perception of higher macroeconomic stability.
Labor market continues to present fairly positive developments.
Compared to the same month of last year, it declined 1.2 p.p. in July, the sixth consecutive fall according to this comparison basis, so that the average unemployment rate reduced by 0.4 p.p. in the year through July, compared to the same period last year.
These figures corroborate the creation of 1.2 million formal jobs in the year through July and 1.4 million formal jobs in the last twelve months.
In line with the positive developments in labor market, and with the expansion of credit, retail sales continue to record positive performance.
These developments confirm the view expressed in previous Copom Minutes that both the expansion of income and the improvement of consumer credit conditions are crucially important to the strengthening of aggregate demand growth.
For the next quarters, it is expected the strengthening of retail sales, boosted by the increase in employment and income, credit expansion and by the recovery of consumer confidence, which so far has not been affected by the higher volatility in the financial markets.
Therefore, the installed capacity utilization rate in July almost resumed the rate observed in May, a record high for the series.
According to CNI data, installed capacity utilization in the manufacturing industry in July stood 2.0 p.p. above the rate observed in the same month of 2006, the twelfth consecutive expansion under this basis.
In the year through July, the installed capacity utilization average rate stood 1.8 p.p. above the observed in the same period of 2006 and 1.2 p.p. above the rate observed in the same period of 2005 and Such increase reflects, unmistakably, economic activity acceleration, despite the strong expansion of investment.
The most recent data indicate that investment has contributed to a slowdown in the elevation of capacity utilization rates, but has not been sufficient to avoid the persistence at relatively high levels, which coincided, in the past, with periods of inflation acceleration.
In this context, the expansion of investment and the maturing of projects will be fundamental to avoid sharp mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments with regard to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
Despite the deceleration, at the margin, the trade balance continues to present robust performance, confirming the evaluations reported in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes that depict important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, imports have been growing more rapidly than exports at the margin, due not only to the strengthening of the BRL, but also, and mainly, to the higher level of economic activity.
On the other hand, the effects of US real state sector crisis over global growth may slow down global demand for Brazilian exports.
In any way, these two movements point out to an adjustment process in the trade balance, due to important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade over the recent years.
There is greater perception that investments in US real state have triggered losses not so far fully assessed in extension and distribution - over financial institutions in developed economies.
This uncertain global financial scenario resulted in liquidity problems across credit and money markets.
Central banks, particularly those of Europe and in the US, have promptly answered by increasing liquidity provisions and facilitating the access to the discount window.
However, these economies continue to have problems of asymmetric access to interbank credit, despite at a less intensive manner than observed in mid-August.
These developments had important impact over monetary policy prospects in developed economies, towards limiting, at least in the short term, the scope for restrictive stance.
In particular, the probability of additional monetary tightening in the US seems reduced, not only due to the problems of interbank liquidity, but also because, even considering that part of the adjustments in the US activity level in response to the crisis may already have occurred, it is more likely that spillover effects on the financial sector and the consumer confidence cause a stronger economic deceleration.
Even considering that Europe and the major Asian countries record robust expansions, despite the economic cooling in Japan, the US crisis may have negatively impact world growth.
However, the Brazilian economy remains sound and shows greater resilience to face the international markets turmoil.
So far, the international crisis does not seem to have significantly impacted inflation and domestic economic activity, unequivocal evidence of the benefits stemming from the highly improved external solvency over the recent years.
Oil prices, another source of international uncertainty, remains at elevated levels and still presents high volatility.
On one hand, this behavior reflects structural shifts in global demand for energy and, on the other hand, recurrent episodes of geopolitical tensions.
Despite the uncertainties surrounding the expectations about the future trend for oil prices, the main scenario considered by the Copom, which attributes no change to domestic gasoline prices in 2007, remains plausible.
Moreover, the prices of other commodities also present high volatility, due to the heightened uncertainty about the prospects for global growth and the recent turmoil on global markets.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This projection is based on the endogenous determination model for regulated prices.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a 5 bps spread in the fourth quarter of 2007, reaching 74 bps in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
These developments continue to suggest the consolidation of a favorable macroeconomic scenario.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom reaffirms the view expressed in previous Minutes, that in addition to containing short-term inflationary pressures, monetary policy has also contributed significantly for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the intensity of demand expansion can increase the probability of important pressures over inflation in the short-run.
In addition to investment expansion, imports growth has remarkably contributed to slow down this process, complementing domestic production and, therefore, limiting potential inflationary effects stemming from aggregate demand sustained growth.
Therefore, even with the increase in uncertainty, inflation prospects remain in line with the targets trajectory.
As in recent meetings, the Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of the monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the consolidation of positive developments anticipated for the future.
The Copom evaluates that emerging local inflationary pressures are more likely to represent risks to domestic inflation trajectory, because the heated demand can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
Additionally, the heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the nontradable sector.
The Copom also observes that the increase in IPCA inflation expectations for 2007 and for twelve months ahead, despite to levels below the targets established for 2007 and 2008, is a process that must be carefully monitored.
In this sense, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, discriminating between one-off and persistent or generalized price increases, and promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consolidation of a long-lasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception underway.
The scope for a reduction in real interest rates in the future will naturally follow as a consequence of this improved perception.
The Copom evaluates that its cautious monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability of inflation convergence to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forwardlooking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate demand and supply, remain consistent with the recent benign inflation outlook observed in the last quarters.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
Since the beginning of the monetary easing cycle, in September 2005, the Selic rate has already been reduced by 825 b.p., with the bulk of the reduction concentrated in the last nine months.
Consequently, the activity level has not completely mirrored the effects of the interest rates cuts yet, as well as the effects of the economic activity on inflation have not completely materialized.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the prospective inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, employment and income expansions and credit growth will continue to bolster economic activity, despite the current inflation acceleration and some increase in the market interest rate.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, activity level should also reflect the effects of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for the next quarters of the year and for Consequently, the lagged effects of interest rates cuts on an increasingly robust aggregate demand will add up to other factors that will continue to contribute to this expansion.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have limited effects in 2007 and predominant impacts in The pace of domestic demand may continue to be sustained by factors such as the impulse derived from the monetary policy easing implemented this year, but it may still bring non-insignificant risks to the inflationary dynamics.
Conversely, the last developments suggest that the contribution of the external sector to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario may become less effective.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom has privileged a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the lags in the transmission mechanisms and has been the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty related to the process of monetary policy formulation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections and the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
In this context, the Committee considered the option of keeping the basic interest rate unaltered.
Under an inflation-targeting regime, the monetary authority decides according to inflation prospects, analyzing several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine price dynamics and its balance of risks.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up the economic activity recovery.
This expansion encompasses some sectors little exposed to external competition, at the time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as the monetary easing already implemented, are still not fully perceived.
In spite of not being an imminent threat to inflation prospects, the contribution of the external sector to the maintenance of a benign inflationary scenario may become less effective.
In such environment, the monetary authority must remain vigilant, so that short-term uncertainties do not contaminate longer time horizons.
The prices of perishable food retreated again in August, following the pattern that has been observed since May.
Energy, gasoline and alcohol prices contracted in August and altogether influenced the IPCA-15 with -0.14 p.p.
The several IPCA-15 core inflation measures showed that inflation increased in August, not only on a month-on-month, but also on a twelve-month trailing basis.
Higher inflation in the prices of wholesale products was responsible for the acceleration of the IGP-DI, primarily due to the increase in agricultural prices.
Regionally speaking, 15 out of 27 Federation Units achieved positive results in the period.
Retail sales performance reflects the continuity of payroll growth and better credit conditions, together with the impacts of social programs and the recovery of the agricultural sector.
On a regional basis, all states recorded growth in retail sales under this comparison basis, and the most significant expansions occurred in the Northeastern and Northern regions, especially due to the impact of federal government social assistance programs in these regions.
According to Anfavea, vehicles production reached 268.2 thousand units in July, a new monthly record.
National production of grains should reach 133.4 million tons, due to good weather conditions and the production incentive driven by the increase in international agricultural commodities prices.
In fact, the Icea remained above the IEC for the eighth consecutive month.
In the capital goods and construction material sectors, investment intentions seem to have cooled, while intermediate goods producers remain willing to invest.
According to the Ministry of Labor and Employment, 127 thousand new formal jobs were created in July.
Wage adjustments have been favored by economic growth and low and stable inflation, which allow full and immediate compensation of past inflation, together with real wages increases sustained by productivity gains.
The average tenure of credit operations for individuals reached 407 days in July, compared to 341 in the same month of the previous year.
The average tenure of personal credit operations totaled 434 days, an 87-day extension relative to July 2006, as a consequence of the increasing share of payroll-deducted contracts.
In addition, it bears emphasizing the elevation of the average tenure of vehicles acquisition operations, which reached 567 days, up from 515 days in the last twelve months.
Japan and Euro area economies sustained their growth trend, with signs that their respective domestic demands have become more significant in this process.
Emerging economies, led by fast growth in China, India and Russia, also showed robust expansion, favored by high liquidity e increasing commodities prices.
The turmoil caused by US subprime mortgages market, in mid-July, affected the credit market and other assets, spread risk aversion and reduced international liquidity.
As a consequence, overall outlook became highly volatile, causing significant falls and massive sales in stock markets, lower global liquidity and some decline in energy and commodities prices.
Under these circumstances, the main central banks carried out important shortterm open market operations, aiming at keeping their respective basic interest rates close to the targets.
A lot of uncertainties still affect the markets, and it is not clear the time they will take to overcome it.
Concerns about the subprime market and broader issues regarding the US credit market will continue to drive the scenario.
Normal uncertainty, related to economic indicators and the coming decisions of the main central banks, will also be present, injecting volatility until the extension of the problem becomes clear, particularly in relation to the financial effects of subprime contracts.
There is some consensus that the subprime mortgages crisis will hit the real sector of US economy and affect the countrys growth, but the consequences over global economy tend to be less important.
Foreign Trade and International Reserves Between January and August, Brazilian external trade confirmed the ongoing expansion, and reached record highs both in exports and in imports.
Between July 16 and September 3, one- and three-month rates fell 0.29 p.p. and 0.16 p.p., respectively, while the six-month rate increased 0.14 p.p.
In addition, One-, twoand three-year rates also increased 0.57 p.p., 1.06 p.p. and 1.11 p.p., respectively.
In the same period, the BCB also conducted 37 overnight repo operations aimed at draining the excess liquidity from the market.
On July 19, August 6 and August 13, the BCB also conducted borrowing operations with tenures of 17, 23 and 18 working days, respectively.
In addition, the BCB conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures up to two working days.
