As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, the effects of wholesale prices over consumer inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
This expansion suggests that the retreat in industrial output in July was punctual.
For September, the leading and coincident indicators available point to the continuity of the industrial production expansion cycle, which will be favored by the several stimulus factors that influence economic activity, including the monetary easing already implemented.
The strength of durable consumer goods production reflects, predominantly, the remarkable improvement in credit conditions, when compared to historical patterns.
The accelerated expansion of capital goods production is, to a large extent, due to the consolidation of positive prospects for the continuity of domestic demand growth, which has reflected both the improvement of income and the expansion of credit, underpinned by the perception of higher macroeconomic stability.
Furthermore, it bears emphasizing the contribution of other specific factors, such as investment resumption in the agricultural and live stock sector.
Labor market continues to present fairly positive developments.
However, the unemployment rate significantly decreased 1.1 p.p. in August, year-over-year, the seventh consecutive fall according to this comparison basis, so that in year-to-date terms it stood 0.5 p.p. below the observed in the same period of last year.
These figures corroborate the creation of 1.6 million formal jobs in the year through September and 1.5 million formal jobs in the last twelve months.
In line with the positive developments in labor market, and with the expansion of credit, retail sales continue to record positive performance, indicating that the pace of domestic demand growth remains robust, and consistent signs of cooling cannot be perceived.
These developments confirm the view expressed in previous Copom Minutes that both the expansion of income and the improvement of consumer credit conditions are crucially important to the strengthening of aggregate demand growth.
The August result stood 1.7 p.p. above the rate observed in the same month of 2006, recording the thirteenth consecutive expansion under this basis.
In the year through August, the average installed capacity utilization rate stood 1.8 p.p. above the observed in the same period of 2006 and 1.2 p.p. above the rate observed in the same period of 2005 and Such increase reflects, unmistakably, economic activity acceleration and occurs in several sectors, despite the strong expansion of investment.
The most recent data indicate that although investment has contributed to dampen the process of elevation of capacity utilization rates, it has not been sufficient to avoid its persistence at relatively high levels, which coincided, in the past, with periods of inflation acceleration.
In light of the recent behavior of capacity utilization rates, the expansion of investment, as well as the timely maturity of projects, which may increase the productive capacity of economy, will be fundamental to avoid relevant mismatches regarding the evolution of aggregate supply and demand.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments with regard to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to present robust performance in 2007, despite the deceleration at the margin, confirming the evaluations reported in Inflation Reports and previous Copom Minutes about important structural changes in the Brazilian foreign trade.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, imports have been growing more rapidly than exports, due not only to the strengthening of the BRL, but also, and mainly, to the higher level of economic activity in the country.
Although the most intense effects of the crisis in the US subprime mortgages market over financial markets seem to have exhausted, uncertainties remain.
On the other hand, neither has the situation in the interbank markets of the mature economies reached normality, nor have the developments of this crisis over real economy completely materialized.
The magnitude of the crisis is not completely known especially the effects over the US economic growth and, to a lesser extent, over the European economies.
Notwithstanding the remaining difficulties in financial markets and the uncertainties regarding global economy developments, the recovery in risk appetite has been relatively fast, including that regarding Brazilian assets.
In fact, the price behavior of Brazilian assets in the last episode of stress in international financial markets, similarly to the observed in February and in March this year, and in May and June 2006, evidences the consolidation of international investors confidence in the Brazilian economy.
The main central banks reacted to the financial turbulence providing liquidity in the interbank market and, in the case of US, easing the monetary policy aiming at minimizing the risk that the impact of the real state sector over credit would lead to a more pronounced economic deceleration.
In short, the long monetary tightening cycle comes to an end in the US, and the current debate seems to be centered in the duration and magnitude of additional reductions in the interest rates.
In Europe and in the major Asian countries, economic activity continues to record robust expansions, despite the increase in the risk of deceleration, caused by the uncertainties regarding the US domestic macroeconomic scenario, the impact of difficulties of real state market over financial institutions and credit conditions in these regions.
In this context, it bears emphasizing that the current vigor of emerging economies has importantly counterbalanced the economic deceleration in the US.
The Brazilian economy, specifically, does not seem to have significantly been impacted by the recent turmoil, and should continue its growth trajectory, essentially sustained by domestic demand, in the upcoming quarters.
This behavior reflects not only structural shifts in global energy markets, but also geopolitical tensions, which recently intensified.
Despite the significant uncertainties surrounding the expectations about the future trend for oil prices, the main scenario considered by the Copom, which attributes no change to domestic gasoline prices in 2007, remains plausible.
The prices of other commodities have also presented high volatility in the last weeks, driven by the heightened uncertainty about the prospects for global growth and by the turmoil on global markets.
Nevertheless, the main raw material price indices have presented an upward trend in the last weeks.
In this context, the strong acceleration of food prices in several countries should be highlighted, which has made the control of inflation by several central banks a more difficult task.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This projection is based on the endogenous determination model for regulated prices.
The projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, using a Vector Autoregressive model based on the Selic and 180-day swap rates, estimates a -8 bps spread, under the benchmark scenario, in the fourth quarter of 2007, reaching 47 bps in the last quarter of The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
This reduction was mainly driven by the addition of the September inflation result, below market expectations.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of demand expansion remains robust, and may increase the probability of significant inflationary pressures on short-term inflation.
Investment expansion and imports growth have contributed to retard this process, limiting potential inflationary effects stemming from aggregate demand sustained growth.
Moreover, despite uncertainties regarding the continuity of strong growth in the international economy and the heightened volatility in global markets in the last months, the prospects for Brazilian external financing in the forecast period suggest, according to the information available until now, that the balance of payments should not present a risk to the inflation scenario.
On the other hand, some recent evidences point to an intensification of the risks on the global inflation outlook, as suggested by the evolution of some raw materials prices.
Therefore, although inflation prospects remain in line with the targets path, additional uncertainty surrounds this outlook.
As in recent meetings, the Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of the monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the consolidation of positive developments anticipated for the future.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that emerging local inflationary pressures will represent risks to domestic inflation trajectory has increased, because the heated demand can increase the pass-through of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation.
Additionally, although the external sector can restrain the inflationary pressures in the tradable sector, the heated domestic demand can trigger inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector.
The Copom also observes that even though the upward movement of IPCA inflation expectations for 2008 has stabilized over the recent weeks at a level below the target established for 2008, this process must be carefully monitored.
In this context, the Copom will continue to manage the monetary policy stance so that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
In this respect, the Copom will carefully monitor the evolution of inflation and the several core inflation measures, discriminating between oneoff and persistent or generalized price increases, and promptly adjusting the monetary policy stance to the circumstances.
The preservation of inflation rates in line with the targets path and the consolidation of a long-lasting stable macroeconomic scenario will contribute to the progressive reduction of macroeconomic risk perception underway.
The scope for a reduction in real interest rates in the future will naturally follow, as a consequence of this improved perception.
The Copom evaluates that the persistence of a cautious monetary policy stance has been critical to increase the probability that inflation will continue to evolve according to the targets path.
For this to materialize, however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators, in particular the expected dynamic of aggregate supply and demand, remain consistent with the recent benign inflation outlook observed in the last quarters.
The Committee emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags in the transmission of monetary policy stance to economic activity and inflation.
Since the beginning of the monetary easing cycle, in September 2005, the Selic rate has already been reduced by 850 b.p., with the bulk of the reduction concentrated in the last nine months.
Consequently, neither has the activity level completely mirrored the effects of the interest rates cuts yet, nor have the effects of the economic activity on inflation completely materialized.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative monetary policy stances should necessarily focus on the prospective inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indicators.
During the coming months, credit growth and payroll expansion should continue to bolster economic activity.
As mentioned in recent Copom Minutes, activity level should also reflect the effects of governmental transfers and other fiscal impulses expected for the next quarters of the year and for Consequently, the lagged effects of interest rates cuts on an increasingly robust aggregate demand will add up to other factors that will continue to contribute to this expansion.
These issues become even more relevant considering the clear signs of heated aggregate demand, and the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have limited effects in 2007 and predominant impacts in The Copom recognizes the contribution of investment, enlarging the productive capacity, and of the external sector to mitigate inflationary pressures, but evaluates that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which should continue to be sustained by factors such as the impulse derived from the monetary policy easing implemented this year, may bring non-insignificant risks to the inflationary dynamics.
Aiming at consolidating a stable and predictable environment, the Copom has privileged a strategy to avoid a volatile inflationary trajectory.
This strategy takes into consideration the lags in the transmission mechanisms and has been the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation.
That is the reason why variables such as inflation projections, the balance of risks associated to the prospective scenario and the preventive stance in the decision-making process of the Copom are so important.
Prudence assumes an even more important role in this process, like at the current moment, when the deterioration of the balance of inflationary risks reduces the safety margin of the monetary policy.
Under this context, considering the uncertainties associated with both the transmission mechanisms of the monetary policy and the prospective growth pace of aggregate supply and demand, the Copom decided to pause the monetary policy easing process.
This decision aims to preserve the gains in inflation control and to ensure that the strengthening of economic activity continues to be underpinned by solid fundamentals.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the Copom decides according to inflation prospects, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine price prospective dynamics and its balance of risks.
Domestic demand continues to expand vigorously, backing-up economic activity strength.
This expansion encompasses some sectors little exposed to external competition, at a time when the effects of important incentive factors, such as the monetary easing already implemented, are still not fully perceived.
In spite of not being an imminent threat to inflation prospects, the contribution of the external sector to the maintenance of a benign inflationary scenario may become less effective, at a moment when the effects of investment over the productive capacity of the economy still need to consolidate.
In such environment, the monetary authority must remain vigilant, so that short-term uncertainties do not contaminate longer time horizons.
Conversely, housing, health and personal care and clothes registered higher rates than in the previous month.
The several IPCA core inflation measures declined on a month-on-month basis and showed relative stability on a twelve-month trailing basis.
Considering the index components, the IPA-DI and the IPC-Br decelerated in September, while the INCC accelerated.
The deceleration of IPA-DI in September reflected the lower change in industrial and agricultural prices.
The main drivers for upward agricultural price pressures in September were the prices of soy, corn, fruit and legumes, perishable milk and wheat.
The deceleration in the agricultural IPA stemmed mainly from the prices of perishable milk and poultry, the downturn in the prices of bovines and the recurrent fall in the price of sugar cane, compared to the previous month.
Among the prices of industrial products, it bears emphasizing the increase in the prices of mining industry products and fertilizers and the fall in the prices of non-ferrous metals.
Among the activities included in the general indicator, only the sales of hyper- and super-markets, food products, beverages and tobacco expanded on month-on-month basis.
Regionally, 9 out of 27 Federation units reached positive results in July.
Retail sales performance reflects the continuity of payroll growth and better credit conditions, together with the impacts of social programs and the recovery of the agricultural sector.
On a regional basis, all states but Piau recorded growth in retail sales in 2007, with the most significant expansions in the Northeastern and Northern regions.
The disaggregated analysis of industrial activity showed that, in August, seventeen out of the 26 activities with seasonally adjusted series increased, with highlights to food, vehicles, machines and equipment, and electronic material and communication equipment.
The main negative drivers stemmed from the decreases in the edition and printing sector and pharmaceutical industry.
Vehicles production reached 252.8 thousand units in September, according to Anfavea.
In September, for the ninth consecutive month, the Icea remained above the IEC.
This result was due to the combination of less favorable assessments regarding current situation and more optimistic expectations for the next months.
All the main sectors presented positive changes, except for agriculture and live stock sector, which reflected the inter-harvest period in the Middle-South period of the country.
Considering credit operations by economic activity, loans to industries, other services and commerce increased above the overall average in August.
The average tenure of credit operations for individuals reached 414 days in August, compared to 344 in the same month of the previous year.
The average tenure of personal credit operations totaled 441 days, a 90-day extension relative to August 2006, reflecting the increasing share of payroll-deducted contracts.
In addition, it bears emphasizing the elevation of the twelve-month trailing average tenure of real estate financing and vehicles acquisition operations, which reached 1833 days and 571 days, up from 1403 days and 517 days, respectively.
The recovery in the prices of commodities reinforces the uncertainties regarding inflationary pressures triggered by energy and food prices.
The recent falls in consumer confidence indexes already capture the feeling of these effects over consumption intentions.
Despite the current contraction of inflation in developed countries, the central banks still worry about these inflationary risks and will gradually return to prioritize inflation combat in their monetary policies stance.
Foreign Trade and International Reserves Between January and September 2007, Brazilian external trade confirmed the ongoing expansion, reaching record highs in exports and imports.
Regarding this group, it bears emphasizing the acquisitions of primary food products, mineral, chemical and pharmaceutics products, and transportation equipment accessories.
Amongst the imports of capital goods, it bears emphasizing the acquisition of industrial machines, machines and equipments for office and scientific service, and parts and pieces for capital goods.
The BRL appreciation also contributed to the interest rates decrease in the period.
Between September 3 and October 15, one-, three- and six-month rates decreased, respectively, 0.14 p.p., 0.10 p.p. and 0.09 p.p.
One-, two- and three-year rates decreased 0.15 p.p., 0.44 p.p. and 0.46 p.p., respectively.
In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, from September 4 to October 15, weekly five- and seven-month long fixed rate repo operations.
In the same period, the BCB conducted 24 borrowing and one lending overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations with tenures up to two working days.
