The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the fourth quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 95th meeting) on December 24 in Beijing.
The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. It was agreed that since the beginning of 2021, China has coordinated pandemic containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment. With the sound monetary policy maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks. While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline. Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
It was pointed out at the meeting that as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties, and the domestic economic development faces triple pressures, namely demand contraction, supply shocks, and weakening expectations. Considering the situation, the PBC will place an utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability. It will reinforce inter-temporal adjustment, which is to be combined with countercyclical adjustment, and coordinate the monetary policies for this year and the next year, so as to bolster high-quality economic development. Remaining flexible and appropriate, the sound monetary policy will be more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, with monetary policy tools playing their roles in adjusting both the aggregate and the structure. The PBC will take more proactive measures to boost support for the real economy. It will keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable. With these efforts, the PBC will enhance the resilience of economic development and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy. The structural monetary policy tools are expected to play more roles and become better targeted. The two monetary policy tools providing direct support for the real economy should be developed into market-oriented policy tools rendering inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs) and self-employed businesses. The PBC will ensure a good use of the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals. It will implement a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development. Financial institutions will be guided to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development. The PBC will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, by guiding large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment. With these efforts, the financial market will become more vigorous and resilient, and a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive will be developed. The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses. Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector. It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers, better meet the reasonable demands of homebuyers, and foster a virtuous cycle of the real estate market for its sound development. In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy.
The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will earnestly implement the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), all the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Upholding the general principle of seeking progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm. It will remain committed to the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand. It will continuously ensure stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and expectations, and maintain security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments. While strengthening the coordination with fiscal, industrial, and regulatory policies, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.
The meeting was chaired by Yi Gang, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee. Members of the Monetary Policy Committee, including Lian Weiliang, Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Pan Gongsheng, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin, and Wang Yiming, attended the meeting. Ding Xuedong, Zou Jiayi, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, and Cai Fang took a leave of absence for official businesses.