The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting of 2021 (its 93rd meeting) on June 25 in Beijing.
The meeting discussed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. It was agreed that since the beginning of this year, continued efforts in coordinating pandemic containment and economic and social development as well as the effective implementation of macro policies have bolstered the sustained recovery of the national economy in general. The sound monetary policy has been continuous, stable and sustainable, and the management of market expectations has been scientific and effective. Strong support has been rendered for the real economy and financial risks are effectively prevented and managed. With the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continuously delivering benefits, monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and loan rates have remained stable and witnessed a slight decline. As the expectations remain stable, the RMB exchange rate has become more flexible in two-way fluctuations and served as a stabilizer for the macro economy.
It was pointed out at the meeting that the national economy is performing steadily with stable and sound momentum for growth, but the overall situations at home and abroad remain complicated and challenging. The PBC will enhance judgment and analysis of domestic and international economic situations, strengthen the coordination of international macroeconomic policies and guard against external shocks. It will concentrate on running its own affairs well and delivering good cross-cycle policy designs, so as to bolster high-quality economic development. The sound monetary policy will be flexible, targeted, reasonable and appropriate. The PBC will properly manage the timing, intensity and effectiveness of monetary policy, so as to keep liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, keep the growth of money supply and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) generally in line with nominal GDP growth, and maintain a basically stable macro leverage ratio. It will safeguard the overall stability of the economy and make its development more resilient. The PBC will further bring into play the guiding role of central bank lending, central bank discounts, as well as the monetary policy tools that provide direct support for the real economy. Specifically, it will extend the policy of deferred repayments on loans to micro and small businesses (MSBs) and the support scheme for unsecured loans, employ a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development, reinforce the support extended to inclusive finance, and guide financial institutions to step up support for sci-tech innovation, MSBs and green development. The supply-side structural reform of the financial sector will be deepened to guide large-sized banks to increase the availability of financial services at the community level and encourage small and medium-sized banks to focus on their primary responsibilities and businesses. In this way, it is expected to enhance the vitality and resilience of the financial market and foster a modern financial system that features strong adaptability, competitiveness and inclusiveness. The PBC will work to improve the mechanism for the formation and transmission of market-based interest rates and the central bank policy rate system. It will optimize the regulation of deposit rates, and adjust the method of determining the self-regulatory ceiling of deposit rates. It will continue to unleash the potential of the LPR reform, and facilitate further decline in actual loan rates. The market-oriented reform of exchange rates will be deepened to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen the management of expectations, promote the balance between internal and external equilibria, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will build the systems and mechanisms needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, and improve the system for providing financial support for innovation. By guiding financial institutions to increase the issuance of medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector, it will strive to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development. It will work on developing tools to support carbon emissions reduction, and improve the green finance system for the goals of achieving peak carbon emissions and carbon neutrality. In addition, it will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, and improve economic and financial oversight and risk management capability in an open economy.
It was emphasized at the meeting that the PBC will follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, and earnestly implement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government. The PBC will act in accordance with the decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the general principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, and place a top priority on stability. Based on the new development stage, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy and build the new development paradigm. It will focus on promoting high-quality development and pursue supply-side structural reform as a main task by staying committed to the strategy of expanding domestic demand. It will consolidate and expand achievements in pandemic containment and economic and social development, while ensuring stability on six fronts, namely, employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and market expectations, and maintaining security in six areas, namely, employment, the people’s basic livelihood, the operations of market entities, food and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, as well as the normal functioning of primary-level governments. It will implement monetary policy in a flexible and targeted manner, and properly handle the relationship between economic recovery and risk prevention, so as to ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range. It will work toward an economy with a higher-level equilibrium in the course of economic recovery, and celebrate the 100th anniversary of the founding of the CPC with outstanding accomplishments.
The meeting was chaired by Yi Gang, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee. Members of the committee that were present included Ding Xuedong, Lian Weiliang, Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin, and Wang Yiming. Zou Jiayi, Pan Gongsheng and Cai Fang took a leave of absence for official businesses. Representatives from the Nanjing Branch, Wuhan Branch and Xi’an Branch of the PBC attended the meeting as observers.