Reduced pressures from regulated prices were an important driver of the deceleration, while market prices remained virtually unchanged versus the previous month except those inflation indices that capture seasonal adjustments in education prices in January.
Regarding wholesale prices, the deceleration in industrial price increases was accompanied by a decline in agricultural prices.
In this group, despite price increases for vegetables, fruits, beans, corn and coffee, the declines in wheat and animal products prices prevailed.
In the IPA-DI measured according to the production stage, final and intermediate goods price increases slowed in January, while prices of raw materials declined.
IPCA core inflation decelerated slightly in January, but remained at high levels.
The persistence of high core inflation and the behavior of the diffusion index indicate the dissemination of price increases across the economy.
The IPCA tends to come under pressure in February, due to the seasonal impact of education costs and the projected readjustments for regulated prices.
Perishable food prices should continue on the upward trend begun in January, due to unfavorable weather conditions during the harvest.
In wholesale prices, besides the influence of perishable food prices, prices of iron, steel and byproducts should continue to exert pressure.
On the other hand, the declines in the prices of animal products tend to continue.
Moreover, the exchange rate appreciation should favorably influence domestic prices, mainly commodities such as soy, corn and wheat.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The category of food, beverage, and housing continued to post high monthly inflation rates.
Relative to December, regulated price inflation decelerated, while market prices continued to increase at a pace similar to previous months.
The IPCA deceleration in January was also due to a break in the trend of high monthly increases in tradable goods prices, in contrast to non-tradable goods, which continued to increase for the fourth consecutive month.
Despite the deceleration in the monthly IPCA inflation, the dissemination of price increases in recent months across the consumer basket continues to expand.
According to production stage criteria, the IPA result for January was particularly influenced by the deceleration in the prices of gross raw materials, agricultural goods, final goods, food and fuel.
The low changes in the IPA in recent months are, in part, due to the recent exchange rate appreciation and may affect positively the future evolution of consumer prices.
Naturally, the intensity of this pass-through will depend on prospective demand conditions and price setters expectations regarding the future inflation path, as highlighted in previous Copom Minutes.
In January, core IPCA inflation calculated by excluding household food items and regulated prices broke the acceleration trend observed in recent months.
Twelve-month accumulated inflation under this measure, however, remains above IPCA headline inflation.
Core IPCA inflation calculated under the non-smoothed trimmed means method also slowed, while core inflation calculated under the smoothed method remained virtually unchanged.
Despite the marginal deceleration, the annualized rates of core inflation under all three criteria remain high and incompatible with the inflation target path.
The increase was over a higher base, following IBGEs upward revision of the series.
The revision modified the prevailing view regarding recent industrial performance, since, contrary to what was suggested by October and November preliminary data, the fourth quarter result increased compared to the third quarter.
This performance confirms the recent shift in the composition of economic activity, as growth has increasingly been sustained by the more income- and employment-sensitive sectors.
In December, on a quarterly moving average basis, industrial output continued the growth trend observed since February, although at a lower pace in recent months.
The result for December and the subsequent series revisions show that industrial output increased more than expected in recent months.
For January, leading and coincident indicators signal an accommodation in industrial activity.
However, inventory indicators show that they remain at desirable levels, compatible with economic growth.
One should expect temporary accommodation in the pace of industrial output growth, but still consistent with a scenario in which there is a continuation of the expansion begun in the second half of As noted in previous Copom Minutes, it is normal that, after the initial strong impulse at the outset of the economic recovery, the growth process tends to converge to rates more compatible with the pace of output capacity expansion.
This seasonal pattern is typically observed at the end of the year, and tends to reverse in the first quarter.
Formal employment measured by the Ministry of Labor and Employment increased with the creation of 115,972 jobs in January, or 1.539 million on a twelve-month accumulated basis.
The CNI also showed that real industrial payrolls have continued to grow in December, sustaining the trend begun in March Preliminary data for retail sales suggest a strong expansion in December.
This index, associated with the increase in employment and wages, suggests that retail sales momentum will be sustained, particularly sales of semi- and non-durable goods.
As repeatedly emphasized in prior Copom Minutes, and due to the significant activity expansion observed since end-2003, the performance of aggregate supply in the coming quarters remains an important concern for prospective inflation dynamics.
In terms of composition, a decline in capacity utilization is evident among credit-sensitive sectors, while income-sensitive sectors, such as clothes and footwear, remain at high or increasing levels.
The positive trend of the business confidence index for the manufacturing sector, as well as the continuation of Brazilian sovereign risk at reduced levels, suggests a favorable environment for the continuity of fixed-capital investment growth.
Brazil continued to register large surpluses in the external trade accounts in the beginning of the year.
In volume terms, comparing December figures to the same month of 2003, manufactured goods exports have continued to post record growth rates, while fuels and lubricants and durable consumer goods were the main drivers of imports.
The international capital market environment has remained favorable.
However, with market stabilization, the Brazilian country risk premium has gradually declined, recently reaching 400 basis points.
As mentioned in the last Copom Minutes, abundant international liquidity and market stability remain tied to macroeconomic conditions in the industrialized countries, especially the United States, and to the Federal Reserves potential monetary policy response to economic developments.
New information suggesting an economic scenario that would alter the Feds current stance could result in greater asset price volatility.
This instability could be exacerbated if the major economies exchange rates undergo sharp adjustments due to the imbalance in these countries external accounts.
Price volatility has mirrored news regarding possible supply restrictions among exporting countries, demand conditions and available oil reserves in the main consumer countries.
In the context of a highly volatile oil price scenario, international oil prices stand below domestic oil prices.
However, given the oil price volatility observed in recent months, these developments do not mean that there will be sufficient room to reduce domestic oil prices during the year.
As mentioned in prior Copom Minutes, inflation expectations for 2005 remain high, despite favorable events that could dampen inflationary pressures, such as the signs of deceleration in economic growth, exchange rate appreciation, the decline in important commodity prices, and the signaling of a more restrictive monetary stance in the last months.
The exchange rate appreciation and the increase in the yield curve balanced the effects of higherthan-expected January inflation and anticipated increases in regulated prices during the year.
For 2006, the forecasts also showed improvement at the margin, with the benchmark scenario forecast below the target established by the National Monetary Council for the year, and the market scenario forecast above the target.
Since the beginning of the monetary policy adjustment process, inflation expectations and forecasts have improved, although the current headline and core inflation are still incompatible with the medium-term targets.
The more restrictive monetary policy stance adopted since September 2004 will increase the likelihood that the deceleration of wholesale price inflation positively influences consumer price inflation.
Moreover, there is the possibility that the positive seasonal effects of food prices will be registered earlier this year than in prior years.
Combined, these factors may contribute to attainment of inflation rates in the first half of the year that bolster confidence in the convergence of 2005 inflation to the target path.
This increase in the likelihood of inflation convergence to the target path is tied to the response of economic activity and inflation to the monetary policy stance.
In the January Minutes, the Copom mentioned specific factors, among the uncertainties regarding macroeconomic projections, which could harm the convergence process.
Of particular concern was the intensity of self-propagating forces in the economic cycle, tied mainly to income and employment dynamics, and the possibility of greater inflation persistence, given aggregate demand conditions.
In the evaluation of the committee members, data released thus far, including signs of a break in the inflation acceleration registered in the fourth quarter, reduce the likelihood of realization of the risks mentioned in January.
These risk factors should not be interpreted as evidence of the loss of monetary policy effectiveness as a result of recent credit and fiscal developments.
Independent of the specific importance of these developments to current performance, it is important to highlight that every expansionary impulse requires an adequate monetary policy response, but does not necessarily represent the loss of effectiveness of conventional monetary instruments.
Credit growth as a result of the introduction of new personal loan contracts is an important structural advance that, in addition to making a permanent contribution toward improving the efficiency of financial intermediation, should also increase monetary policy effectiveness in the medium run.
In the opinion of the Copom members, there is no evidence to suggest that monetary policy will be unable to assure convergence to the inflation target path during the period required to consolidate this structural change.
Furthermore, the monetary stance implemented in recent months takes into consideration the fiscal policy impact on aggregate demand and, ultimately, on inflation.
It is undeniable that reductions in fiscal expenditures reinforce monetary policys efforts to control inflation, and that improvements in the public accounts contribute to further reductions in real interest rates in the medium run.
However, again, it does not mean that the current fiscal policy stance makes conventional monetary policy instruments inefficient in the control of inflation.
With a reduction in the risks of convergence of inflation to the target path, the Copom understood that the process of interest rate adjustment should be maintained at the originally projected pace.
The committee members still agree that this adjustment, followed by a sufficiently long period of stable interest rates, will be sufficient to align the future path of inflation with the monetary policy objective.
Although the current monetary policy decision brings the Selic interest rate close to a level that, according to the Copoms opinion, will promote inflation convergence to the target path, the Copom recognizes that it is still not possible to assume, with this decision, the conclusion of the adjustment process initiated in September.
The extent of additional tightening will depend on confirmation in the data of the favorable scenario that is beginning to materialize, and on economic agents perception that interest rates will remain constant for a sufficiently long period of time at the conclusion of the process.
Clearly, in the case of a reversal in the evolution of the projected inflation outlook or of an exacerbation of the other risk factors followed closely by the Copom, the monetary authority will be prepared to adjust the pace and magnitude of the interest rate adjustment process to the circumstances.
Investment indicators registered month-on-month expansion in December.
Industrial production reached a new record level in the month.
Analysis of industrial production by activity reveals that the growth in production in December reflected increases in 16 of the 23 activities, and growth in all use categories.
In the month, notable growth was registered in petroleum refining and fuel-alcohol production, as well as metal products, food, vehicles, and pharmaceutical products.
By categories of use, semi- and non-durable consumer goods production stood out with the highest growth rate in the month and a record production level, confirming recovery in domestic demand.
According to the same survey, final goods inventories grew relative to October, with levels slightly above companies projections.
Stocks of raw materials and intermediate goods also increased in the fourth quarter of 2004, remaining, however, within projected levels.
Inventory data from the quarterly Manufacturing Industry Performance Survey, conducted by FGV, also demonstrated inventory growth at the beginning of this year, relative to that observed in October.
Despite the increase, the data suggest normalization relative to the historical series.
Leading indicators for the industrial sector signal some decline in January, compared to December, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Particularly notable are the negative monthly variations in automotive production, the number of road tolls paid by trucks, and shipments of corrugated cardboard.
In addition, it has become consensual that the Federal Reserve will maintain its measured pace of interest rate increases during the year.
Inflation has remained under control in Europe, despite the recent surge.
On the other hand, the downward shift in the long end of the yield curve was driven by the reduction of the country risk, the BRL appreciation and by inward foreign capital flows.
Between January 19 and February 16, the 1-month, 6-month and 1-year interest rates increased by 0.58 p.p., 0.55 p.p., and 0.43 p.p., respectively, while the 2-year and the 3-year rates decreased by 0.04 p.p. and 0.40 p.p., respectively.
With the objective of accelerating the reduction in the public sectors foreign exchange exposure, on February 2 the Banco Central began to conduct FX swap auctions, in which the Banco Central assumes a long FX position and short interest rate position.
The Treasury also conducted seven auctions of LFTs maturing in 2006 and 2007, four of which were sales and three of which were exchanges.
The BCB also intervened in the open market on a weekly basis with 3-month fixed-rate repo operations and 1-month floating-rate repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations.
The BCB also conducted fourteen fixed-rate overnight repo operations, five of which were overnight borrowings and nine of which were overnight lending.
