Seasonal factors, particularly the annual adjustment of tuition fees, prevented the IPCA deceleration.
Even though inflation remained at a level similar to that of January, there was a reduction in the number of items registering price increases, reversing the recent trend.
Agricultural price increases may continue in the coming months, reflecting the recent increase in agricultural commodities prices in the international market.
The minimal increases in the industrial IPA in recent months partially reflect the exchange rate appreciation in the period and the effects of monetary policy, and may positively affect the evolution of consumer prices.
Naturally, the intensity of the pass-through will depend on prospective demand conditions and price setters expectations relative to the inflation trajectory.
The smaller number of items subject to inflationary pressures contributed to the deceleration of trimmedmeans core inflation, both with and without smoothing, reversing the trend observed through December.
However, core IPCA inflation calculated by excluding household food items and regulated prices accelerated in February, due to the tuition fee increases, which had an unsurprisingly higher impact on the core than on headline IPCA.
Had education costs not been considered, the core by exclusion would have decelerated.
Leading and coincident indicators anticipate a new increase in industrial output in February.
The other categories slowed in January compared to December.
As highlighted in previous Copom Minutes, this performance underscores the recent shift in the composition of economic activity, as growth has increasingly been supported by more income-sensitive sectors.
On a quarterly moving average basis, semi- and non-durable consumer goods expanded at increasingly higher rates in recent months, while other categories were stable or declined slightly.
The recent behavior of the labor market also confirms that an income-driven economic cycle is under way.
Retail sales grew notably in recent months.
The most income- and employment-sensitive items have shown the strongest growth.
On a quarterly moving average basis, hyper-and supermarket sales continued the strong growth trend begun in mid-In the last two months, fabrics, clothing and shoes also posted strong growth.
These indicators, together with employment and income indicators, suggest that retail sales should remain on a growth trend.
As repeatedly emphasized in prior Copom Minutes, and due to the significant activity expansion observed since end-2003, the performance of aggregate supply in the coming quarters remains an important concern for prospective inflation dynamics.
With regard to external trade, a robust surplus was maintained in February, and the outlook for the year remains highly favorable.
In volume terms, and comparing January with the same month of 2004, manufactured exports continued to lead growth, while capital goods were the most notable category on the import side.
Brazilian country risk increased and, following the adjustment in several other emerging market currencies, the real depreciated.
As stressed in prior Copom Minutes, abundant international liquidity and market stability remain tied to macroeconomic conditions in the industrialized countries, especially the U.S., and to the FEDs potential monetary policy response to economic developments.
Despite the volatility of recent weeks, the Copom continues to attribute a low probability to a significant deterioration in international financial markets driven by abrupt changes in the conduct of U.S. monetary policy.
International oil prices have risen, almost continuously, since the second week of February, and recently reached new highs, above those of last October.
Oil prices have been driven by news related to demand conditions and the available oil stock in the main consumer countries particularly in light of weather conditions in the northern hemisphere as well as possible supply restrictions among producing countries.
With the increase in oil prices, international gasoline prices have returned to levels above those in the domestic market.
Even if this recent uptick in international prices has not translated into an increase in domestic gasoline prices, it affects the prices of petroleum derivatives and market inflation expectations.
As mentioned in prior Copom Minutes, inflation expectations for 2005 remain high, despite favorable developments that could dampen inflationary pressures, such as signs of a deceleration in economic growth, the reevaluation of market expectations for the exchange rate trajectory, the decline in wholesale industrial prices, and the more restrictive monetary stance of recent months.
The marginal increase in inflation expectations for the year is, however, related mainly to the higher than expected adjustment of some regulated prices, as was the case for urban bus fares, and to the less favorable international environment.
Nonetheless, inflation expectations for the next twelve months and for 2006 remain stable, suggesting that the more restrictive monetary stance has prevented short-term inflationary pressures from contaminating longer-term inflation expectations.
The improvement in projections for 2006 reflects the consolidation of the monetary tightening process begun in September, and also the fact that the factors affecting 2005 inflation forecasts are concentrated in the first quarter.
Economic activity continues to expand, but at a slower pace and more in line with supply conditions, so as not to result in significant inflationary pressures.
Under the inflation-targeting regime, the monetary authoritys decision-making process is oriented around the projected inflation path, analyzing alternative scenarios for the main variables that affect prices dynamics.
Heightened risks for short-term inflation tend to increase the uncertainty surrounding the future path of inflation, so that both the monetary authoritys assessment of scenarios and the coordination of private sector expectations become more difficult.
In such an environment, heightened uncertainty caused by risk factors that may reverse in the short term could have a more lasting affect on inflation expectations.
Therefore, the monetary authority must remain vigilant so that short-term pressures do not contaminate longer time horizons.
As highlighted in the last Copom Minutes, the monetary authority should be ready to adjust the pace and magnitude of the interest rate adjustment process to the circumstances, if there is a deterioration in the risk factors monitored by the Committee.
All sectors sales included in the index fell.
Analysis of industrial production by activity reveals that the January production fall reflected declines in 13 of the 23 activities, and 3 of the 4 use categories.
Particularly notable are the positive growth rates in automotive production, the number of road tolls paid by trucks, and shipments of corrugated cardboard.
However, greater concern is being paid to some indicators, such as productivity trends, unit labor costs, and the pass-through of higher producer price inflation to consumer price inflation, given the implications for medium- and long-term price stability.
The Treasury market has become more volatile, following the moves in the foreign exchange markets, and mirroring the uncertainties regarding the sustainability of the fiscal and external deficits.
In the Euro Area, economic indicators for the fourth quarter of 2004 showed deceleration.
In the main economies, there are still no signs of inflationary surges in the near term, which has eased concerns about changes in the monetary policy stances.
Agricultural commodity prices reversed their downward trajectory in February, due to worse than expected harvests.
Oil and metal prices have risen consistently since mid-February, with futures prices at even higher levels.
Foreign Trade and Balance of Payments In February, the Brazilian trade balance posted record highs on monthly, year-through-February accumulated, and twelve-month accumulated bases.
The increase in key export products has been accompanied by an increase in growth of typically lowparticipation items, underscoring the export diversification currently under way.
In addition, it is important to highlight the broadening of export destinations, even to markets with low participation in Brazilian exports.
Export revenues have also beneficed from the rise in prices of important export products.
Import growth in February and in the first two months of 2005 was disseminated.
Money Market and Open Market Operations After the release of the February Copom Minutes, the long end of the yield curve shifted downward.
Between February 16 and March 16, the 1-month interest rate increased by 0.16 p.p., while the 6-month, 1-year, 2year and 3-year rates fell by 0.12 p.p., 0.19 p.p., 0.04 p.p. and 0.05 p.p., respectively.
With the objective of reducing the public sectors foreign exchange exposure, the BCB continued conducting FX swap auctions, in which the BCB assumes a long FX position and short interest rate position.
The Treasury also conducted eight auctions of LFTs maturing in 2006, 2007 and 2008, four of which were sales and four of which were exchanges.
The BCB also intervened in the open market on a weekly basis with 3-month fixed-rate repo operations and 1-month floating-rate repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations.
The BCB also conducted eighteen fixed-rate overnight repo operations, nine of which were overnight borrowings and nine of which were overnight lendings.
