Wholesale price inflation declined, mainly due to the deceleration of industrial price increases, the effect of which counterbalanced higher agricultural prices.
The December IPCA reflected pressures on both market and regulated prices.
The main drivers were gasoline, meat, urban bus fares, clothing, chicken, housemaid services, fuel-alcohol, and water and sewage prices, responsible for 0.61 p.p. of the monthly index.
Prices of animal products continued to exert pressures, due to the inter-harvest period, while the prices of cereals and grains maintained a downward trend, impacted by international prices and the exchange rate.
In the IPA-DI measured according to the production stage, final and intermediate goods price increases decelerated in December, while the increase in the prices of raw materials was virtually unchanged.
IPCA core inflation remained at high levels in December.
The persistence of high core inflation and the behavior of the diffusion index indicate the dissemination of price increases across several sectors of the economy.
The variation of the IPCA in January should be lower than December, but still at a level inconsistent with the 2005 inflation target.
Electricity in Rio de Janeiro, meat and clothing prices will exert inflationary pressures.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
The acceleration occurred across all three components tradable, non-tradable and regulated prices.
The increase in regulated prices, notably fuel, continued to put pressure on inflation.
Household food prices reversed the downward trend observed in recent months, ceasing to contribute to lower inflation.
Nonetheless, IPCA inflation accelerated in December even excluding household food prices.
Hence, the contribution of market prices to inflation increased in Additionally, of the 1.70 p.p. reduction in the 2004 IPCA, 0.9 p.p. was due to the drop in market price inflation, and 0.8 p.p. was due to lower regulated price inflation.
Despite the recent deceleration of the Industrial component, cumulative wholesale price inflation in 2004 continues to represent a potential pressure on consumer prices in the coming months.
The intensity of the pass-through will depend on prospective demand conditions and market inflation expectations, as assessed in previous Copom Minutes.
IPCA core inflation measures continued to accelerate in December, according to the three criteria by excluding regulated prices and household food, by smoothed, and by non-smoothed trimmed-means.
Similarly to that observed for the headline index, this acceleration has occurred for the third consecutive month.
The cumulative change in core inflation excluding regulated prices and household food was above the headline IPCA in 2004, for the first time since The cores, in addition to presenting an underlying inflation trend incompatible with the medium-run inflation target, accelerated in recent months.
The seasonally adjusted quarterly moving average series shows output declining in November for the first time since February.
The decline was led by the drop in intermediate goods, which represent the heaviest weight in the industrial production index, while groups directly linked to final demand have grown.
For semi- and non-durable consumer goods, the seasonally adjusted quarterly moving average series have posted the highest output level since August 2003, when these sectors resumed growth.
This behavior confirms the change in the composition of economic activity, with growth being increasingly sustained by more income- and employment-sensitive sectors.
Leading and coincident indicators of industrial activity signal an increase in output in December.
This expectation, in addition to the upward revision of the October figure, is consistent with the continuity of the expansion of industrial output observed since the second half of 2003, although not necessarily at the same pace as observed in the initial phases, given the relative accommodation registered in recent months.
As noted in prior Copom Minutes, it is normal that, after the initial strong impulse, the growth process converges to rates consistent with the pace of output capacity expansion.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to expect a temporary accommodation after a monthly sequence of high growth rates.
The labor market continues to show signs of improvement.
In December, however, net hires were negative.
Supermarket sales, although increasing at lower rates, continue to support growth at the margin.
On a quarterly moving average basis, aggregate sales continued to increase, although at lower rates and tending toward stability.
The positive results for employment and wages suggest that sales dynamism will be sustained.
As repeatedly emphasized in prior Copom Minutes, and due to the significant activity expansion observed since end-2003, the performance of aggregate supply in the coming quarters remains an important concern for prospective inflation dynamics.
The CNIs installed capacity index decreased modestly in November in seasonally adjusted terms for the third consecutive month.
Capital goods output maintained robust growth rates in the year.
In the third quarter of the year, fixed capital investment as a share of GDP remained stable, when compared to the cumulative data up to the second quarter of Recent performance of the activity level, capacity utilization and fixed capital investment do not demonstrate a significant change from the scenario discussed in prior Copom meetings, of a closure of the output gap despite the recovery in investment from the low levels of recent years.
Therefore, monetary policy must remain particularly vigilant with regard to the pace of additional demand expansion.
International liquidity and markets stability remain tied to macroeconomic conditions in the industrialized countries, especially the United States, and to the possible response of the Feds monetary policy to these economic developments.
Thus, new information suggesting an economic scenario that would alter the Feds current policy of gradual interest rate increases will result in greater asset price volatility.
This instability could be exacerbated if the major economies exchange rates undergo sharp adjustments due to the imbalance in these countries external accounts.
International oil prices reverted the downward trend observed between October and the middle of December.
Prices have been volatile due to news regarding possible supply restrictions among exporting countries, the available of oil reserves in the main consuming countries, and the severity of the northern hemisphere winter.
The decline in inflation expectations remains modest, considering the favorable events that could contribute to dampen inflationary pressures in 2005, such as the signs of deceleration in economic growth, exchange rate appreciation, the decline in international commodity prices, and the signaling of a more restrictive monetary policy.
The Copoms inflation forecast for 2005 presented a minimal decline compared to those released in the December Inflation Report.
Since the beginning of the monetary policy adjustment process, in September, the deviation between the Copoms inflation forecasts and the inflation target trajectory has narrowed.
Some factors, however, represent risks to the process of inflation convergence to the target trajectory during the coming months.
First, it is possible that self-propagating forces stimulate aggregate demand more than expected in the forecast exercises.
The uncertainty surrounding the intensity of these forces in the Brazilian economy is similar to those related to the immediate monetary policy transmission, especially because the country did not experience sustained growth in the last years.
Second, the stickiness of inflation, given current aggregate demand conditions, could also prove more intense than that estimated with data available for the Brazilian economy.
The recent acceleration of core inflation and the upward revision of industrial output could evidence risks to the monetary management, or, alternatively, could only reflect the usual transmission lags between monetary policy, activity and inflation.
Considering the likelihood that recent consumer price dynamics could actually represent a deterioration of the risks to meet the inflation target trajectory, the Copom examined the possibility of accelerating the pace of interest rate adjustment.
However, there was consensus among the Committee members that available data would not justify such acceleration.
The members of the Copom confirm their conviction that additional phases of the current process of monetary adjustment, followed by a sufficiently long period of stable interest rates, will be sufficient to align the future path of inflation with the monetary policy objective.
Clearly, if the inflationary process proves resistant to the monetary stance adopted since September, or if other risk factors deteriorate, the monetary authority will be prepared to adjust the pace and magnitude of the interest rate adjustment process to the circumstances.
All components of the index increased in the month, with particularly notable and continued growth in furniture and electrical appliance sales.
Auto, motorcycle and parts sales, which are not included in the general index, declined again in November.
Regarding fixed capital investment, the indicators showed a recovery in November compared to the previous month.
It is important to highlight that, in October, capital goods exports were driven by the sale of a domestically-produced oil exploration platform-ship, which remained leased in Brazil.
The breakdown of industrial output data showed the decline in November was a result of the performance of 16 out of the 23 components, seasonally adjusted.
The most notable declines were in the sectors of pharmaceuticals, metallurgy, electrical equipment and materials and metal products.
The sectors that demonstrated notable growth were electronic material, communications equipment and food.
Increases in steel output and auto manufacturing led the expansion.
Packaging paper shipments, the number of road tolls paid by trucks, and electrical energy also expanded.
The number of cancelled files exceeded new files in the month.
This occurred just once more in the historical series, in December The meaningful growth of cancelled files was a result of a campaign to recover credits in arrears for more than two years.
The U.S. current account deficit and oil price volatility remain the main focus of global financial markets.
Given the inflexibility of exchange rate in Asian countries, especially China, the euro continues to absorb the majority of pressure from the U.S. currency depreciation.
Regarding oil, although the short -term outlook anticipates strong price volatility, the marginal recovery of the OECD and particularly U.S. stocks and the slower growth of demand signal the stability of prices this year.
Agricultural and metal commodity prices recorded a decline, with the exception of coffee, sugar and steel.
In the U.S., the fall of the Producer Price Index in December somewhat cooled expectations for a faster pace of monetary tightening.
Thus, the Fed should maintain the gradual pace of monetary tightening throughout the year.
Considering the expected maintenance of interest rates in the Euro Area, the yield differential of U.S. dollardenominated assets should increase during the year, facilitating the financing of the U.S. current account deficit.
In addition to the increase in volumes, key export products have registered price increases and shipments have continued to expand, both to traditional markets and new destinations.
The positive slope of the yield curve widened up to the nine month vertices.
Between December 15 and January 19, the 1-month and 6month interest rates increased by 0.65 p.p. and 0.87 p.p., respectively, while the 1-year, 2-year and the 3-year rates increased by 0.86 p.p., 0.56 p.p. and 0.26 p.p., respectively.
The BCB did not carry out auctions to roll over FX securities and swaps maturing in January.
The BCB also carried out 16 very short-term repos, of which, nine were overnight borrowings, three were borrowings with a two- to five-working-day tenure, and four were overnight lending.
