RATE
BCRP REDUCED THE REFERENCE RATE TO 5.50% The Board of Directors of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru (BCRP) agreed to reduce the reference rate by 25 basis points to 5.50 percent.
Future reference rate adjustments will be conditional on new information about inflation and its determinants.
The decision to reduce the reference rate considered the following information and projections: In July, monthly inflation was 0.24 percent and core inflation was 0.19 percent.
Between June and July, year-on-year inflation decreased from 2.3 to 2.1 percent, within the target range, while year-on-year core inflation declined from 3.1 percent in June to 3.0 percent in July, at the upper limit of the target range.
Core inflation in July showed less persistence compared to previous months due to certain service components.
Following a significant reduction in global inflation from the second quarter of 2022 to the end of 2023, some economies have experienced a slight persistence in year-onyear rates.
However, global inflation is expected to continue decreasing gradually over the course of the year.
One-year-ahead expected inflation decreased from 2.53 percent in June to 2.49 percent in July, within the inflation target range.
Year-on-year inflation is projected to stay around the center of the target range over the forecast horizon, and core inflation is expected to follow a decreasing trend.
In July, all coincident indicators and most expectations indicators improved, remaining in optimistic territory for the third consecutive month.
The outlook for global economic activity points towards moderate growth in the context of lower inflationary pressures and still restrictive international financial conditions.
However, uncertainty remains regarding the pace of interest rate reductions in advanced economies.
Additionally, risks stemming from international conflicts persist.
The Board is particularly attentive to new information on inflation and its determinants, including the evolution of core inflation, inflation expectations, and economic activity, to consider, if necessary, additional changes in the monetary stance.
The Board reaffirms its commitment to adopt the necessary actions to maintain inflation within the target range.
The Board also decided the following interest rates on its window facility operations in domestic currency with financial entities: Overnight deposits: 3.50 percent per year.
Direct security/currency repo and rediscount operations: i) 6.00 percent per year for the first 10 operations in the last 3 months and ii) the interest rate set by the Monetary and Exchange Operations Committee for operations in addition to these 10 operations in the last 3 months.
In addition, the Monetary and Exchange Operations Committee may establish higher based on the amount of the operations.
The BCRP Boards next monetary policy session will take place on September 12, Lima, August 8,
