On September 26, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third regular quarterly meeting in 2018 (its 82nd meeting) in Beijing.
The participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation. It is their concensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained a stable growth momentum with strong resilience, the overall supply and demand remains broadly balanced, and the swtich to new growth drivers has gathered pace. Domestic demand has become an increasingly stronger driver for economic growth, the RMB exchange rate and market expectations have remained stable, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks. The prudent and neutral monetary policy has brought about positive outcomes, as the macro leverage ratio has stablized, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided solid support for the real economy. The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial situtaion has become more complex. The Chinese economy faces tougher challenges.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor new developments in the economic and financial situation and environment both at home and abroad, attach great importance to counter-cyclical adjustments, make forward looking judgments on the situation and take pre-emptive adjustment and fine tuning measures when necessary. The prudent monetary policy will remain neutral, money supply will be properly managed to keep liquidity at reasonably ample levels, and steps will be taken to guide the reasonable growth of money supply, credit and aggregate financing to the real economy. The financial system reform will be deepened, the two-pillar framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies and the monetary policy transmission mechanism will be improved. Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to guide improvements in financing and credit structures, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development, to enhance the financial sector’s capacity to serve the real economy, and to nurture a virtuous circle of economic and financial development. Meanwhile, the financial open-up will continue in a proactive and orderly manner to boost the vitality and resilience of the financial sector.
It was emphasized at the meeting that PBC will, following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era on economic work, earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Government Work Report and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability. The PBC will work to maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of trade, foreign direct investment, and domestic investment, and keep market expectations stable in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to properly manage the strength and pace of structural deleveraging and strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, prevent and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Yi Gang, Governor of PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired the meeting. Ding Xuedong, Lian Weiliang, Liu Wei (Ministry of Finance), Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Liu Shiyu, Pan Gongsheng, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin, Liu Wei (Renmin University of China) and Ma Jun attended the meeting as committee members. Representatives from PBC Shanghai Head Office, the Tianjin Branch and the Xi’an Branch attended the meeting as observers.