Days ago, the 4th quarterly meeting of Monetary Policy Committee in 2011 was held in Beijing.
The participants analyzed current economic and financial situations at home and abroad. In their view, both the real economy and financial sector in China were moving in the direction intended by the macro-economic management policy, the economic growth and the overall price level stabilized, and the balance of payments became more balanced. On the other hand, due to a number of factors such as the European debt crisis, with global economic growth remaining tepid, instability and uncertainty rising, the Chinese economy still faced complex domestic and external situation.
It was emphasized at the meeting that it was necessary to follow the latest domestic and international economic and financial developments and their impacts, continue the implementation of a prudent monetary policy, maintain policy stability and consistency, make macro-management policies better-targeted, more flexible and forward-looking, properly handle the intensity, pace and focus of policy implementation, conduct fine-tunings and take preemptive measures in a timely manner in view of changing situations, strike a balance among stable and relatively fast economic growth, economic structural adjustment and inflation expectation management, and strengthen systemic risk prevention. A mix of monetary policy tools will be used and macro-prudential policy measures will be employed to make counter-cyclical adjustment, to keep the money and credit aggregates and all system financing aggregates at reasonable volumes. And in line with the principle of differentiated treatment to different sectors, the PBC will vigorously guide and promote credit structure optimization, step up financial support to key areas and weak links in the economy, guide financial institutions to improve their financial services so as to better serve the real sector. The role of direct financing will be further tapped to meet the diverse demand for investment and funding to promote the sound development of the financial markets. Efforts will be made to promote the market-based reform of the interest rates, and further improve the RMB exchange rate regime to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee chaired the meeting. Other Committee members present at the meeting included Mr. Li Yong, Ms. Hu Xiaolian, Mr. Yi Gang, Mr. Du Jingfu, Mr. Ma Jiantang, Mr. Shang Fulin, Mr. Guo Shuqing, Mr. Xiang Junbo, Mr. Jiang Jianqing, Mr. Zhou Qiren, Mr. Xia Bin and Mr. Li Daokui. Mr. You Quan and Mr. Zhu Zhixin were absent from the meeting on business leaves. Presidents of the PBC Jinan Branch, Guangzhou Branch and Chongqing Operation Office joined the meeting as non-members.