On June 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the second quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 85th meeting) in Beijing.
The attendees has analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situation. It is their consensus view that the Chinese economy has maintained sound growth momentum with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace. The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and become more resilient against external shocks. The sound monetary policy is practiced responding to the requirements of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, the prevention and control of financial risks is steadily and resolutely carried forward, and continued improvements have been made to the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy. The real economy and financial sector both have made good progress in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and pronounced contradictions still persist. The international economic and financial situation has become more complex, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, innovate and improve approaches to macro control, make timely and appropriate countercyclical adjustments, and enhance macro policy coordination. The sound monetary policy will be maintained appropriate in intensity, money supply will be properly managed, and massive liquidity injection will be avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy is in line with the nominal GDP growth. The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform, improve the two-pillar regulatory framework underpinned by monetary policy and macro prudential policy, and further improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Meanwhile, based on the requirements of deepening supply-side structural reform in the financial sector, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems. The PBC will improve financial services offered to small and micro businesses as well as agriculture, rural areas, and farmers, to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development, to facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, and to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development. Moreover, measures will also be taken to further expand the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial sector, consolidate the capability of managing economic and financial situation and preventing risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in the international financial governance.
It is emphasized that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, adhere to the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, strengthen its efforts to invigorate micro-entities, and make further progress in stabilizing employment, preserving financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign investment, and stabilizing domestic investment and expectations. A combination of monetary policy instruments will be used to keep liquidity at reasonably adequate level. The PBC will deepen interest rate liberalization reform, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level and promote the stable and sound development of economy. Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, so as to achieve risk prevention while facilitating high-quality development, properly manage the intensity and pace of risk resolution, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Yi Gang, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired the meeting. Monetary Policy Committee members including Lian Weiliang, Zou Jiayi, Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, Pan Gongsheng, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin, Liu Wei, and Ma Jun attended the meeting. Ding Xuedong took a leave of absence for duty calls. Representatives from Shenyang Branch, Jinan Branch, and Chengdu Branch of the PBC attended the meeting as observers.