On April 12, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) holds the first quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 84th meeting) in Beijing.
Participants analyzed the domestic and international economic and financial situations. It is their consensus that the Chinese economy has witnessed healthy development with strong resilience, and the switch to new growth drivers has gathered pace. The RMB exchange rate has remained stable, market expectations have improved, and the economy has become more resilient against external shocks. The prudent monetary policy has reflected the demand for counter-cyclical adjustments, as the macro leverage ratio has tended to stabilize, the measures adopted to prevent and mitigate financial risks have produced results, and the financial sector has provided stronger and more efficient support for the real economy. The domestic economy and financial sectors both have realized positive development in structural adjustments, yet deep-seated problems and critical contradictions still persist and the international economic and financial environments have become more complex. The Chinese economy still faces many uncertainties.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor the marginal changes in the economic and financial situations both at home and abroad, strengthen the sense of crisis, maintain strategic orientation, maintain counter-cyclical adjustments, and strengthen coordination among monetary, fiscal and other policies. Preemptive adjustments and fine-tuning will be made at proper time so as to prevent risks with the priority of stabilizing growth. The prudent monetary policy shall be more properly managed to avoid massive liquidity injection, and maintain liquidity at reasonably adequate level and keep the growth rates of broad money M2 and aggregate financing to the real economy consistent with the nominal GDP growth rate. The financial system reform will be deepened by refining the two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies, advancing the reform in interest rate and other key areas, and smoothing the monetary policy transmission channels. Based on the requirements in deepening supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures with an emphasis on adjusting and optimizing the structure of financial system, and to enable private enterprises to get financial support that matches their contributions to the economic and social development. The quality and effectiveness of financial sector’s support to the real economy will be enhanced by comprehensively implementing policies, while the financial services provided for small and micro enterprises, as well as agriculture, rural areas and rural people are to be improved, and a virtuous triangular cycle will be fostered among keeping monetary policies prudent, enhancing the vitality of micro entities and giving play to the functions of the capital market, so as to nurture the overall virtuous cycle of the national economy. In the meantime, the two-way opening-up at a high level in the financial sector will be further expanded to enhance the capacity for economic and financial management, risk prevention and control in an open economy, and participation in the international financial governance.
It was emphasized at the meeting that following Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, PBC will earnestly implement the principles of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC),  the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, and adhere to the principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability in accordance with decisions and arrangements by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. The PBC will not only stimulate the vitality of micro entities but also innovate and improve macro adjustments, so as to further maintain stability in job creation, preserve financial stability, support stable growth of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, and stabilize investment and expectations. The PBC will use a combination of monetary policy instruments to keep the RMB exchange rate generally stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, strike a balance among interest rates, exchange rates and the country’s balance of payments, facilitate the stable and sound development of economy, stabilize market expectations, forestall and defuse financial risks, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Yi Gang, Governor of PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired the meeting. Lian Weiliang, Liu Wei (Ministry of Finance), Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, Pan Gongsheng, Tian Guoli, Liu Shijin, Liu Wei (Renmin University of China) and Ma Jun attended the meeting as committee members. Ding Xuedong was absent due to official business. Representatives from Shenyang Branch, Jinan Branch and Chengdu Branch attended the meeting as observers.