On September 25, the Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the third quarterly meeting in 2019 (its 86th meeting) in Beijing.
The attendees analyzed the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad. Their view is that currently China’s major macroeconomic indicators are within a reasonable range, the economy has maintained a growth momentum with strong resilience, and new growth drivers are replacing the old ones. The RMB exchange rate has remained stable and becomes more flexible in two-way fluctuations and more resilient against external shocks. The sound monetary policy responds well to the requirement of countercyclical adjustment, the rapid growth of macro leverage ratio has been initially curbed, financial risks are generally under control, and continued achievements have been made in improving the quality and efficiency of the financial sector serving the real economy. The real economy and financial sector have both made good progress in structural adjustments, yet the downward pressure on China’s economy is mounting. The international economic and financial situation has become more complicated, and external uncertainties and destabilizing factors are adding up.
It is agreed at the meeting that the PBC will continue to closely monitor profound changes in the economic and financial situation both at home and abroad, be more mindful of the difficulties ahead, maintain its strategic resolve, and focus on performing its own duties. It will innovate and improve approaches to macro regulation, strengthen countercyclical adjustment, and enhance macro policy coordination to forge synergy. The sound monetary policy will be kept appropriate in intensity, money supply properly managed, and massive liquidity injection avoided, so as to ensure that the growth of broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are in line with the nominal GDP growth and prices are  generally stable. The PBC will continue to deepen the financial system reform and improve the regulatory framework underpinned by the two pillars of monetary policy and macro prudential policy. Moreover, based on the requirements of deepening the financial supply-side structural reform, efforts will be made to optimize financing and credit structures, to provide stronger support for high-quality development, and to boost the compatibility between the financial system and the supply and demand systems. The PBC will work vigorously to improve monetary policy transmission, employ market-based reforms to remarkably lower the real interest rates, guide financial institutions to enhance their support for the real economy, especially for micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and private enterprises. Therefore, private enterprises will get financial support that matches their contribution to the economic and social development. Efforts will be made to facilitate the formation of a triangular framework in which the supply system, the demand system, and the financial system support each other, so as to drive the overall virtuous circle of national economic development. In addition, measures will also be taken to further open up the financial sector at a high level and in two ways, consolidate the capability to manage economic and financial situation and prevent risks in an open market, and enable stronger capacities to participate in international financial governance.
It is emphasized by the attendees that the PBC will follow the guidance of Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, earnestly implement the guidelines of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the Central Economic Work Conference, and the Report on the Work of the Government, continue acting in accordance with the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, uphold the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, strengthen its efforts to invigorate micro entities, and make all-round progress in stabilizing employment, preserving financial stability, supporting stable growth of foreign trade and foreign investment, and stabilizing domestic investment and expectations. A mix of monetary policy tools will be used in a flexible way to keep liquidity reasonably adequate. The PBC will deepen reforms to strengthen the market’s role in setting interest rates, improve the loan prime rate (LPR) formation mechanism to promote its application, keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level, and boost the sustained and sound development of the economy. Effective measures will be taken to prevent and defuse financial risks, so as to achieve risk prevention while facilitating high-quality development, properly manage the intensity and pace of risk resolution, stabilize market expectations, and hold the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
Yi Gang, Governor of the PBC and Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, chaired the meeting. Monetary Policy Committee members including Ding Xuedong, Lian Weiliang, Chen Yulu, Liu Guoqiang, Ning Jizhe, Guo Shuqing, Yi Huiman, Pan Gongsheng, Liu Shijin, Liu Wei, and Ma Jun attended the meeting. Zou Jiayi and Tian Guoli took a leave of absence for duty calls. Representatives from Shenyang Branch, Jinan Branch and Chengdu Branch of the PBC attended the meeting as observers.