The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on October 6 and 7, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[3] In this situation, the amount outstanding of the monetary base had been in the range of 251-261 trillion yen. In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments continued to be at low levels. The uncollateralized overnight call rate and general collateral (GC) repo rates had been at levels below 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had marked slightly larger negative figures, mainly reflecting that investors had brought forward the timing of their purchases of T-Bills -- intended for duration adjustments for the year-end -- amid a situation of the Bank's purchases of JGBs being at high levels. Yields on 10-year JGBs had declined to around 0.45 percent with market participants shifting to a "risk-off" mode, mainly reflecting weaker-than-expected economic indicators in the United States and Europe, but the size of the decline was limited compared to that in overseas yields. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had temporarily declined rather considerably to around 14,500 yen, with the yen appreciating against the U.S. dollar amid declines in overseas stock prices. Thereafter, Japanese stock prices had recovered while overseas stock prices had been picking up, mainly on the back of firm corporate results in the United States, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been in the range of partly reflecting the decline in Japanese stock prices, but recovered thereafter. They were recently at around the same levels as those marked at the time of the previous meeting. In the foreign exchange market, with market participants shifting to a "risk-off" mode, the yen had temporarily appreciated against the U.S. dollar to the range of 105-106 yen, mainly reflecting the narrowing of the interest rate differential between Japan and the United States. The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen. Thereafter, the yen depreciated against the dollar as market participants' shift to a "risk-off" mode had slowed somewhat. Looking at developments throughout the inter-meeting period, the yen had been more or less flat against the dollar. Meanwhile, the euro had generally been more or less flat against the dollar. Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- had been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. The U.S. economy steadily continued on its moderate recovery, led by private demand. Private consumption remained firm, with employment continuing its firm increase. Housing investment remained on its moderate pick-up trend. Exports continued to increase. Reflecting these developments in demand at home and abroad, production activity continued on its steady increasing trend. Prices remained stable. The European economy continued its moderate recovery, but its momentum was waning. Private consumption continued on a moderate recovery trend. Business fixed investment continued to see movements toward a pick-up, particularly in Germany. On the other hand, the pace of the pick-up in exports had been sluggish recently. With demand weakening and sentiment turning cautious, the pace of recovery in production activity had been slowing. As for prices, the year-on-year rates of increase in both the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food and the HICP for all items remained low, both being clearly below the quantitative definition of price stability set by the European Central Bank (ECB), which was below, but close to, 2 percent. Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, led mainly by domestic demand. With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to grow stably due mainly to an improvement in external demand and the stimulus measures by the government, although there remained downward pressure associated with structural reforms. Exports continued to increase, particularly to the United States and Europe as well as to Asia. Stable growth in private consumption continued against the background of a favorable employment and income situation. On the other hand, growth in fixed asset investment continued to see a moderate slowdown on the whole, since the pace of increase in real estate investment had slowed, although public investment remained firm. The pace of growth in production had recently been slowing marginally. Meanwhile, the NIEs had been improving somewhat due to a rise in exports to the United States, albeit with differences remaining across countries, while the ASEAN economies as a whole had been lacking growth momentum despite a continued improvement in exports and private consumption. In India, the economy had bottomed out on the back of a pick-up in exports and private consumption. As for prices of emerging economies, there were differences by country and region. Specifically, the year-on-year rates of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) had recently been declining in the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia. In South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand, the rates of increase had been at low levels as a trend. On the other hand, inflation rates in Brazil and Russia had been rising, mainly due to the increase in food prices. As for global financial markets, instability in market developments had temporarily heightened and risk assets in the euro area and emerging economies had been bought back only slowly despite the recent pick-up in market developments. Thus, some markets continued to show nervousness. In international commodity markets, crude oil prices continued their declining trend, due to both demand and supply factors. Exports had leveled off more or less with fluctuations taken into consideration. Real exports for September 2014 had increased on a month-on-month basis, and had marked a slight increase of 1.6 percent in the July-September quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis, turning upward for the first time in three quarters. Exports were expected to head for a moderate increase, mainly against the background of the recovery in overseas economies. Public investment had more or less leveled off at a high level. It was expected to continue to stay at around this level for the time being. Business fixed investment had increased moderately as corporate profits had improved. Meanwhile, business sentiment had generally stayed at a favorable level on a monthly basis, although somewhat hesitant movement had been observed. Machinery orders (private sector, excluding orders for ships and those from electric power companies) had risen by 3.8 percent in the July-August period relative to the April-June quarter. As for the outlook, business fixed investment was projected to follow a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits continued their improving trend. According to the September Corporation, the business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2014 for small manufacturers had been revised noticeably upward from those in the initial survey in April, indicating that their business fixed investment was expected to increase, as happened in fiscal 2013. As for the employment and income situation, labor market conditions continued to improve steadily, as evidenced by the moderate improving trend in the unemployment rate. Regarding wages, nominal wages per employee had been rising moderately, albeit with fluctuations, as non-scheduled cash earnings and special cash earnings had increased and as scheduled cash earnings had been picking up. Reflecting these developments in employment and wages, the year-on-year rate of increase in employee income had been climbing moderately. Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole, albeit unevenly. Although sales at retail stores in real terms had fallen back substantially in the April-June quarter, they moved up by 3.0 percent in the July-September quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis. On a monthly basis, they had increased for two consecutive months, in August and September. This indicated the waning effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase, mainly in components other than durable goods, supported in part by the dissipating effects of irregular weather during this past summer. As for sales at large retail stores in nominal terms, the effects of irregular weather during this past summer had abated from the end of August through September, and the effects of the decline in demand had been waning, mainly in components other than durable goods. Meanwhile, as for durable goods, sales of household electrical appliances in real terms, which had decreased significantly in the April-June quarter, rose in the July-September quarter, but only slightly compared with the degree of the decline in the previous quarter. Services consumption, such as that related to travel, remained steady as a trend. Private consumption was expected to remain resilient with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily, and the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase were expected to wane further. As for housing investment, the subsequent decline following the front-loaded increase continued, as exemplified by the fact that sales of newly built condominiums in the Tokyo metropolitan area continued to show some weakness. Such investment was expected to regain its resilience gradually with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily, supported as well by accommodative financial conditions, while the effects of the decline following the front-loaded increase were expected to remain for the time being. Industrial production had grown at a somewhat rapid pace in the January-March quarter, but had fallen back noticeably in the April-June quarter and continued to decrease in the July-September quarter, due in part to inventory adjustments, such as in durable consumer goods and construction goods. It was expected to resume its moderate increase, as the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase waned gradually. As for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, producer prices were more or less flat relative to three months earlier. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for September was 1.0 percent. With regard to the outlook, producer prices were expected to stay more or less flat for the time being. Financial conditions were accommodative. The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 35 percent. Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable. Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been at around 2.5 percent. Firms' financial positions had been favorable. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at around 3 percent, mainly due to the increase in bank lending. Inflation expectations -- such as those derived from market data -- had been increasing from a somewhat longer-term perspective, but many indicators of inflation expectations had been more or less flat since around this summer. Regarding global financial markets, members agreed that some markets continued to show nervousness, although investors' once-elevated risk aversion had abated somewhat. As for international commodity prices, most members noted the recent decline in crude oil prices. Members concurred that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- had been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies - would continue to recover moderately. With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed that the moderate recovery in the U.S. economy continued, led by private demand, as private consumption had been firm on the back of improvement in the employment situation. As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy was likely to gradually accelerate its pace of growth supported by a virtuous cycle originating from household spending. Members concurred that the euro area economy continued its moderate recovery, but its momentum was waning. As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy would likely maintain its moderate recovery, supported mainly by the resilience in private consumption and an increase in exports, although the adjustment pressure associated with the debt problem remained and a downtrend in the inflation rate had been observed. Members agreed that it was necessary to keep paying attention to the continued moderate disinflationary trend. Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to grow stably due mainly to firm exports and the stimulus measures by the government, although there remained downward pressure associated with structural reforms. As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy would likely continue to see generally stable growth, albeit at a somewhat slower pace, as authorities carried out policy measures to support economic activity while progressing with structural reforms. Meanwhile, a few members said that attention needed to be paid to how the recent slowdown in the economy's growth momentum would affect the global economy and international commodity prices. With regard to emerging economies, members shared the view that the NIEs had been improving somewhat due to a rise in exports to the United States, albeit with differences remaining across countries. On the other hand, they concurred that the ASEAN economies as a whole had been lacking growth momentum despite a continued improvement in exports and private consumption. They shared the view that emerging economies were likely to moderately increase their growth rates as positive effects of recovery in advanced economies spread, and as domestic demand picked up reflecting accommodative financial conditions, although differences remained across countries and regions. Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative. They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. Members agreed that firms' financial positions had been favorable, as firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend and issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable. They shared the view that firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, and that the amount outstanding of bank lending, including that to small firms, had been increasing moderately. Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad and financial conditions in Japan, members discussed the state of Japan's economy. With regard to economic activity, members concurred that the economy continued to recover moderately as a trend, as a virtuous cycle from income to spending had been operating steadily in both the household and corporate sectors, although some weakness, particularly on the production side, had been observed due mainly to the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. Members agreed that Japan's exports had leveled off more or less with fluctuations taken into consideration. They shared the view that business fixed investment had increased moderately, mainly on the back of the continued improvement in corporate profits. As for the employment and income situation, members shared the view that, with labor market conditions continuing to improve steadily, employee income had increased moderately. They agreed that private consumption remained resilient as a trend on the back of a steady improvement in the employment and income situation, and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole, albeit unevenly. On the other hand, many members expressed the view that the effects of the consumption tax hike exerting downward pressure on private consumption had been prolonged, mainly on durable goods and housing investment, both of which had seen considerable front-loaded increases in demand. Members agreed that, although the rate of change in industrial production on a month-on-month basis had recently turned positive, inventory adjustments continued, particularly in durable consumer goods including automobiles and in construction goods. Regarding prices, most members noted that somewhat weak developments in demand following the consumption tax hike and a substantial decline in crude oil prices had been exerting downward pressure recently. Many members expressed the view that, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was likely to be at around 1 percent for some time, mainly due to the effects of the decline in crude oil prices. Many members expressed the recognition that, on the condition that crude oil prices stayed at around the current level, the downward pressure on inflation rates on a year-on-year basis would remain until around the first half of fiscal 2015, and thus the projected rate of increase in prices would be revised downward compared with that in the July 2014 interim assessment. Some of these members expressed concern over the negative effects on inflation expectations of the downward pressure on consumer prices. Some members expressed the recognition that inflation expectations had been rising recently on the whole. A different member noted that, although inflation expectations had been on an uptrend from a somewhat longer-term perspective, indicators of medium- to long-term inflation expectations such as the break-even inflation rates, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, had been more or less flat or declining since around August. Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members discussed monetary policy for the immediate future. Many members pointed out that, although the decline in crude oil prices would be favorable for Japan's economy from a long-term perspective, the recent substantial decline in such prices, together with somewhat weak developments in demand following the consumption tax hike, had been exerting downward pressure on prices in the short term. On this basis, these members said that, if the current downward pressure remained, albeit in the short term, there was a significant risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset, which had so far been progressing steadily, might be delayed. They stated that, to pre-empt manifestation of such risk and to maintain the improving momentum of expectation formation, the Bank should decide additional monetary easing at this time. Some of these members -- noting that, in Japan, due to the protracted deflation, the formation of inflation expectations tended to be affected by developments in the actual inflation rate to a considerable degree -- expressed concern that such formation might be affected if the lull in the inflation rate's increase were to become prolonged. One of these members added that this point was particularly important because the period around the year-end and early next year was a critical one when firms formulated business plans and conducted wage negotiations. Some members stated that, when the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013, it had committed to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. These members continued that, when deciding additional monetary easing, it was necessary to thoroughly explain that this commitment remained unshakable, in order to convey the Bank's unwavering determination to conquer deflation. One of these members said that the Bank had been reiterating that it would make adjustments without hesitation if the outlook changed due to the manifestation of risk factors and if, consequently, adjustments were judged necessary for achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. This member continued that, therefore, if no policy action was taken at this meeting, this could be understood as a breach of the commitment, thereby possibly impairing the Bank's credibility significantly. Meanwhile, a different member noted that, deciding additional monetary easing at this meeting would be sufficient to put achievement of the 2 percent price stability target in a stable manner in sight in the second half of fiscal 2015. This member continued that, if this turned out to be the case, a start to discussions about an exit strategy would become possible. One member added that additional monetary easing measures proposed at this meeting would promote recovery amid the situation of a virtuous cycle of economic activity being maintained, and therefore these measures were expected to produce stronger effects on corporate profits, employment, and wages than in the past. In the meantime, a few members said that the Bank should thoroughly explain that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing was meant to be continued as long as it was necessary for maintaining the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner, and therefore the measure was open-ended. With regard to the specifics of additional monetary easing, some members said that, given that the measures to be decided at this meeting should aim at affecting people's mindset, the scale of monetary easing should be as large as possible, while taking into account the associated risk exposure and side effects, to avoid being regarded as adopting such measures in an incremental manner. On this basis, a few members noted that it was desirable to (1) accelerate the annual pace of increase in the monetary base from about outstanding of the Bank's holdings would be increased from an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen. One of these members pointed out that there had been substantial declines in short- to medium-term interest rates recently, while somewhat longer-term interest rates remained at relatively high levels. This member then added that, with a view to realizing the fundamental purpose of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- that is, encouraging a further decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve -- it was necessary to examine the balance with T-Bill purchases and the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases as well. On this point, some members said that it was necessary to formulate the guideline for asset purchases so that the Bank's operation desk would be able to make flexible adjustments to some extent by taking into account developments in financial markets. A few members noted that bold increases should be made in the purchases of risk assets such as exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). In the meantime, in response to the members' questions, the staff provided a supplementary explanation, which included feasibility in terms of the Bank's market operations and the associated risk exposure. On the other hand, some members expressed a cautious view regarding the decision to implement additional monetary easing at this point. These members -- while sharing the view that risks to the outlook for prices had become larger -- said that, basically, the virtuous cycle of economic activity and prices was being maintained and it was appropriate for the Bank to continue with the current guidelines for money market operations and asset purchases. Some members noted that the effects that could be brought about by additional monetary easing would not be worth the accompanying costs and side effects. With regard to the effects of additional monetary easing, some members said that interest rates would be expected to decline further owing to such easing; however, considering that (1) nominal interest rates were already at historical low levels while real interest rates were substantially negative, and (2) the effects of asset purchases, by their nature, increased in a cumulative manner with the progress in such purchases, the marginal effect of such easing with respect to boosting economic activity and prices would not be large. In terms of influence on expectations, some members noted that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing had created the effect of changing people's expectations at the time of introduction, but that additional steps to expand it would only have limited effects compared with when it was introduced. One of these members added that the sustainability of such effects was questionable. In terms of the costs and side effects of additional monetary easing, a few members pointed to a possible further deterioration in market functioning. One of these members said that it was possible that money market funds (MMFs), money reserve funds (MRFs), and some other funds would face greater difficulty in finding investment opportunities. Furthermore, a few members expressed concern with regard to the effects a further decline in interest rates would have on financial institutions' profits and their intermediation function. Meanwhile, some members pointed out that, if the Bank purchased JGBs so that their amount outstanding increased at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen, this would mean the Bank was purchasing most of the JGBs issued on a flow basis; therefore, not only would this considerably squeeze liquidity in the JGB market, but it also would further heighten the risk that such a move would be perceived as effectively financing fiscal deficits. In addition, one member said that, if the yen consequently depreciated further, there would be concern over the adverse effects it would have on domestic demand-oriented small firms that had underpinned economic recovery thus far. Meanwhile, with regard to people's inflation expectations, one member said that people's behavioral patterns were steadily starting to change to ones based on the assumption of moderate inflation; in light of this, quantitative and qualitative monetary easing could be assessed as fully playing its role. On this basis, the member continued that, therefore, the Bank should not respond too frequently to the monthly figures of the year-on-year rates of change in the CPI. A few members noted that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding imputed rent, had been in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent, and that with the consumption tax hike also taken into account, households perceived that prices had been rising at a considerable pace. Meanwhile, a few other members said that the 2 percent price stability target was to be achieved over the medium to long term along with a rise in growth expectations, and therefore the Bank should not excessively adhere to the period of about two years. With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy, many members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members continued that, in doing so, it would examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. However, one member expressed the view that, if a rise were to occur in markets' anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years, this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, the member continued that it was appropriate to (1) change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted to about two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures in a flexible manner; and (2) reconsider the time frame for achieving the price stability target. This member expressed the view that the current inflation rate and inflation expectations were close to levels in line with the long-term growth potential under the zero output gap. Therefore, the member added that, in the current phase, what was more important was structural reform to strengthen the growth potential, rather than additional monetary easing. On the basis of the discussions on a change to the guideline for money market operations and other matters, the government representatives requested that the chairman adjourn the meeting because they needed to contact the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy. The chairman approved the request. (The meeting adjourned at 12:31 p.m. and reconvened at 12:42 p.m.) The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks. (1) About one and a half years had passed since the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. Due in part to the effects of the "three-arrows" strategy, including aggressive monetary policy, the Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery, while weakness could be seen recently, and moves toward wage increases on a scale not seen in recent years were spreading. The government welcomed the Bank's measures proposed at this meeting as they aimed to further promote the positive cycle of the economy, thereby generating sustainable economic growth. The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks. (1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery, while weakness could be seen recently. As for the outlook, although weakness would remain for the time being, the economy was expected to recover, supported by the effects of the policies, while the employment and income situation improved. However, attention should be given to the downside risks to the Japanese economy, such as lengthening of the reaction after a last-minute rise in demand and slowing down of overseas economies. (2) At the second Government-Labor-Management Meeting for Realizing a Positive Cycle of the Economy held on October 22, the government had confirmed that results were being seen with regard to wage increases. In order to enlarge the positive cycle of the economy, it deemed it necessary to improve both the level of wages and wage systems. Although, on a fundamental level, wage systems were to be determined by labor and management, the government would foster a shared recognition between them in terms of its major policy for improving the treatment of the generations raising children and non-regular employees. The government had set up the Headquarters for Creating a Society in which All Women Shine, with the Prime Minister in charge, for utilizing the power of women and vitalizing society. At the first meeting, it had decided on a policy package and then submitted related bills to the Diet. With regard to overcoming the population decline and vitalizing local economy in Japan, the government had also submitted amendments of related laws to the Diet. As for the National Strategic Zones project, it would submit to the Diet an amendment that incorporated additional regulatory reforms. The government had convened the first Zone Council for the Okinawa Prefecture zone, which meant that it had convened Zone Councils in all of the six special zones it had identified. With regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a ministerial meeting had been held in Sydney from October 25 through 27, at which time the government had made further progress in negotiations on market access, including for goods, and on rules in fields such as intellectual property. (3) The government deemed the discussions at this meeting to be timely. Based on these discussions, it expected the Bank to continue its efforts to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. The government also expected the Bank to continue providing a sufficient explanation on its monetary policy management and its outlook for prices at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy and on other occasions. Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.