The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Copom members also evaluated the evolution of financial conditions indicators.
The environment with Scenario benign financial conditions results from the increase in the degree of monetary stimulus, the relatively The Copoms baseline scenario for inflation favorable global environment for emerging economies encompasses risk factors in both directions.
Copom members also conjectured on granted, the Copom believes that it is essential to the sensitivity of macroeconomic variables to monetary observe the evolution of economic activity and policy, as we lack historical precedent in the Brazilian inflation projections and expectations over the next history for the current degree of stimulus.
Copom months, with increasing weight for members judge that changes in the credit and capital markets tend to bolster the power of monetary policy.
The Committee discussed the effects of the coronavirus on the global economy.
The Copom members concluded that the The Committee judges that this decision reflects its consequence of these effects to monetary policy baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the conduct will depend on the relative magnitude of the associated balance of risks, and it is consistent with global economic slowdown versus the reaction of convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant financial assets.
Short-term projections were particularly affected by the effects of the protein price shock The Copom sees progress in the process of reforms which, after manifesting themselves more intensely and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy than expected at the end of 2019, have already showed but emphasizes that persevering in this process is a partial reversal at the beginning of Regarding essential to allow for the consolidation of the reduction administered prices, the benign conditions for the of the structural interest rate and for a sustainable occurrence of minor adjustments in electricity rates economic recovery.
The Committee also stresses that persist.
In light of the lagged effects of the horizon of monetary policy, and elevated economic monetary easing cycle that began in July 2019, the slack prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., Committee deems appropriate to interrupt the interest rates below the structural level.
The Committee emphasizes Committee members expressed the view that the that its next steps will continue to depend on the current level of _ex-ante real interest rates provides_ evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and stimulus to the economy.
