This of this year, concurrently with the expected winding up set of factors could potentially result in a higher-than- of the emergency transfer programs.
Regarding the global economy, the data already Short-term inflation seems to be cooling after Julys available for the 2020Q2 GDP did not surprise, but it sharp increase.
Revisions to some components of service price Depression.
There are some promising signs of inflation have offset the impact of the depreciation of recovery which, however, has shown to be incomplete.
The strong recovery in consumption was not followed by the services sector.
The Committee considered that this generate increased asset price volatility.
Moreover, unpredictability and the risks associated with the without the necessary time to transition to a new evolution of the pandemic may imply a domestic environment, it may affect the proper functioning and scenario characterized by an even more gradual dynamics of the financial system and the capital recovery of the economy.
Hence, the Committee concluded that possible new interest rates reductions would demand The Copom members debated on the level of caution and additional gradualism.
To this end, if economic slack.
As with the activity, the Committee necessary, further interest rate cuts would require believes that the pandemic should continue to have greater clarity about prospective inflation and activity heterogeneous effects on the economic sectors.
Given and could be spaced over time.
The Committee concluded that the nature of adequate to meet the inflation target, but maintaining the crisis probably implies that the disinflationary the necessary caution for prudential reasons, the pressures from reduced demand may last longer than Copom considered the use of a forward guidance as an in previous recessions.
The Copom discussed the limitations on the use of this instrument in The Committee then assessed the appropriate emerging countries.
Relative to developed countries, degree of stimulus for the current environment.
First, emerging countries are more susceptible to contagion it analyzed whether the existence of an asymmetry in from external crises and have greater vulnerabilities in its balance of risks, mainly related to fiscal issues and their economic fundamentals.
Therefore, due this the continuation of reforms in the Brazilian economy, greater unpredictability and volatility, the use of such would be a sufficient reason to maintain the stimulus at an instrument becomes more challenging.
Given its perception of economic slack Committee concluded that despite those limitations, and prospective inflation, the Committee considered the forward guidance would be the policy strategy with that, although asymmetric, its projections for inflation the best cost-benefit ratio.
The forward guidance are below the target for the relevant horizon for transmits the Committee's vision on its future actions monetary policy.
Therefore, in line with its inflation and tends to adjust the expectations reflected on the targeting mandate, the Committee concluded that it intermediary part of the yield curve.
To adapt the forward guidance to the dynamic limits imposed by prudential issues, the Committee The Committee then resumed discussion of a considered that it should have an asymmetric policy potential effective lower limit for the Brazilian policy intention, in which, if the necessary conditions were interest rate and its connection with prudential and met, the Copom would not raise the interest rate but financial stability issues.
For the majority of the could reduce it.
To maximize its effectiveness, the members of the Copom, this limit would be significantly Committee decided that this forward guidance should higher among emerging economies than among be conditional on inflation expectations, as well as on developed countries due to the existence of a risk the inflation projections of its baseline scenario, for the premium.
This premium is dynamic and tends to be relevant monetary policy horizon, which currently larger in Brazil, given the country's relative fiscal includes 2021 and, to a lesser extent, This fragility and the uncertainties regarding its prospective information on inflation would be considered fiscal path.
In this context, we would already be close to altogether and, when they were sufficiently close to the level from which further interest rate reductions the inflation target for the corresponding horizon, they could be accompanied by asset price instability.
The Copom also discussed the relative importance Given the difficulties inherent in using forward of the main components of credit and operating costs guidance in emerging economies, in addition to of the financial system.
Considering the long history of expectations and projections of inflation in the the Brazilian economy operating with the basic interest relevant horizon, the Committee also deemed rate at a very high level, the unprecedented low necessary to condition its interest rate policy intention interest rates may compromise the performance of on two other factors.
First, it is conditional on the some markets and economic sectors, with potential maintenance of the fiscal regime, since its rupture impact on financial intermediation.
Based on results would imply significant changes to the structural from stress test scenarios, the Committee considers interest rate of the economy.
Second, it is conditional that the financial system is resilient to the credit risk on the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, arising from the current pandemic.
However, when given that an unanchoring would indicate that the costs analyzing the financial system in a broad way derived from the monetary stimulus would be considering its various industries, markets, products outweighing its benefits.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher- than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2021 and, to a lesser extent, The Committee believes that persevering in the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that doubts regarding the continuation of the reform agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
The Copom believes that the current economic conditions continue to recommend an unusually strong monetary stimulus but it recognizes that, due to prudential and financial stability reasons, the remaining space for monetary policy stimulus, if it exists, should be small.
Consequently, possible future adjustments to the current degree of monetary stimulus would occur with additional gradualism and would depend on the perception of the fiscal trajectory, as well as on new information that changes the Committee's current assessment about prospective inflation.
Despite the asymmetry on its balance of risks, the Copom does not foresee reductions in the monetary stimulus unless inflation expectations, as well as its baseline scenario inflation projections, are sufficiently close to the inflation target at the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which currently includes 2021 and, to a lesser extent, This intention is conditional on the maintenance of the current fiscal regime and on the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations.
