The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
With this background, the On the one hand, economic slack may continue to environment for emerging economies has become produce a lower-than-expected prospective inflation challenging, despite the additional provision of trajectory.
This risk increases if a worsening of the monetary stimulus in major economies.
In particular, the substantial international oil price Copom members discussed the evolution of retraction may quickly affect domestic fuel prices.
The economic activity in light of the available information implications of the pandemic on the service segment, and indicators.
However, these data do not yet reflect onwards.
The Copom members continued the debate on the size of the economic slack.
Given the available data, the In the hybrid scenario with interest rate path Copom concluded that the economy continued to extracted from the Focus survey and constant recover gradually and close its gap.
The Committee then discussed how the pandemic affects the Brazilian economy and, particularly, the scenarios for prospective inflation.
First, a supply shock, derived from the greater uncertainty.
Third, a shortage of demand, derived from an increased Taking into account the baseline scenario, the uncertainty and the restrictions imposed by the balance of risks, and the broad array of available pandemic.
The Committee judges that the first effect will have The Committee judges that this decision reflects its small quantitative importance, due to the Brazilian baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher- economy's poor interconnection with global than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is production chains.
The second effect will probably consistent with convergence of inflation to its target imply a strong disinflationary impact in the short term.
Finally, The Copom reiterates that economic conditions the third effect tends to be quite significant at the prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest relevant horizon for monetary policy because the rates below the structural level.
Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that The Copom conjectured on the economy's questions about the continuation of the reform agenda structural interest rate and how it may evolve in the and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation coming months.
In the Committee's view, the possible process could result in a higher structural interest rate.
The Copom understands that the current environment recommends caution in the conduct of In light of this perception, the Committee monetary policy and, at this moment, deems considered that a reduction in the basic interest rate appropriate to keep the Selic rate at its new level.
However, the Committee recognizes that new information on economic The Banco Central do Brasil stresses that it will conditions will be essential to determine its next steps.
Barros, Fabio Kanczuk, Fernanda Feitosa Nechio, Joo Manoel Pinho de Mello, Maurcio Costa de Moura, Finally, the Copom evaluated the balance of risks Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, and Paulo Srgio Neves de around the baseline scenario.
The Committee Souza. concluded that, at the moment, the balance of risks has higher variance than usual.
