The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.
Against this backdrop, despite the additional provision of fiscal and monetary stimuli The Copoms baseline scenario for inflation in major economies, and some moderation in financial encompasses risk factors in both directions.
This risk increases if a worsening of the Turning to economic activity, data through March pandemic implies an increase in uncertainty and reflect only partly the impact from the COVID-19 precautionary savings and, consequently, implies a pandemic over the Brazilian economy.
Higher decline in aggregate demand that is larger or longer frequency and more timely indicators for April show than anticipated.
There was a further make the environment more challenging for emerging decline in oil prices and a sharp drop in domestic fuel economies.
Unlike other recent crises, in which the prices for producers, which will continue to impact epicenter was in the Northern Hemisphere, in the consumer prices in the coming weeks.
The most recent current crisis it moved to all countries, along with the readings of price indices showed significant pandemic.
Additionally, projections point to a global disinflationary effects on prices of services and recession with few historical precedents.
Among the emerging Inflation projections and scenarios are affected by economies, those with greater fiscal vulnerability are assumptions about the future path of oil prices, which have prone to be the most harmed.
The Copom members debated about the level of However, the prevalent view was that, in light of the economic slack.
They reinforced their view that the elevated uncertainty domestically, the remaining scope pandemic shall exert a disinflationary impact on the for monetary policy is unknown and may be small.
Brazilian economy, together with a sharp increase in Therefore, the Copom chose to provide a more economic slack.
It The Committee judges that this decision reflects its was also pointed out that this premium tends to be baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher- higher in Brazil, given the country's relative fiscal fragility than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is and the uncertainties regarding its prospective fiscal consistent with convergence of inflation to its target path.
In this context, we would be close to a level where over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which further reductions in the policy rate could be includes accompanied by instability in financial markets and asset prices.
Conversely, another member argued that, in The Committee believes that persevering in the principle, there is no reason for such a minimum process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the operational limit, since traditional channels of monetary Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable policy remain operational, without discontinuities, economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that although possibly with an increased effect of changes in doubts regarding the continuation of the reform the policy rate on financial asset prices.
The Committee agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal as a whole recognized the importance of gradualism in consolidation process could result in an increase in the the conduct of monetary policy for assessing the structural interest rate.
The Copom believes that the current state of Finally, concerning the structural rate of the affairs recommends an unusually large monetary economy, the Committee assessed that it also reflects stimulus, but it reinforces that there are potential limits economic agents expectations about the prospective to the remaining space for adjustment.
In the Committee's view, the believes that the fiscal trajectory over the next year, as interaction between the deterioration of the external well as the perception of its sustainability, will be scenario, frustrations regarding the continuity of the crucial to determine the length of the stimulus.
However, triggered a downward revision on inflation the Committee recognizes that the variance of its expectations towards levels not compatible with the balance of risks has increased and that further target, particularly, within the relevant horizon for information on the effects of the pandemic in the monetary policy.
This decline holds for expectations economy, as well as a decline in fiscal uncertainty, will measured by both the Focus survey and the break-even be essential to determine its next steps.
Barros, Fabio Kanczuk, Fernanda Feitosa Nechio, Maurcio Costa de Moura, Otvio Ribeiro Damaso, and Two Committee members pondered that, even with Paulo Srgio Neves de Souza.
