The latest inflation readings were higher than expected and, despite the predicted retraction of food price pressures, December inflation should remain elevated, with an off-schedule collection of tuition fees and the transition to the highest level of the electricity rates flag system.
Despite the stronger short-term inflationary pressure, the Committee maintains the diagnosis that the current shocks are temporary, but continues to monitor closely its evolution, in particular, the core inflation readings.
On the one hand, economic slack may continue to produce a lower-than-expected prospective inflation trajectory, especially when this slack is concentrated in the service sector.
This risk increases if a slower reversion of the pandemic effects lengthens the environment of high uncertainty and precautionary savings.
The relative increase in the risks of these events implies an upward asymmetry to the balance of risks, i.e., in the direction of higher-than- expected paths for inflation over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
In the short term, the pandemic resurgence, and the resulting increase in social distancing in some of the major economies should interrupt the recovery in demand.
In the medium term, however, positive vaccine test results, as well as monetary and fiscal stimuli, should imply a stronger recovery.
The perception of economic slack for an extended period, along with the communication of central banks of major economies, creates an environment of liquidity and return of capital flows, favorable to emerging economies.
The Copom members discussed the evolution of domestic economic activity in light of the available information and indicators.
They judged that the transfer programs from the government have allowed for a relatively strong rebound in durable goods consumption and investment.
However, recent data continue to reflect an uneven recovery in economic activity.
Prospectively, the unpredictability associated with the pandemic evolution and the necessary adjustment in government spending from 2021 on increases the uncertainty about the economic recovery.
The Committee judged that the risks associated with the pandemic evolution may imply a domestic scenario characterized by an even more gradual recovery.
The Copom members debated on the level of economic slack.
As with activity, the Committee believes that the pandemic continues to have heterogeneous effects on different economic sectors.
The transfer programs from the government have reduced slack in the goods sector.
Service activities, however, especially those most directly affected by social distancing measures, face a greater reduction in demand.
Prospectively, the evolution of these sectoral gaps will depend on the pandemic evolution and on the adjustment in public spending.
Next, the Committee discussed the implementation of monetary policy.
The Copom continued its analysis, considering not only the baseline scenario but also the balance of risks.
The Committee judged that, at this moment, the upward asymmetry in the balance of risks caused by fiscal risks is sufficient to compensate for the fact that inflation projections in its baseline scenario are below the target in the relevant horizon.
The Committee again pondered over the interpretation of its forward guidance fiscal clause, which conditions the non-elevation of interest rates to the maintenance of the current fiscal regime.
The Committee reaffirmed that changes in fiscal policy that affect public debt trajectory, or compromise the fiscal anchor, would motivate a reassessment, even if the spending ceiling in nominal terms is still maintained.
This reassessment would follow the inflation target framework, which is based on the analysis of prospective inflation and its balance of risks.
Thus, the Committee decided to add to its communication that, although the forward guidance might be withdrawn soon, this would not mechanically imply an increase in interest rates.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2021 and The Committee believes that persevering in the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that uncertainty regarding the continuation of the reform agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
The forward guidance stated that the Copom does not intend to reduce the monetary stimulus as long as specified conditions are met.
The Committee judges that those conditions continue to hold.
The Copom judges that, since the adoption of the forward guidance, inflation expectations reverted their declining trend relative to the target for the relevant horizon.
Additionally, over the next months, the 2021 calendar-year should become less relevant than the 2022 calendar-year, for which projections and expected inflation are around the target.
A scenario of inflation expectations converging to the target suggests that the conditions for maintaining the forward guidance may soon no longer apply, which does not mechanically imply interest rate increases, since economic conditions still prescribe an extraordinarily strong monetary stimulus.
In case the forward guidance ceases to apply, monetary policy will follow the inflation target framework, based on the analysis of prospective inflation and its balance of risks.
