The latest inflation readings were higher than expected, and the Committee raised its projection for the remaining months of This revision was due to continuing food and industrial price increases which, in turn, are a consequence of a persistent exchange rate depreciation, the oil price rise, and the income transfer programs.
On the one hand, the partial normalization of some depressed prices should continue, in a context of a recovery in mobility indices and activity level.
On the other hand, some prices, which rose extraordinarily due to a temporary reduction in supply in conjunction with an occasional increase in demand, are expected to reverse.
Therefore, in spite of the stronger-than-expected inflationary pressure, the Committee maintains the diagnosis that this shock is temporary, although closely monitoring its evolution.
This risk increases if a slower reversion of the pandemic effects lengthens the environment of high uncertainty and precautionary savings.
On the other hand, the extension of fiscal policy responses to the pandemic that aggravate the fiscal path or a frustration with the continuation of the reform agenda may increase the risk premium.
The relative increase in the risks of these events imply an upward asymmetry to the balance of risks, _i.e., in the direction of higher-than-_ expected paths for inflation over the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
A potential non-organized and abrupt reduction of governmental stimuli also brings risks to the economic recovery.
For now, however, the reduction in financial asset volatility keeps resulting in a relatively favorable environment for emerging economies.
Still, the Committee judged that there is significant uncertainty about the evolution of this scenario.
The Copom members discussed the evolution of domestic economic activity in light of the available information and indicators.
They assessed that recent data suggest an uneven recovery in economic activity.
The transfer programs from the government have allowed for a relatively strong rebound in durable goods consumption and investment.
However, several service sector activities, especially those more directly affected by social distancing measures, remain significantly depressed.
Prospectively, the unpredictability associated with the pandemic evolution and the necessary adjustment in government spending from 2021 onwards increases the uncertainty about the maintenance of the economic activity recovery.
The Committee considered that this unpredictability and the risks associated with the evolution of the pandemic may imply a domestic scenario characterized by an even more gradual economic recovery.
The Copom members debated on the level of economic slack.
As with activity, the Committee believes that the pandemic should continue to have heterogeneous effects on the economic sectors.
Given the nature of the shock, the economic slack in the service sector should remain larger than in other sectors.
The Committee concluded that the nature of the crisis probably implies that disinflationary pressures from reduced demand may last longer than in previous recessions.
The Committee then resumed the discussion of a potential effective lower limit for the Brazilian policy interest rate and its connection with prudential and financial stability issues.
Considering the long history of the Brazilian economy operating at very high levels of Selic rate, unprecedented low interest rates may compromise the performance of some markets and economic sectors, with a potential impact on financial intermediation.
For the majority of the Copom members, we would already be close to the level from which further interest rate reductions could be accompanied by asset price instability.
Subsequently, the Copom members discussed on the maintenance of the signaling that the remaining space for monetary policy stimulus, if it exists, should be small.
The Committee assessed that this signaling is due to prudential restrictions regarding reductions of the Selic rate and, therefore, should be kept in communication.
Next, the Committee discussed the implementation of the monetary policy itself.
The Copom continued its analysis, considering not only the baseline scenario, but also the balance of risks, and restrictions of prudential nature.
Regardless of prudential restrictions, the Copom considered that, at this moment, the upward asymmetry in the balance of risks caused by fiscal risks is sufficient to compensate the fact that its inflation projections in the baseline scenario are below the target at the relevant horizon.
Finally, the Committee discussed the interpretation of the fiscal clause of its forward guidance, which conditions the non-elevation of interest rates to the maintenance of the current fiscal regime.
The Committee judged that changes in the fiscal policy that affect the public debt trajectory or compromise the fiscal anchor would motivate a reassessment, even if the spending ceiling in nominal terms is still maintained.
This reassessment would follow the usual guidance of an inflation targeting regime, based on prospective inflation and its balance of risks.
The Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for prospective inflation, a higher-than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is consistent with convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2021 and The Committee believes that persevering in the process of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is essential for a sustainable economic recovery.
The Copom also stresses that uncertainty regarding the continuation of the reform agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal consolidation process could result in an increase in the structural interest rate.
The Copom believes that the current economic conditions continue to recommend an unusually strong monetary stimulus but it recognizes that, due to prudential and financial stability reasons, the remaining space for monetary policy stimulus, if it exists, should be small.
The forward guidance stated that the Copom does not intend to reduce the monetary stimulus as long as specified conditions are met.
