This set of factors could potentially result in a higher-than-expected path for inflation over the Inflation expectations for 2020, 2021, and 2022 relevant horizon for monetary policy.
The Copom members discussed the evolution of domestic economic activity in light of the available information and indicators.
They evaluated that data for the second quarter corroborate the perspective of a sharp GDP contraction and suggest that economic activity reached the lowest level in April, registering only a partial recovery in May and June.
Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance of risks, and the broad array of available The Copom members debated on the level of information, the Copom unanimously decided to lower economic slack.
The sudden growth in than-usual variance in the balance of risks, and it is economic uncertainty should result in an increase in consistent with convergence of inflation to its target precautionary savings and, consequently, a significant over the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which reduction of aggregate demand.
The Copom also stresses that aggregate demand that would be lost due to the doubts regarding the continuation of the reform effects of the pandemic.
As a result, the economic agenda and permanent changes to the fiscal recovery could be faster than anticipated by the consolidation process could result in an increase in the baseline scenario.
The Committee resumed the discussion on the The Copom believes that the current state of potential effective lower limit for the Brazilian interest affairs continues to recommend an unusually strong rate.
Most members of the Committee believe that this monetary stimulus, but it recognizes that the remaining limit would be significantly higher among emerging space for monetary policy stimulus is uncertain and economies than among developed countries, due to should be small.
The Committee believes that the fiscal the existence of a risk premium.
This premium is trajectory over the next year, as well as the perception dynamic and tends to be larger in Brazil, given the of its sustainability, will be crucial to determine the country's relative fiscal fragility and the uncertainties length of the stimulus.
In this context, we would already be close to the level from which further At the present moment, the Committee judges that interest rate reductions could be accompanied by asset the magnitude of the monetary stimulus already price instability, and potentially compromise the implemented seems compatible with the economic performance of some markets and economic sectors.
For the next The Committee also reflected on the relative meetings, the Committee sees as appropriate to importance of the main components of the cost of evaluate the impact of the pandemic and of the set of credit and emphasized that liquidity premium seems to credit and transfer programs in place and foresees that prevail at the moment.
The Committee recognized that any possible adjustment to the monetary stimulus this set of factors, as well as prudential issues, justify would be residual.
However, the Copom remains caution in the conduct of monetary policy.
The Committee recognizes that the disinflationary shock, although accompanied by greater variance of its balance of risks has increased and that fiscal fragility, has triggered a downward revision on further information on the evolution of the pandemic, inflation expectations towards levels not compatible as well as a decline in fiscal uncertainty, will be essential with the target, particularly, within the relevant to determine its next steps.
