
For the month of October, the Board increased the range for its operating target at  132 -  142 million as a daily average.
In September, the said balance was  136 million, which fell within the announced range ( 130  140 million).
The Central Bank Board of Directors also established that the following interest and commission rates would be used in domestic-currency Central Bank operations since October 5: For monetary regulation credits in domestic currency, the effective interest rate would be the weighted average of the interbank interest rates, or 7,5 percent, whichever is highest.
It should be noted that this is the fourth consecutive month in which the Bank reduced this rate.
In August, the said rate was 8,5 percent.
For overnight deposits in domestic currency held by banks at the Central Bank, the effective interest rate will be 3,0 percent.
The latter rate was 4,0 percent.
For foreign exchange temporary purchase operations (swap operations), the commission implies an effective annual cost of 7,5 percent.
The latter cost was 8,5 percent.
The following interest rates will be used in foreign-currency operations: The effective annual rate for monetary regulation credits will be 5,0 percent.
The latter rate was 5,5 percent.
For overnight deposits held by banks at the Central Bank, the rate is equivalent to the average obtained by the Central Bank for similar deposits abroad.
The Central Bank grants monetary regulation credits in domestic and foreign currency on a regular basis.
For domestic currency operations, the Central Bank Board approved a new facility regarding temporary purchase of CDBCRP and Public Treasury bonds in domestic currency, besides the usual auction mechanisms, which holds maturities and interest rates of regulation credits.
For the current year, the rate of inflation falls below the range announced in the 2001 Monetary Program, reflecting a lower than expected economic activity.
It should be noted, that the Central Bank has been widening banking liquidity and reducing its operations interest rates.
If justified by financial conditions, the values mentioned above could be modified in order to ensure the attainment of the objective to preserve monetary stability.

