rate
BCRP reduces its reference interest rate in domestic currency from 10,0 to 9,0 percent and from 6,5 to 6,0 in foreign currency, as well as the benchmark for monetary operations to a  130  140 million range.
For the month of August, the Board approved a range of  130 -  140 million on a daily average for its operating target, lower than the July range ( 135  145 million), in line with the lower demand for current account balances observed in July as a consequence of the flexibility in the conditions of the monetary regulation credits of the Central Bank.
For this reason, the current account balance in July was  129 million, which fell below the announced range.
The Central Bank Board of Directors also established that the following interest and commission would be used in domestic-currency Central Bank operations since August 3: For monetary regulation credits in domestic currency, the effective interest rate would be the weighted average of the interbank interest rate, or 9,0 percent, whichever is highest.
It should be noted that the new level of the reference interest rate for monetary regulation credits implied a reduction for the third consecutive month.
Since July 6, this rate was 10,0 percent.
For overnight deposits in domestic currency held by banks at the Central Bank, the effective interest rate will be 4,0 percent.
This rate is effective since March For foreign exchange temporary purchase operations (swap operations), the commission will be 0,0138 percent per day, equivalent to an effective 9,0 percent annual cost.
This cost is lower than that effective since July 6 (10,0 percent).
The following interest rates will be used in foreign-currency operations: The effective annual rate for monetary regulation credits will be 6,0 percent.
This rate implied a reduction with respect to the rate effective since July 6 (6,5 percent).
For overnight deposits held by banks at the Central Bank, the rate is equivalent to the average obtained by the Central Bank for similar deposits abroad.
The Central bank grants monetary regulation credits in domestic and foreign currency on a regular basis.
If justified by financial conditions, the values mentioned above could be modified in order to ensure the attainment of the objective to preserve monetary stability.
Attached to this informative note is a summary chart on the monetary policy decisions in the last 6 months.
