Most members pointed out that economic performance remains heterogeneous across countries. One member added that, overall, world economic activity remains resilient. Some members noted that the US economy continues showing strength. Regarding its labor market, one member highlighted that it remains tight. However, another member underlined that preliminary figures indicate that the expansion of that economy during the first quarter of 2024 was lower than anticipated and lower than observed towards the end of 2023. He/she added that although total consumption continues growing at a robust pace, driven mainly by services, consumption of goods contracted due to lower spending on durables. He/she argued that this differentiated dynamics between consumption of goods and that of services is observed in an environment of a more limited access to credit due to high interest rates, lower excess savings, and greater caution by consumers given the recent evolution of the labor market. He/she noted that the unemployment gap has continued closing, which has been accompanied by some moderation in the pace of growth of nominal wages. He/she stated that signs of a cooling in labor demand have become stronger. He/she pointed out that vacancies continue trending downwards and that the non-farm payroll has observed growth rates at levels close to its historical average. Regarding other countries, he/she noted that the euro area registered a greater dynamism compared to the previous two quarters, when it had registered slightly negative rates. He/she pointed out that economic activity in the United Kingdom has been driven mainly by the services sector and industrial production, after having been in technical recession in the second half of 2023. He/she mentioned that emerging economies have shown greater dynamism compared to the end of 2023. He/she expressed that China's growth has been driven mainly by consumption. advanced economies, economic activity is expected to moderate in 2024. One member underlined that growth in the euro area and the United Kingdom is expected to be relatively low. However, some members highlighted that the expected growth rate for the United States have been revised upwards. One member stated that a greater dynamism is foreseen for emerging economies. He/she underlined that the outlook for global economic activity is subject to high uncertainty. He/she warned that among global risks the following stand out: the intensification of geopolitical turmoil; a further deceleration of the Chinese economy; a greater impact of the value chain reconfiguration process; and the risks of high fiscal deficits, especially in emerging economies, in an environment of tight financial conditions. Most members pointed out that headline inflation has been decreasing in most economies. However, they expressed that it remains above their respective central banks’ targets. One member also indicated that the rate of reduction has been decreasing at a more moderate pace than that observed in 2023. Another member noted that in some cases in its latest readings headline inflation even increased. The majority agreed that the behavior of headline inflation is partly due to increased pressures on energy prices. One member highlighted that core inflation continued decreasing, although some members indicated that it has done so at a more moderate pace. One member pointed out that recent US inflation figures have turned out to be higher than anticipated. He/she added that in most emerging economies the latest readings reflect persistence of inflation at high levels. Another member considered that, although the disinflation has advanced worldwide, this process has not concluded and there are still challenges ahead. Most members mentioned services inflation resistance to decline. One member underlined that inflation persistence in this component is a global phenomenon and that, in most cases, it does not correspond to the phase of the economic cycle countries and regions are currently in. Most members emphasized this persistence in the case of the United States. One member noted that, in the first quarter of 2024, monthly changes in service prices have been, on average, higher than those observed in the second half of 2023. Some members commented that within services, the housing component has exhibited more persistence than others. One member added that said persistence is observed in housing rents, where market prices tend to adjust more gradually, and he/she also pointed out the financial services component, where the auto insurance item stands out. Some members highlighted that inflation is expected to continue declining worldwide. However, some members indicated that projections for inflation in some economies were revised upwards. One member pointed out that most central banks maintain their expectation that inflation will return to its target towards the end of 2025 and, in some cases, such as the Federal Reserve, towards the beginning of 2026. Another member stated that in most emerging economies prospects of convergence towards the end of this year and the beginning of 2025 are maintained. The majority mentioned that most central banks in advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged at their latest meetings. One member stated that they have maintained a cautious tone. Most members noted that the Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged in a context of higher-than-expected inflation levels and resilient economic activity. One member stated that it kept its target range constant for the sixth consecutive meeting. and that it also announced a decrease in the rate of reduction of its balance sheet starting in June. He/she added that the press release mentioned that the risks to attaining its employment and inflation goals have moved to a better balance. Most members underlined that the chairman of that institution indicated that progress in disinflation has not been sufficient and that they need to observe further progress before lowering the reference rate. One member pointed out that said officer highlighted that according to the Committee monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive and there is evidence that it is influencing aggregate demand. Meanwhile, with respect to the European Central Bank, he/she indicated that it left its reference rate unchanged for the fifth consecutive time, and communicated that if confidence increases about inflation being on a trajectory towards its target, a reference rate cut would be appropriate. Another member added that most central banks in South America and some in Eastern Europe continued with their normalization cycles. Regarding expectations about the future behavior of reference rates, some members noted the decline in the expected number of federal funds rate cuts this year. One member indicated that markets went from anticipating six rate cuts at the beginning of the year, to expecting between one and two. Another member pointed out that the date on which the first downward adjustment is expected to take place has been postponed. One member stated that the expectation is that the first reference rate cut will take place at the end of the third quarter of 2024, with two rate cuts of As for the European Central Bank, some members expressed that it could implement the first rate cut during the summer. One member argued that this has been supported by the sustained decline of inflation in the euro area. Most members pointed out that, given the change in the outlook for monetary policy in the United States, government bond yields increased worldwide. However, some members noted that such increases partially reversed in recent days following the release of US labor market figures suggesting a lower-than-expected dynamism. The majority highlighted that since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, international financial markets exhibited volatility. One member argued that this partly resulted from the increase in the expected level of the Federal Reserve's reference rate, given the systemic importance of the US economy. Some members added that said volatility was exacerbated by the intensification of geopolitical tensions. In this regard, most members pointed out that since the last monetary policy decision, aversion. The majority mentioned that, in this episode, the US dollar appreciated against a large number of currencies. One member considered that the increase in US government bond yields, the resilience of economic activity in that country, and the role played by financial instruments issued in the United States as safe haven assets during episodes of risk aversion all contributed to the appreciation of the dollar. Some members underlined that, since Mexico´s last monetary policy decision, several stock market indexes declined. However, one member noted that stock markets exhibited a heterogeneous behavior. Most members pointed out that the GDP flash estimate for the first quarter of the year showed registered in the last quarter of 2023 extended into the first quarter of 2024. One member stated that the flash estimate registered a low quarterly growth of 0.2%, although higher than for the previous quarter. Some members pointed out that these figures were lower than anticipated. One member highlighted that the heterogeneity in the signals of indicators and the uncertain environment have impeded an adequate assessment of the economic activity's performance during the first quarter of 2024. Another member stated that since September 2023 the economy seems to have entered into a trajectory of slower growth than what was being observed before. Regarding the behavior of the productive sectors, some members noted that secondary activities contracted during the quarter. Some members mentioned that, nevertheless, a reactivation is expected in March. One member warned that, looking ahead, their performance appears uncertain. He/she pointed out that, within its components, manufacturing exhibited sluggishness, which seems to be in line with the stagnation of US manufacturing. Another member stated that although some components, such as transportation equipment, have rebounded at the margin, the trends have not reversed. One member underlined that construction registered high levels due to the performance of civil engineering public projects. However, he/she indicated that this sector has not shown a clear trend since mid-2023. He/she highlighted that in its most recent readings private construction has lost momentum. Some members pointed out that after the weakness exhibited at the beginning of 2024, services showed some reactivation in February and March. Some members commented that services components continued exhibiting heterogeneity. One member highlighted that in some subsectors, such as mass media information, transportation and health care, an upward trend was observed. He/she stated that the remaining subsectors exhibited a greater weakness, in particular, accommodation and food preparation services, which have still not regained their pre-pandemic levels. Some members expressed that the behavior of economic activity at the beginning of the year was also influenced by a decline in primary activities. However, one member considered that these seem to have recovered after having fallen sharply in January. Regarding domestic demand, some members stated that investment registered a low dynamism. One member noted that such behavior has prevailed for some months, although it remains at high levels. In this regard, another member indicated that gross fixed investment grew at an annual rate of 10.7% in February, driven by construction and machinery and equipment. Some members pointed out that private consumption has maintained a positive trend. One member particularly noted the high growth in the consumption of imported goods. However, some members indicated that private consumption moderated somewhat. One member highlighted that leading indicators show mixed signals about this component, with credit card spending growing at elevated levels, while sales of light vehicles and of the Mexican Association of Supermarkets and Department Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in Spanish) exhibiting a loss of dynamism. Another member argued that forward-looking indicators of services consumption suggest that it could expand at a slower pace. Regarding external demand, most members pointed out that manufacturing exports remained at high levels, although they continued showing a low dynamism. Some members underlined that after having remained stagnant for several months, the value of non-automotive exports improved in March. One member indicated that external demand is expected to remain sluggish in light of the prevailing weakness in the US manufacturing sector, which could extend the low dynamism of domestic manufacturing production. Most members noted that a reactivation of economic activity is expected for the second and commented that the economic boost that is typically observed in election years seems to be materializing with a certain lag, and thus the spillover effects of increased public spending during these episodes could possibly be observed in the coming months. Another member added that the reactivation of economic activity observed in February and March points toward the possibility of a greater dynamism in the second quarter of 2024, supported by the expansion of private consumption and investment. He/she stated that for the third and fourth quarters of the year, growth would moderate as some of the factors that would provide greater momentum to economic activity in the second quarter would dissipate. One member stated that there is a risk that the boost in public spending this year and the following one is greater than expected. He/she added that, given the strong rebound anticipated in US industrial production, greater levels of external demand can be expected to stimulate economic activity in Mexico. Most members mentioned that the output gap remained in positive territory during the fourth quarter of 2023, although it declined. One member pointed out that it has narrowed for two consecutive quarters. Some members considered that it continues without being statistically different from zero. One member indicated that it is expected to gradually approach zero over the forecast horizon. Another member commented that the slack indicator obtained through principal components was also less positive. He/she noted that while the indicator associated with the labor market remains at high levels, the one related to consumption is close to zero. He/she stated that, given the mixed signals of economic activity figures, attention must continue to be paid to the cyclical conditions of the economy due to their relevance for inflation dynamics. Most members highlighted that the labor market unemployment rates remain at historically low levels. One member underlined that even after correcting for the population that is available to work, the unemployment rate is considerably below the Non-accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment levels are similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. One member added the increase in newly created IMSS-insured jobs. However, another member expressed that this year formal job creation has grown at lower rates than those observed in increases remained high. One member stated that, with figures up to March, the annual increase in the daily wage associated with IMSS-insured workers was around 10%, while contractual wage revisions for private firms were at 9.4%, and for public ones at increases are of a magnitude unseen in many years. He/she added that, as a result of low unemployment and wage increases, the wage bill continues advancing at much higher rates than those prior to the pandemic. However, some members noted that wage increases in formal employment seem to be moderating at the margin. One member commented that this was observed in particular for the upper quartiles of the wage distribution. Most members pointed out that annual headline inflation rose from 4.40 to 4.65% between February and April. One member highlighted that despite the fluctuations registered in 2024, headline inflation has remained clearly below the peak of noted that since last October, there was an interruption of the downward trajectory that headline inflation had been exhibiting since September 2022. He/she stated that therefore, the progress in disinflation observed during that period becomes less relevant. Most members underlined that the recent increases in headline inflation have been driven by an increase in the non-core component. One member indicated that, without minimizing the increase in headline inflation, which the inflation target is based on, it is important to acknowledge that its upward adjustment is due to the non-core component. He/she argued that the latter is subject to shocks that can cause abrupt and sudden adjustments in several of its items, both to the upside and to the downside, and therefore its behavior does not indicate the direction in which headline inflation could shift in the medium term. Another member recalled that the non-core component is usually affected by supply-related shocks, the effect of which tends to dissipate relatively quickly. He/she specified that, as anticipated, disinflation is taking place in a non-linear and heterogeneous way. One member stated that relative price adjustments are being faced rather than a generalized increase in the price level. He/she pointed out that the ten CPI items with the highest variation in the first fortnight of April, corresponding to the fruits and vegetables subcomponent, contributed with nearly 60 basis points to headline inflation. Finally, another member stated that the recent increase in headline inflation should not be interpreted as a sign that disinflation has come to a halt. continued decreasing at the margin, having and April. Some members highlighted that this component has therefore decreased for 15 consecutive months. They underlined that core inflation better reflects the medium-term inflation trend. They considered that its downward trajectory reflects the progress in disinflation. One member argued that by analyzing this component it is possible to assess the process by which the shocks stemming from the pandemic and the military conflict on inflation fade away. Another member underlined that the contribution of core inflation to disinflation has been evident, as it accounts for 276 of the 405 basis points of the decline that headline inflation has registered since its peak of this inflationary episode. One member highlighted that it has reached levels even lower than those observed in June 2021, when the tightening cycle began. Another member added that in the last four fortnights its variations have been smaller than one standard deviation from its average behavior between 2005 and 2019. However, some members noted that the pace of decline of core inflation has slowed down. One member pointed out that the atypical origin of shocks resulted in a very different dynamic of its components from that observed in other episodes. As part of the analysis of core inflation’s components, the majority underlined the decline in merchandise inflation. One member highlighted that it has declined for seventeen consecutive months. He/she considered that both the central bank's monetary policy stance and the mitigation of shocks have contributed to this reduction. He/she pointed out that both food and non-food merchandise inflation have decreased significantly, and that the latter is even below 3%. Another member stated that food merchandise inflation, however, remains at high levels. One member recalled that food merchandise inflation was at double-digit levels at the beginning of He/she pointed out that, since then, it has fallen significantly and it is now practically at its historical average. He/she specified that non-food merchandise inflation is already below its respective historical average. In this regard, he/she indicated that the persistence of food and non-food merchandise increased significantly and that, in the disinflation phase, it has been decreasing, approaching its historical norm. Most members highlighted that services inflation has remained at high levels without showing a downward inflection point. Some members expressed concern about this behavior. One member noted that, although data points to a moderation at the margin, its trajectory has been above expectations. Some members mentioned that it has remained above 5% despite the monetary tightening. Some members argued that the atypical shocks of the pandemic and the military conflict continue affecting inflation, especially services prices. One member stated that after the pandemic, the increased mobility of the population and the recovery of demand for services have allowed costs to be passed on to prices, which has taken longer than anticipated to materialize. In this regard, another member noted that the shocks have broadly affected both services and merchandise, although with a greater lag on services. He/she mentioned that as consumption patterns have normalized, the persistence of services, which are typically the most persistent component within core inflation, has been increasing towards its usual levels, after having declined due to the weak demand faced by services, particularly housing services. He/she added that the subindex of other services shows a persistence greater than historically observed, and that unlike other subindices that have registered a clear reversal, it still does not show a clear reversal to its typical levels. He/she commented that since a normalization of merchandise persistence has been observed, he/she expects that the persistence corresponding to the other services subindex will also moderate, given the relationship between these two components strengthened. One member asserted that the prices of housing services, which constitute the item with the highest weight in the CPI, have shown unusually high seasonally adjusted and annualized variations, and the presence of new shocks has more than offset the favorable base effects, resulting in cumulative inflation remaining above its pre-pandemic average. He/she expressed that the prices of other services such as car insurance, personal care or food-related ones show pressures that could be attributed to a cost passthrough. Another member stated that demand- related pressures, the current wage policy, and the continued decline in labor productivity have contributed to the resistance of services inflation to decline. Regarding the increase in non-core inflation, most members noted that it reached 5.54% in April. Some members indicated that this reading is close to its historical average. One member pointed out that this component has increased since last year after having registered historically low figures. Another member noted that the observed variations of the prices within the non-core component have reached more than three standard deviations from their average behavior between 2005 and 2019. on agricultural and livestock product prices and on energy prices. Some members noted that fruit and vegetable prices have been affected by climaterelated factors. inflation expectations remained stable. Similarly, some members pointed out that medium-term expectations have also remained stable. Some members pointed out that they continued at levels above target. One member underlined that a significant challenge is that these expectations show resistance to decline. Regarding short-term expectations, another member considered their evolution as relatively stable. Some members stated that those corresponding to the end of 2024 and highlighted that they are above the central bank's forecasts. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, another member pointed out that short-term breakeven inflation remained below the upper limit of the variability interval, while for longer terms it remained around 450 basis points above its historical average. He/she argued that the above suggests a certain resistance to decrease in both implied inflation expectations and the inflation risk premium. One member noted that expectations drawn from market instruments corresponding to the All members highlighted that, considering that inflationary shocks are foreseen to take longer to dissipate, the forecasts for headline and core inflation have been revised upwards. Most members stated that services inflation is foreseen to show more persistence, as compared to what had been previously anticipated. One member mentioned that it is expected to exhibit a downward trend as of the fourth quarter of 2024. Some members indicated that the revision of forecasts reflects the materialization of certain risks. One member acknowledged that the prevision of the atypical shocks of the pandemic and the military conflict on services prices has been complex. He/she noted that there is no quantitative information available on similar past episodes that could have been used as a reference in this period to assess the magnitude and duration of such impacts. Another member added that the difficulty in predicting the speed at which the persistence of services will return to its historical norm is what has made forecasting its evolution more challenging. He/she considered that, for this reason, the latest adjustments to the inflation forecast are mainly due to upward revisions in the forecasts for this component. Some members pointed out that the adjustment in headline inflation forecasts also reflects an increase in price variations of energy, as well as of agricultural and livestock products. All members mentioned that headline inflation is now expected to converge to the target in the fourth quarter of 2025. Some members stated that this means that the disinflation process will continue, but at a more gradual pace. One member highlighted that reductions in core inflation are still foreseen. Most members considered that the balance of risks for the foreseen inflation trajectory in the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. However, one member estimated that, in view of forecast revisions, the balance of risks takes on a less negative tone. He/she added that certain factors of the external environment of this balance have not shown relevant changes compared to what was observed in previous monetary policy decisions. He/she indicated that domestically, the expectation of an economic growth lower than previously anticipated has gained relevance, which has implications for slack conditions. He/she added that, due to the significant reduction of inflation from its peaks during this episode, a risk that has clearly been mitigated is that inflation could have settled at the referred high levels. Another member warned that the balance of risks has deteriorated due to domestic-related pressures associated with the dynamism of the economy, a tight labor market, significant wage increases, and uncertainty regarding the effects of the expansionary fiscal policy. He/she considered that the inflationary environment is much more complex than that faced at the beginning of last year. Among upward risks, the majority mentioned the persistence of core inflation, specifically its services component. One member highlighted the risk of economic activity showing greater-thanexpected resilience. Some members expressed uncertainty as to the potential effect of fiscal policy. Some members added the possibility of greater cost- related pressures of various nature. In particular, one member pointed out the potential effects of the tightening of the labor market and wage increases. Another member underlined the risk of an exchange rate depreciation. Some members added as upward risks for inflation the possibility that non-core inflation tends to settle at its long-term average. One member stated that climate-related shocks have been increasingly severe and frequent and could exert significant pressure on said component. He/she noted that the forecasts estimate that non-core inflation returns to that for this reason future forecasts could be adjusted upwards. Another member indicated that variations in relative prices of certain agricultural and livestock products are more likely to affect consumer inflation expectations and that monetary policy should avoid these second-round effects. As for risks to the downside, one member pointed out the possibility of an economic slowdown. Another member underlined the possibility that lower exchange rate levels compared to those observed in the early months of last year may contribute more than anticipated to mitigate certain pressures on inflation. The majority mentioned that domestic financial markets experienced bouts of volatility, as was the case for international ones. The majority exhibited volatility and that the Mexican peso registered a depreciation. Some members noted a temporary deterioration in trading conditions. One member added that these conditions have been gradually improving. Some members pointed out that part of the volatility resulted from the liquidation of long positions. One member added that it was also due to the unwinding of carry trade strategies and other technical factors. Some members highlighted the high sensitivity of the Mexican peso to the global environment of risk aversion. One member pointed out that this caused the Mexican peso to be among the currencies with the highest depreciation in some trading sessions. Some members noted that prospective information anticipates possible exchange rate depreciations in the coming months. One member highlighted that, despite all of the above, the Mexican peso has remained below the levels observed in 2023. He/she recalled that in the first months of the year, the Mexican peso appreciated visibly, reaching in late March and early April levels unseen since 2015. Some members expressed that the Mexican peso continues standing out among emerging economies’ currencies that have exhibited greater resilience. One member stated that this has contributed to the restriction of monetary conditions. Another member expressed that the resilience of the Mexican peso has been aided by the monetary policy actions implemented by the central bank, which have contributed to maintaining a volatility-adjusted interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States that remains attractive. He/she added that other factors have also influenced the evolution of the exchange rate, such as the favorable outlook associated with the nearshoring phenomenon and the country's sound macroeconomic fundamentals. One member mentioned that the liquidation of long positions on the Mexican peso, sound macroeconomic fundamentals and the high volatilityadjusted interest rate spread can contribute to reduce the possibility of a sudden adjustment in the exchange rate. The majority noted that, since the last monetary policy meeting, government bond yields have increased along the entire yield curve. One member mentioned that this was due to the high correlation with US markets and to a greater risk aversion. Another member stated that interest rates exhibited greater volatility after the March meeting. He/she added that in May, however, these registered a certain downward adjustment, in line with international markets. One member pointed out that the dynamics of short-term interest rates have also responded to revisions in expectations regarding Mexico’s monetary policy. He/she specified that neither markets nor analysts anticipate a change in the reference rate in May, while the former expects it to reach 10.2 and the latter 10.0%, by the end of the year. Another member argued that short-term interest rates in domestic markets have also been subject to pressures stemming from the increasing cost that Pemex has faced to issue debt. Regarding capital flows, one member pointed out that there were outflows of foreign investors in M-bonos, which were partially offset by inflows in Udibonos. Another member noted that stock markets performed favorably. Some members highlighted that total financing continued expanding. The majority indicated that credit granted by commercial banks maintained its dynamism. One member expressed that commercial bank financing to businesses, mortgage lending, and consumer credit grew during the first quarter of 2024. However, some members observed that lending to businesses and consumer credit continued moderating. One member added that, according to the survey of banks, lending standards remained tight. Another member mentioned that, regarding credit risk, delinquency levels remain low and stable. The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the effects of the shocks on inflation and its determinants, the behavior of medium- and long- disinflationary process. It stated that challenges and risks prevail, which requires monetary policy to continue being managed prudently. It took into account the expectation that the effects of the shocks will affect inflation longer than had been anticipated. Concurrently, it estimated that said shocks will continue easing. Based on the above, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains restrictive and will continue being conducive to the convergence of inflation The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. Looking ahead, it will assess the inflationary environment in order to discuss reference rate adjustments. It will also consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member pointed out that during this inflationary episode, there have been different stages, each of them entailing alternative implications for monetary policy conduction. He/she highlighted how, given its commitment to its primary mandate, Banco de México raised the reference rate by 725 basis points to a level of 11.25%. He/she recalled that when the reference rate was last increased in March 2023, headline inflation was at 6.85% and core inflation was at 8.09%. He/she commented that at that time it was evident that before considering reference rate cuts, it was necessary to observe a significant advance of the ongoing disinflation process. He/she argued that, in contrast, in 2024 both headline and core inflation have remained at levels noticeably lower than their peak levels during this inflationary episode, and the disinflationary process has advanced. He/she considered that the current environment, while still challenging, is less adverse than in 2022 and early 2023. He/she deemed that, consequently, we are now entering a new stage where it is possible to assess the possibility of reference rate cuts on a meeting-by-meeting basis, depending on the evolution of the inflation outlook. He/she explained that for this reason the last monetary policy meeting the reference rate was reduced by 25 basis points, given the progress in disinflation. However, he/she considered that subsequent reductions should be gradual given the higher-than-anticipated persistence in services inflation, and that the effects of inflationary shocks are now expected to dissipate more gradually than previously anticipated. He/she stated that, given this outlook it is appropriate to make a pause at this monetary policy meeting. He/she indicated that the inflationary environment is such that it allows to consider potential reference rate cuts going forward, with decisions contingent on the inflation outlook. He/she stated that a continued assessment of all inflation determinants will be necessary. He/she underlined that it is essential to continue weighing the undeniable progress achieved in Mexico’s disinflationary process against the challenges that still prevail. He/she highlighted that it will be important to consider that the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and the one prevailing in the future will impact the evolution of inflation within the planning horizon. He/she emphasized that monetary policy decisions will continue to be such that the monetary policy stance leads annual headline inflation to converge to the 3% target in the forecast period. Another member expressed that it is valid to acknowledge the progress made in the disinflationary process, attributable to a sound, timely, and effective monetary policy. However, he/she pointed out that looking into the past does not guarantee the convergence of inflation within the planning horizon. He/she argued that the inflation forecast targeting regime requires looking into the future and ensure that monetary conditions remain at the levels required to achieve such convergence. He/she warned that, in view of the risks faced and the slowdown in the disinflationary process, the achieved monetary restriction should be firmly maintained. In particular, he/she reiterated his/her concern about the potential effects on the inflation trajectory of a divergence of public finances from what is expected or being affected by the situation of Pemex. He/she also reiterated the challenges that will be faced in monetary policies, given that the expectation of a decline in inflation is subject to the Public Sector Borrowing Requirements (PSBR) being reduced by not materialize, would exert greater-than-expected pressures on aggregate demand and debt markets. He/she also indicated that the inflation forecast was revised upwards, as he/she had warned could occur during the previous meeting. He/she argued that the reduction in the reference rate in the March decision, which he/she considered premature, incurred a social cost, as it required extending the monetary restriction for a longer period. He/she mentioned that. looking ahead, commitment to the primary goal must be strengthened and that a forward-looking and datadependent approach should be prioritized, avoiding any premature adjustments. In this regard, he/she deemed that communication with the markets should prioritize institutional messages and avoid generating volatility. Finally, he/she argued that it is important for the central bank to intensify its efforts in reviewing exhaustively its forecasting tools that allow the inclusion of the changes observed in recent years in both global and Mexican economies and that might have generated structural changes, in addition to other factors, such as climate change, which have become increasingly relevant in understanding price formation and that have implied less precision. This will contribute to a more efficient attainment of the price stability objective for the benefit of the population, especially its lowest-income segment. disinflationary process is complex and not devoid of difficulties. He/she underlined that despite the progress in core inflation, non-core inflation has reversed considerably, while the central bank’s forecasts now consider a greater persistence of the services component. He/she mentioned that the main upward risk to inflation indicated in the balance for inflation has materialized and, consequently, timely convergence to the target has been delayed by two quarters. He/she added that, although most recent data indicate that the economic cycle has lost momentum, demand is expected to recover significantly during the second quarter of the year. He/she considered that synchronization between a higher expected persistence in inflation and the temporary dynamism of economic activity suggests that it is prudent to make a pause to the adjustments in the reference rate, in order to have more information on inflation determinants and on the performance of the monetary policy transmission channels. He/she commented that, although the exante real interest rate decreased in the last monetary policy decision, the real exchange rate continued appreciating, reaching levels unseen since 2008, while interest rates implied by market instruments increased considerably. In this regard, he/she stated that monetary conditions remain notably restrictive. He/she highlighted that the difference between the ex-ante real interest rate and the central estimate of the neutral rate is approximately three times the difference between observed inflation and its target. He/she pointed out that this proportion is unprecedented in Mexico and has facilitated the effective operation of all the monetary policy transmission channels throughout the cycle. However, he/she warned that the effects of such transmission are not symmetrical across inflation components, resulting in differentiated lags in price adjustments between goods and services. He/she explained that this suggests that the pace and scale of possible adjustments in the monetary policy stance should continue to be gradual to ensure the transmission to less sensitive components without causing disorderly deviations in those that are more reactive to different transmission channels. Looking ahead, he/she judged that if the evolution of macroeconomic conditions is consistent with updated inflation forecasts, it may be appropriate to reassess any space for recalibrating the level of monetary restriction once again. He/she argued that the data-dependent approach relying on forecasts and on a decision-by-decision basis, is the best way to ensure a prudent implementation of monetary policy based on the complexity of the disinflationary process, and fully complying with the constitutional mandate and seeking to achieve an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Another member expressed that, given the stagnation of inflation, a deteriorated balance of risks and the expectation of inflation above target for a longer period, no additional fine-tuning of the target rate can be made, either now or in the following months, and a restrictive stance should be maintained for an extended period. He/she considered that the moderate reductions in core inflation and the risks that non-core inflation reaches its historical average, demand a restrictive stance that avoids indirect effects of the non-core component on core inflation. He/she argued that a monetary easing cycle appears distant, and thus the fine-tuning of the previous decision needs to be interpreted correctly, considering that changes to the nominal rate seek to maintain the monetary policy stance relatively constant in a range of restriction for the ex-ante real rate between 7 and 7.5%. He/she mentioned that the weakness and low efficiency of most transmission channels in Mexico supports the case for maintaining the level of restriction for a longer period, and therefore adjustments to the reference rate should be more spaced out and more gradual than as anticipated by analysts. He/she pointed out that the vigorous growth of bank lending reflects the weakness of the credit channel, and that the high liquidity of the Mexican peso results in exchange rate fluctuations that are beyond monetary policy and limit the extent of the exchange rate transmission channel. He/she argued that the expectations channel is the one that operates with greater effectiveness. He/she judged that analyzing the output gap, delinquency rates, or the economic slowdown becomes relevant only to the extent that they contribute to understanding how monetary policy can anchor inflation expectations. He/she stated that inflation expectations above 3% should not be tolerated for any term, and therefore intermediate targets focused on returning these expectations to their historical averages should be discarded. Instead, advantage should be taken of the high monetary restriction to continuously, forcefully and unrestrictedly converge to 3%. He/she indicated that in subsequent decisions, the signals sent and their effects on inflation expectations should be carefully assessed. In this regard, he/she added that the direction of adjustments of the target rate is an even stronger signal than the level of the reference rate per se. For example, he/she underlined that, on this occasion, lowering the rate from 11 to 10.75% would send a premature signal of complacency with the observed trajectory of inflation. On the contrary he/she noted that maintaining the target rate unchanged signals that the central bank is not satisfied with inflation levels, that inflationary risks are acknowledged, and that there is a commitment to the 3% target. For this reason, he/she added that the central bank communication must assure that the bank is determined to attain the target at all costs. He/she suggested that for the upcoming decisions, not only should the current level of monetary restriction be maintained as long as core inflation, especially its services component, does not show a clear downward trend, but this intention should be explicitly stated in the forward guidance. He/she commented that in the second half of the year there would be greater clarity to make fine adjustments, even more gradual than anticipated, and only if conditions warrant it. He/she affirmed that monetary policy decisions should remain independent of the decisions made by the Federal Reserve and that it is not possible to compare Mexico’s interest rate spreads with those of other countries since the target rates respond to contexts and needs that are not entirely comparable. He/she cautioned that if inflation and its expectations remain persistently outside the variability range, the possibility of assessing the degree of monetary restriction required to achieve the 3% target should be considered. One member considered that, in light of the revision of the inflation forecast resulting from a greater persistence of the services component, it is appropriate to leave the reference rate unchanged on this occasion. He/she stated that this allows to reinforce a stance conducive to preventing inflation expectations from becoming contaminated. In this context, he/she deemed it relevant for the conduction of monetary policy to assess the dynamics within services inflation. He/she mentioned that the subindex of other services shows greater persistence compared to its historical norm. He/she added that, as its relationship with the merchandise component strengthened, it continues to reflect in a lagged manner the multiple shocks that gave rise to the atypical inflationary episode. He/she highlighted that other components of services inflation, such as housing, and which initially exhibited less persistence, have been reverting to their typical behavior. He/she added that monetary policy is transmitted heterogeneously to different components of inflation, with a more lagged effect on services, as this sector is less capital-intensive and more laborintensive. He/she pointed out that these elements should be taken into account in monetary policy implementation since they do not indicate new pressures, but rather that disturbances observed over the previous years continue to dissipate, albeit at a slower pace. He/she argued that the described phenomenon requires maintaining an adequate monetary restriction given a less adverse risk outlook than that faced in 2023, and thus it does not require keeping the monetary policy stance at historically restrictive levels. He/she stated that a gradual approach will allow adjusting the monetary restriction, ensuring it continues to be transmitted to other sectors where its impact has been less pronounced. He/she commented that the monetary policy stance should consider the trends in the inflation outlook overall and avoid adopting an overly data-dependent approach or focusing on a single variable. He/she stated that progress in the inflationary outlook is undeniable given the significant reductions in inflation, the gradual mitigation of the risk of inflation settling at high levels, and that, looking ahead, there is the expectation that it will continue decreasing, albeit at a slower pace. Considering all of the above, he/she sustained that an adjustment to the policy rate at the next meeting could be considered if the intermediate inflation targets, such as the inflation forecast, are met. He/she expressed that the current policy stance is highly restrictive and that, even with additional adjustments, it will remain robust despite changes in the relative stance compared to other economies. He/she emphasized that continuing with rate adjustments does not imply abandoning a restrictive stance. He/she warned that such stance will remain necessary throughout the forecast horizon, given the challenges that still prevail. The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the effects of the shocks on inflation and its determinants, the behavior of medium- and long-term inflation expectations, and the disinflationary process. It stated that challenges and risks prevail, which requires monetary policy to continue being managed prudently. It took into account the expectation that the effects of the shocks will affect inflation longer than had been anticipated. Concurrently, it estimated that said shocks will continue easing. Based on the above, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains restrictive and will continue being conducive to the convergence of inflation to the 3% target in the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. Looking ahead, it will assess the inflationary environment in order to discuss reference rate adjustments. It will also consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of leaving the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.00%.