Most members highlighted the resilience of world economic activity, although they noted a differentiated performance among economies. One member pointed out the dynamism exhibited by some economies in 2023, including that of the United States. He/she also mentioned the continuous tightening of labor markets and the boost to consumption observed in that economy. He/she compared the latter with the sluggishness shown by emerging economies, especially the Asian ones. Another member stated that during the last quarter of 2023, although the pace of expansion of the US economy moderated, it was higher than expected, while economic activity in the euro area remained stagnant. He/she added that emerging economies registered a lower dynamism during the same period compared to the previous quarter. Regarding labor markets, he/she indicated that they remain tight in the main economies, although in some of them they show signs of moderation. He/she mentioned that unemployment gaps have slightly narrowed and that wage growth has moderated, although it remains at high levels. He/she underlined that, despite the figure for non-farm payrolls at the margin which is consistent with the resilience of the US economy, this indicator has been trending downwards since mid2022.He/she added that, likewise, a downward trend can be observed for vacancies and for excess demand for labor. Some members indicated that forecasts from international organizations point to global growth of around 3% for 2024. Some members underlined that these forecasts consider a heterogeneous behavior among countries. Most members mentioned that US economic growth is still expected to moderate, although some members stated that the likelihood of a soft landing in that economy has increased. The majority warned that the outlook for world economic activity faces risks. Some members considered that this outlook remains uncertain given the expected slowdown in systemically important economies. One member highlighted the uncertainty about the impact of the tightening of credit conditions and decreased excess savings in the United States, and the real estate sector problems in China. Another member highlighted the risk of an escalation of geopolitical tensions, especially for world trade. Most members pointed out that, after decreasing in recent months, headline inflation has recently rebounded in several economies, especially in the advanced ones, due to pressures on energy prices. However, they indicated that, despite the upward adjustment at the margin, a significant decline in inflation has been observed at the global level. One member attributed the latter to improvements in supply and to sound monetary policy stances in different regions. However, another member warned that, in a large number of economies, headline inflation remains above central banks' targets. Most members argued that core inflation continued declining globally. However, one member noted that, in most cases, it still remains high. Another member pointed out that progress in disinflation of the core component mainly reflects a sustained fall in food merchandise inflation. Some members pointed out that, in contrast, services inflation still does not show a clear downward trend, although one member stated that it has moderated. Some members indicated that in most economies inflation is expected to converge to their corresponding central banks’ targets by 2025. One member pointed out that international organizations expect inflation to fall in nearly 80% of the world's economies during 2024. Another member mentioned that, looking ahead, various price-related pressures are expected to continue easing as the effects of pandemic-related shocks and the military conflict in Ukraine dissipate. He/she emphasized that this, along with tight monetary conditions worldwide, will continue contributing to global disinflation. One member pointed out that in the United States certain leading indicators suggest that shelter inflation, which has contributed significantly to inflation in that country, could moderate towards the second half of Some members highlighted that, since the last monetary policy decision, international commodity prices have been volatile. One member underlined that oil prices were affected by the uncertainty associated with geopolitical conflicts, inventory levels, and a changing outlook for global demand. Another member stated that the outlook for commodity prices remains uncertain. The majority noted that the central banks of major advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged. One member specified that the European Central Bank (ECB) kept its reference rates unchanged for the third consecutive meeting and that, despite the recent increase in headline inflation, it did not change its inflation outlook for the medium term. Most members mentioned that at its first meeting of the year the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged for the fourth consecutive time. Some members highlighted that said institution acknowledged that the risks to the fulfillment of its employment and price stability mandates are moving towards a better balance. Some members added that the Federal Reserve's chairman stated that the federal funds rate may have already reached its peak. One member underlined that he also pointed out the advance in the disinflation process despite the solid economic expansion and argued that it would be appropriate, sometime in 2024, to start reducing the funds rate, if the economy evolves as expected. However, most members highlighted that said chairman indicated that they will wait in inflation is sustainable before reducing the federal funds rate. Some members stated that the aforementioned contributed to markets adjusting their expectations of the first rate cut towards the second quarter of 2024. Some members noted heterogeneity in the monetary cycles across regions, especially in emerging economies. One member attributed this to a differentiated behavior of inflation and economic activity across economies. Another member underlined that some Latin American economies continue their monetary normalization. One member pointed out that the central banks of Brazil and Chile continued lowering their reference rates, reflecting optimism about their inflation trajectories, while the Central Bank of Colombia has been more moderate about its reference rate cuts. Another member indicated that, looking ahead, advanced economies, except for Japan, are expected to begin reducing their rates in the second quarter of 2024. One member noted that the ECB and the Bank of England emphasized that they will continue with a cautious and data-dependent approach to ensure that inflation remains on a trend towards their respective targets. Another member highlighted that few changes are anticipated in the policy stances of the monetary authorities of emerging European and Asian economies. One member added that adjustments in monetary policy stances this year are expected to be consistent with the convergence of inflation rates to their respective targets. Some members noted that international financial markets have been sensitive to both the release of economic figures, mainly in the United States, and to changes in the outlook for reference rates, especially those of the Federal Reserve. One member pointed out that market reactions to events in the United States reflect the systemic nature of the US economy and the uncertainty about its evolution. Another member noted that in recent weeks markets have responded to data releases and to comments by central bank officers, seeking to anticipate the inflection point of monetary policy, mainly in the United States and Europe. Some members recalled that at the end of last year, sovereign interest rates decreased significantly. One member attributed this to the continued effects from the perception in financial markets that the Fed’s message of high interest rates lasting longer in the major advanced economies is less likely to hold. Another member pointed to lower inflation as the cause. Most members stated that, subsequently, the release of data suggesting that the US economy remains government interest rates have partially reversed the decline observed towards the end of 2023. Some members added that the US dollar has also recovered. One member noted that there has been a recent compression of credit spreads and a rebound in stock markets, particularly in the technology sector. Some members highlighted that volatility in these markets has moderated in recent weeks. Regarding emerging markets, one member underlined that the beginning of 2024 has been characterized by a slightly adverse performance of their assets, partly reversing the positive performance observed in the last quarter of 2023. Some members stated that, looking ahead, episodes of financial volatility cannot be ruled out in view of the data-dependent stance of various central banks. In that regard, one member added that the divergence between what central banks have communicated and what markets expect represents a risk for financial stability, because it could generate sudden changes in the prices of some assets in case of unfavorable financial conditions. Among the risks to financial stability, some members pointed out the possibility of instability in light of various upcoming elections around the world this year. One member added that a possible escalation of geopolitical conflicts can also generate volatility. All members mentioned that in the fourth quarter of 2023, the Mexican economy registered a greater-than-expected slowdown. Most members noted that the three sectors of economic activity contributed to the slower pace of expansion. One member pointed out that the economy grew at a quarterly rate of 0.1% in the fourth quarter, after having registered 0.6, 0.9 and 1.1% in the previous quarters. Thus, some members considered that, by expanding 3.1% during the year, the economy exhibited robust growth in 2023. One member added that, nevertheless, the slowdown at the end of the year implies a slightly lower expected GDP growth in Regarding the performance of industrial activity, all members stated that manufacturing showed weakness. One member indicated that such behavior mirrored the sluggishness of this sector in the United States. Some members noted a moderation in the rate of growth of the transportation equipment component. One member pointed out that this happened after its significant expansion since the end of 2021. Some members highlighted that during 2023 the weakness of manufacturing contrasted with the dynamism of the construction sector. However, most members stated that, as revealed in most recent data, the latter sector grew at a slower-than-expected rate. In this regard, some members argued that, nevertheless, the level of activity in this sector remains high. Regarding domestic demand, most members indicated that recently investment moderated its pace of expansion due to a slowdown in non- residential construction and in machinery and equipment. Some members mentioned that, in spite of the above, investment grew significantly over the last year and remains at high levels. One member pointed out that with data up to November, gross fixed capital formation grew at annual rates of over maintained its positive trend, although some members noted that it showed less dynamism towards the end of 2023. Some members indicated that consumption growth has reflected the dynamism of consumption of imported goods. Some members mentioned that, in contrast, consumption of domestic goods and services was sluggish. Regarding external demand, one member stated that manufacturing exports contracted during the fourth quarter of 2023. Some members noted that automotive exports improved slightly at the margin, while non-automotive exports moderated compared to the first half of 2023. In this regard, one member considered that aggregate demand has moderated. Another member warned that these signs of moderation must continue being monitored. Most members argued that economic activity is expected to resume a greater dynamism in the first half of 2024. Some members noted that spending on public investment is expected to continue supporting economic growth. One member pointed out that in election years, domestic demand tends to be more dynamic during the first half of the year. Another member added that public construction spending is expected to continue in light of the fiscal expansion plans for the year. However, one member noted that there is uncertainty about the dynamism of economic activity in light of the effects that the fiscal stance might have, the slowdown observed at the end of 2023, and the expectation of weaker external demand. Some members stated that private spending is also foreseen to continue expanding. Regarding risks to growth, one member identified as a risk to the upside the possibility that the effects of nearshoring are greater than anticipated. As a risk to the downside, he/she mentioned a greater-than-expected deceleration of the US economy. He/she considered that risks to growth remain balanced. Most members mentioned that, despite the lower quarterly growth rate registered at the end of 2023, the point estimate of the output gap remained positive, although it decreased at the margin and is still not statistically different from zero. One member pointed out that over the forecast horizon the gap is now estimated to be slightly less positive and to be closing gradually, approaching zero. Most members highlighted that the labor market continued showing strength. They agreed that unemployment rates remain low. However, some members indicated that there are signs of easing in the labor market. One member added that growth of formal employment has slowed down. Another member stated that both the employment-toworking-age population ratio and the number of vacancies have shown signs of moderation. Some members mentioned the stabilization of the labor participation rate. Most members considered that wages continue increasing at an elevated rate. Some members pointed out that they show double-digit nominal annual growth rates. One member stated that these rates of change are historically high. Another member indicated that the annual variation of the nominal daily wage associated with IMSS-insured workers remained above 10% in December, while contractual wage revisions stood at 9.7 and 4.2% in private and public companies, respectively. However, one member argued that wage variations of formal workers seem to have begun to stabilize. Another member pointed out that these have moderated in the industrial and service sectors. Regarding the recent increases in the minimum wage, one member stated that these have had an increasing incidence on the average wage. Most members acknowledged the disinflation process in Mexico. Some members noted that headline inflation is at levels significantly below the peak of 8.70% registered in August 2022. One member pointed out that it is currently 382 basis points below this peak, 248 of which are due to the decline in the core component and 134 to the noncore one. This member pointed out that the above reflects a better balance between the core and noncore contributions. All members mentioned that in the latest readings annual headline inflation increased, reaching 4.88% in January 2024. Most members pointed out that this increase in headline inflation was due to a rebound in the non-core continued to decline. They highlighted that, after having registered historic lows, the non-core component has increased, reaching 5.24% in January. They noted that, at the margin, the rise in this component was due to marked increases in the prices of certain products within the fruits and vegetables subcomponent. Some members mentioned that this was due to a considerable drop in the supply of these products caused by climaterelated factors. One member underlined that in January inflation of the fruits and vegetables subcomponent stood at 21.78%. Some members emphasized that a large part of this increase was due to upward adjustments in the prices of three vegetables: onion, tomato, and tomatillo. One member specified that these three products accounted for more than 70% of the annual variation in this subcomponent in January. He/she noted that these price increases have been among the most extreme over the last two decades. Another member highlighted that these vegetables contributed with 84 of the 488 basis points that headline inflation registered in January. One member indicated that the annual price changes of just two CPI items jointly contributed with over half of the annual inflation of fruits and vegetables in its latest reading. Another member noted that the current level of non-core inflation is very close to its historical average, and thus the risk of a reversion to its historical mean has practically already materialized. All members highlighted that core inflation 4.76% in January 2024. Some members underlined that since its peak in November 2022, this component has decreased by 375 basis points. One member highlighted that various measures of central tendency of core inflation have trended downwards since the second half of 2022, and that extreme variations have been declining. He/she pointed out that more than one third of the CPI items that make up this component show seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations of less than or equal to 3%. Regarding core inflation’s components, most members noted the decline in merchandise inflation. They specified that in January both food and non-food inflation registered 5.54 and although food merchandise inflation still remains at high levels, it has declined considerably. He/she pointed out that, after having attained a maximum of basis points and its most recent reading is the lowest since May 2021. Another member underlined that the merchandise price index has registered seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly variations close to 3%. The majority stated that services inflation still does not show a clear downward trend. Some members pointed out that it was 5.25% in January. One member mentioned that, since August 2022, it has registered annual rates above 5%. He/she considered that such persistence is a matter of concern given that services are non-tradable, which makes them more sensitive to domestic pressures, particularly to the economy’s cyclical conditions. Another member pointed out that services inflation remains high, with pressures perceived in two of its three components. One member stated that inflation of services other than housing and education remains stable, but at high levels. Another member emphasized that, at the margin, services inflation declined slightly and is below the maximum level of that price variations of some of its items have indeed trended downwards. Most members mentioned that services inflation continues reflecting the cost-related pressures that have accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine. One member stated that their performance corresponds to a necessary adjustment in the economy due to a significant distortion in the relative prices between merchandise and services which was generated as a result of the pandemic. He/she recalled that, amid the economic fallout from this health crisis, merchandise inflation increased before services inflation. In contrast, during the current disinflationary phase, merchandise inflation has decreased at a faster rate. However, he/she underlined that he/she anticipates a decline in services inflation insofar as the effects from the easing of the shocks are observed and monetary tightening has an impact. He/she added that the materialization of this outlook is a factor to monitor. Some members considered that medium- and long- term inflation expectations drawn from surveys remained relatively stable. One member pointed out that they have gotten closer to their historical averages, and that their distributions have improved at the margin. Some members noted that they remain at levels above target. One member stated that expectations for the average of the next four years were at 3.7%, still above their historical average prior to 2020, while those for the next five to eight years remained at 3.5%. As for short-term inflation expectations, some members indicated that those for the end of 2024 increased. One member pointed out that over half of surveyed analysts anticipate that by the end of 2024 inflation will exceed the variability range. Another member specified that the median of headline inflation expectations for the end of 2025 registered of 3.1% for the same period. One member underlined that expectations for the next 12 months have continued decreasing and have accumulated a 104 basis-point drop since March 2023. Another member pointed out that short-term expectations for the core component decreased slightly, while those for the non-core component adjusted upwards. As for expectations implied by market instruments, he/she highlighted that breakeven inflation decreased for the short term, reaching below 4%, while for the long term it remained at higher levels. He/she noted that the slower evolution of expectations drawn from market instruments contrasts with the decline in analysts’ medium- and long-term expectations. He/she mentioned that this suggests uncertainty regarding inflation’s trajectory. Most members mentioned that the central bank’s forecast for headline inflation was revised slightly upwards for the short term. They pointed out that supply shocks on non-core inflation basically account for said adjustment. They estimated that these impacts will not be long- lasting, and that for this reason the disinflation process is expected to continue in the following months. Some members indicated that the incidence of said supply shocks is expected to decrease during the second quarter of 2024. Most members pointed out that headline inflation is still foreseen to converge to target in the second quarter of 2025. Some members stated that forecasts for core inflation remained practically at the same levels as in the previous monetary policy meeting. One member mentioned that projections for this component were revised slightly downwards for the first quarter of 2024 as a result of lower-thanexpected annual variations in merchandise prices in January. Another member highlighted that the recent increase in the non-core component is not expected to pass on to core inflation, and it is still expected to be around 3% in the second quarter of All members considered that the balance of risks for the foreseen trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member mentioned that, in his/her opinion, this balance has accentuated its upward bias and level of uncertainty. He/she pointed out that the risk of disinflation stagnating or reversing has increased. He/she highlighted that the core component has been declining recently at a slower pace. Likewise, he/she noted that non-core inflation has increased more than expected. On the other hand, another member emphasized that it had already been anticipated that the disinflation process would be non-linear and heterogeneous. He/she estimated that this does not alter the medium-term outlook for inflation. He/she asserted that, despite the recent rebound in headline inflation, the balance of risks has improved compared to that prevailing at the end of that the risks that currently prevail are more akin to those observed in previous inflationary episodes, as opposed to the atypical shocks faced in the aftermath of the pandemic, and thus their materialization would have more limited effects on inflation. Among upward risks to inflation, the majority underlined the persistence of core inflation at high levels. In this regard, some members stated that services inflation will likely continue exhibiting some downward rigidity. One member pointed out that such rigidity may be the result of services prices not having compensated the totality of the increases observed in the production costs. Another member mentioned that the decline in merchandise inflation could also stagnate due to, among other factors, the deceleration in the decline of global inflation. Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures of various nature. Some members underlined the risk of an escalation of geopolitical turmoil leading to further increases in transportation costs and to upward pressures on energy prices by affecting the security and continuity of global supply chains. One member mentioned the possibility of climate-related, geopolitical and macrofinancial factors may accelerate inflation by disrupting the supply of agricultural and energy products, and merchandise. Another member added that a potential interruption of gasoline price policies also constitutes a risk for this component. However, one member expressed that, although incidents in the Red Sea have raised sea freight costs between Europe and Asia, their impact on inflation should be significantly lower compared to disruptions caused by pandemic-induced bottlenecks. On the other hand, another member mentioned the risk related to wage adjustments, as well as those associated with insecurity. Some members forewarned that non-core inflation could also continue to be affected by climate-related factors. One member added that said factors could also affect the core component, for instance, through the impact of water scarcity on the prices of some services. Some members argued that the behavior of aggregate demand could also pose a risk to inflation’s persistence. One member considered that capacity utilization and labor market indicators point to tight conditions, and thus aggregate demandrelated pressures on prices cannot be ruled out. Another member pointed out that higher public spending planned for this year could reinforce demand-related pressures more than expected and slow down the reduction of inflation. He/she stated that, if the cuts in public spending in 2025 turn out to be smaller than those announced, growth would be higher than forecasted. On the other hand, he/she mentioned that markets expect reference rate cuts in advanced economies to be of greater magnitude than those implied by their central banks’ communication. He/she cautioned that these discrepancies could result in capital outflows, foreign exchange depreciations, and inflationary pressures in emerging economies, including Mexico. Among risks to the downside, one member highlighted a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of the world economy, leading to a faster-than-expected decline in global inflation. He/she underlined that the decline in global inflation, especially in the United States, contributes to disinflation in Mexico through lower variations in tradable goods’ prices. Some members indicated that domestic financial markets exhibited an orderly behavior. The majority mentioned that the Mexican peso appreciated slightly and its trading conditions improved. One member underlined that such conditions have returned to pre-pandemic levels and that, overall, the Mexican peso remained stable despite the volatility registered in certain trading sessions. The majority pointed out that the Mexican peso stood out among emerging economies’ currencies, favored by a relatively high volatility-adjusted interest fundamentals. Some members expressed that both markets and analysts perceive the possibility of facing episodes of exchange rate volatility, and of observing an upward correction in the exchange rate associated, among other factors, with the electoral processes in both Mexico and the United States. The majority noted that government bond yields decreased moderately along the entire yield curve. One member stated that foreign participants showed interest in short-term instruments. He/she attributed such interest to investors seeking to take advantage of interest rate levels and the expectation that these will remain relatively elevated throughout the year, compared to those of other emerging countries. Some members highlighted that in December there was also a significant positioning by foreign investors in domestic government debt. One member pointed out that the above partly reversed in January. Another member added that, during the first days of 2024, two placements of government debt were carried out in international markets. On the other hand, he/she indicated that stock markets have performed favorably and have exhibited gains of over member added that these markets exhibited a strong dynamism at the end of 2023, but performed more moderately in January. Another member stated that, since the end of 2022, sovereign risk indicators for Mexico, as well as for other emerging economies, have trended downwards. Regarding total financing in the economy, some members highlighted that it continued growing due to the expansion of the domestic component, while the external component decreased. One member mentioned that the expansion of monetary sources continued to reflect the acquisition of long-term instruments. Most members highlighted that credit granted by commercial banks continued mortgage lending kept expanding moderately. They added that the consumer loan portfolio continued growing at a high rate, despite showing some deceleration. One member pointed out that such performance has been demand-driven since, according to the survey of banks, overall credit lending conditions have tightened. Another member added that demand from businesses for bank credit has maintained an expansion rate above its prepandemic annual average. Regarding credit risk, he/she indicated that delinquency levels remain at relatively low and stable levels, despite exhibiting a marginal upward trend. The Governing Board evaluated the effects of the shocks on inflation and its determinants, along inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. In the next monetary policy meetings, it will assess, depending on available information, the possibility of adjusting the reference rate. It will take into account the progress in the inflation outlook and the challenges that prevail. It will also consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member indicated that, while it should always be kept in mind that the inflation target refers to headline inflation, when conducting monetary policy, it should be considered that the non-core component is highly volatile and that core inflation better reflects the trend in inflation. He/she recalled that, during the second half of 2022, although headline inflation was already decreasing, the hiking cycle continued. He/she stated that this was because such decline was attributed to the decrease in non-core inflation, while the core component continued increasing. He/she pointed out that it was not until core inflation began to decline markedly that it was deemed that the disinflationary phase had started and that it was unanimously decided to stop increasing the reference rate. He/she highlighted that currently core inflation continues to decline. He/she stated that for monetary policy decisions it is important to consider that the increase in headline inflation reflects a change in relative prices of specific products in the non-core component. He/she added that shocks like the recent ones tend to reverse relatively fast and do not compare to those observed during the pandemic and during the war in Ukraine, which were widespread, deep, and long-lasting. He/she added that it is foreseeable that headline inflation will resume its downward trend in the following months. He/she mentioned that, at the next monetary policy decision meeting, depending on available information, the appropriateness of lowering the reference rate can be assessed, taking into account the visible progress in disinflation and, at the same time, the challenges that still persist. He/she argued that headline inflation remains above target and core inflation continues at relatively high levels despite having declined significantly. He/she underlined that acknowledging the progress in disinflation and discussing the possibility of lowering the reference rate does not imply that victory has been proclaimed in the fight against inflation, as it is recognized that the task is not yet completed. He/she stated that the prevailing level of monetary restriction should be weighed against the evolution of inflation and its components, as well as its outlook, considering that the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained as well as the one prevailing in the future will impact the inflation outlook over the horizon in which monetary policy operates. He/she considered that, given the challenges, whenever macroeconomic conditions allow for cuts in the reference rate, these would be gradual. He/she emphasized that Banco de México must continue with the cautious approach that has guided its decisions. He/she underlined that actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. This is for the benefit of the country's population, primarily its lower-income segments, which are the most affected by inflationary episodes. Another member highlighted that, at this monetary policy meeting, it is important to consider that, while core inflation has exhibited a favorable behavior, the risks of a rebound in the non-core component, which would take it to levels closer to its historical average, have started to materialize to such an extent that it more than compensates for the decline that core inflation continues exhibiting. He/she indicated that, although the central scenario considers that the shocks on relative prices that have affected the noncore component will dissipate in the second quarter of 2024, other risks persist that may jeopardize the foreseen trajectory of inflation towards the 3% target. In this regard, he/she highlighted the possibility that non-core inflation stabilizes at levels above those forecasted for this component by the central bank. He/she pointed out that these forecasts anticipate non-core inflation to be at around half of its historical average throughout 2025. He/she also mentioned as risk factors for the foreseen trajectory for inflation a greater-than-anticipated resilience of the Mexican economy, and possible episodes of depreciation of the Mexican peso during 2024, given internal and external risk factors, as anticipated by some currency market indicators. Additionally, he/she expressed concern about inflation expectations, both drawn from surveys and implicit in market instruments, not decreasing at the required pace to reach the 3% target. He/she deemed that, in view of the environment of high uncertainty and the risks to the upside mentioned above, it is fundamental to maintain the attained level of monetary restriction, and therefore in this meeting the reference rate should remain at its current level. He/she stated that a tone of caution should be maintained in this monetary policy statement, given an environment in which the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside. He/she warned that the fact that it may be necessary to maintain the current level of the reference rate longer than anticipated by market consensus cannot be ruled out. Given the prevailing inflationary dynamics, he/she mentioned that it is extremely risky to include forward guidance and therefore, in his/her opinion, a data-dependent approach should be reinforced. He/she argued that the monetary policy statement should provide flexibility for each of the future decisions, as the economic situation is highly uncertain, both externally and domestically. Therefore, the central bank should not commit to any adjustment of the reference rate within a specific timeframe. One member highlighted that, on this occasion, a first reduction in the reference rate should not be considered, given that headline inflation has recently increased, even more than expected, due to the rebound in the non-core component and taking into account that short- and medium-term inflation expectations increased. He/she also argued that the inflation forecast might be perceived as optimistic since it assumes the increase in non-core inflation is temporary, of which there is no certainty. He/she considered that the recent surprising inflation and economic activity figures have sent mixed signals for determining the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that, before beginning a cycle of consecutive reference rate cuts, core inflation and, particularly, its services subcomponent, must show less persistence and consolidate into a downward trajectory, as anticipated by the central bank's forecasts. He/she mentioned that it will be necessary to make sure that the rebound in non-core inflation does not spill over to core inflation, that monetary policy has its expected impact on aggregate demand and that shocks to non-core inflation are effectively reversed. He/she pointed out that it is also necessary for inflation expectations to return to the variability interval. He/she stated that a signal must be sent that efforts to strengthen the anchoring of inflation expectations will not be spared. He/she underlined that, looking ahead, the current levels of monetary tightening must be maintained. He/she highlighted that, compared to other countries, monetary policy in Mexico is not as effective, and thus a longer-lasting monetary restriction is necessary. He/she pointed out that, since the last reference rate increase, a passive tightening of the monetary policy stance has been observed, and stated that the real ex-ante rate has increased by approximately 110 basis points. In view of the latter, he/she considered that, should the inflation outlook improve significantly, some adjustment to the reference rate could be made in order to maintain a high level of monetary restriction, but without generating excessive astringency. He/she added that the outlook is very uncertain and therefore caution and prudence in managing monetary restriction should prevail in the next monetary policy decisions. He/she underlined that any eventual downward adjustment to the reference rate should not be interpreted as the beginning of a monetary easing cycle. He/she highlighted that, in his/her opinion, it should be communicated that subsequent monetary policy decisions will be completely dependent on the evolution of the data and on the upside risks to inflation not materializing. Another member stated that during 2023 inflation declined significantly and at a speed that has few precedents. He/she pointed out that recently there has been a reversion of the non-core inflation while the core one, which is the most sensitive to monetary policy, has continued to decline. He/she indicated that the Bank’s forecasts suggest that this process will continue, while inflation expectations remain anchored and moving slowly towards their historical averages. However, he/she warned that the gap between observed inflation and its target remains wide and there are several risks to attaining convergence. He/she mentioned that, in order to close the inflation gap, the ex-ante real interest rate has remained in restrictive territory since September interest rate has not changed since March 2023, the monetary restriction has increased as inflation and inflation expectations have improved. He/she pointed out that in order to quantify the level of restriction attained, it’s possible to observe that the difference between the ex-ante real rate and the central estimate of its neutral range is more than double the inflationary gap. He/she added that, in the past, when inflation was above 4%, the real rate gap was on average less than one time the inflation gap. He/she underlined that, consistent with the extraordinary shocks that have been faced, the ratio between both gaps is the largest on record during an entire monetary cycle. He/she pointed out that this measure is also higher than the average currently maintained by both emerging and advanced economies, and even greater than that observed in economies that have shown strong resilience, that have faced episodes of exchange rate stress or that face fiscalrelated pressures. He/she stated that, looking ahead, given the expected disinflation and the passive increase in the real interest rate, if the reference rate is not adjusted, the ratio between both gaps could increase significantly and above what is necessary. He/she added that, due to the upward bias in the inflation risk balance, the forecast is still susceptible to revision in that direction, which would imply that room to calibrate the monetary policy stance is limited and will need to be thoroughly assessed in each decision meeting. He/she highlighted that the approach should be prudent, cautious, flexible and data-dependent. He/she concluded that in subsequent decisions, if macroeconomic conditions allow, the prevailing level of restriction could be pondered along with the evolution of inflation and its determinants, in compliance with the constitutional mandate, seeking an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets. One member highlighted that monetary policy should respond to the overall trend of the inflation outlook and considered that its improvements allow the discussion of whether it is adequate to make an adjustment to the monetary policy stance. He/she highlighted the decline of about 380 basis points in headline and core inflations, as well as decreases in the frequency of price revisions, in the fraction of line items with extreme variations and in the central tendency measures. Likewise, he/she pointed out that, although the balance of risks remains biased upwards, it is less adverse than the one prevailing at the start of 2023. He/she stated that the degree of monetary restriction attained resulted from the atypical nature of the shocks and risks confronted and reiterated that both have mitigated significantly. He/she recalled that the rebound in headline inflation is the result of a significant increase in the price of a few products from the non-core component, which is expected to be temporary, and considered it relevant progress that the recent disinflationary process has been guided by the core component. For that reason, he/she estimated that, in keeping with the tone of caution that has characterized this cycle, in this occasion there is space to adjust the communication so that it captures these improvements as well as the risks that prevail. On the other hand, he/she noted there has been a passive tightening of around 109 basis points and added that when inflation has been at similar levels, nominal and real interest rates have been well below current levels. Thus, he/she emphasized that the monetary policy stance is clearly restrictive by any metric, and argued that it will continue being robust even in case of changes in the relative stance. He/she highlighted that downward adjustments in the interest rate would not prevent the continuation of a restrictive stance, which is necessary given that there is still a distance to cover. Likewise, he/she mentioned that given that monetary policy operates with lags, it will continue fostering the convergence of inflation and added that the speed with which it is transmitted to the different components is heterogeneous. In that regard, he/she noted that the inflation of merchandise prices has declined faster than that of services prices, and indicated that the behavior of these last ones is the result of a necessary adjustment in the economy given the distortion of their relative prices. He/she argued that, the challenge is to adjust the degree of restriction in such a way that it is consistent with an inflation which, although above target, has decreased considerably. He/she stated that the adjustments to the policy stance will be gradual, given the expected non-linearity of the disinflationary process, which would allow an evaluation of its behavior and the monitoring of the prevailing risks. He/she indicated that whether such changes are continuous or not, will depend on the evolution of the inflationary outlook as a whole. The Governing Board evaluated the effects of the shocks on inflation and its determinants, along with the behavior of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. In the next monetary policy meetings, it will assess, depending on available information, the possibility of adjusting the reference rate. It will take into account the progress in the inflation outlook and the challenges that prevail. It will also consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.