Some members noted that global economic activity is expected to have moderated during the second quarter of 2024 compared to the previous one. Some members argued that, nevertheless, the dynamism of economic activity is expected to have remained heterogeneous across countries. They highlighted the prospects of lower growth in emerging economies and higher growth in advanced economies compared to the previous quarter. In this regard, one member noted that the United States registered higher-than-anticipated growth in the second quarter. Another member specified that economic activity in China exhibited low dynamism. One member indicated that world economic growth is expected to be slightly lower in 2024 than in 2023. Another member pointed out that in the remainder of 2024, world economic growth faces the risk of a more pronounced slowdown due to the lagged effects of interest rates remaining high for a longer period than expected. He/she added that geopolitical risks also prevail, associated with the potential escalation of conflicts in the Middle East and with increased trade tensions. Delving into the US economy, some members agreed that, although growth was greater than expected, industrial activity in that country remains weak, mainly in its manufacturing sector. With respect to consumption, one member highlighted that the dynamism of services moderated, while that of goods was mainly driven by the consumption of vehicles, which had registered negative variations since the second quarter of 2023. He/she specified that, nevertheless, in their annual comparison, these continued registering a contraction. Most members noted that recent indicators suggest a reduction in the US labor market dynamism. Some members pointed out that the unemployment rate increased. One member mentioned that wage growth slowed down. Another member pointed out that the non- farm payroll exhibited lower-than-expected growth, and that the number of job vacancies continued to decline. Some members considered that the publication of lower job creation figures generated concerns about the possibility of a “hard landing” in that economy. One member noted that a cooling labor market, coupled with slower growth in disposable income and signs of a less sound financial position of households, could affect consumption dynamics. Most members stated that in a large number of continued decreasing. Some members attributed this, mainly, to lower pressures on food prices and to a decline in core inflation. However, one member considered that this component continues showing persistence at the global level. Another member stated that the disinflation process continues showing heterogeneity, with a marked decrease in the goods subindex and resistance to decline in the services subindex. In the particular case of the United States, one member pointed out that annual headline inflation, measured by the personal consumption expenditure deflator, declined in June. He/she stated that since May, the monthly variations of the core component have been lower than those recorded in the first quarter. He/she argued that the rise in the unemployment rate and the slowdown in wage growth can be expected to contribute to a further decline in inflation in that country. Another member indicated that, looking ahead, disinflation is anticipated to continue in advanced economies. Regarding inflation in emerging countries, some members highlighted the rebound in headline inflation in some of them in recent readings. One member pointed out that this was due to increases in energy prices and in certain food prices. However, some members noted that core inflation in these economies continues decreasing steadily. One member added that in several emerging economies inflation is already within the variability range of their monetary authorities. Most members mentioned that the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged. They pointed out that said institution recognized a more favorable outlook for inflation. Some members indicated that its statement highlighted that the labor market is less tight. One member added that the Federal Reserve emphasized that the risks to achieving its employment and price stability goals continue to move towards a better balance and that the committee remains vigilant to the risks on both sides of its mandate. The majority underlined that its chairman mentioned that in view of the evolution of inflation and the labor market, a reduction in the reference rate could be on the table at the September meeting. One member mentioned that analysts expect three 25-basis-point cuts in 2024, although a high degree of uncertainty prevails in this regard. Regarding monetary policy decisions of other central banks, most members underlined that the unexpectedly. One member noted that, with this adjustment, its reference rate reached its highest level since 2008. Another member added that this is the second increase so far this year. One member mentioned that said central bank plans to halve its monthly purchases of Japanese government bonds starting in 2026. Meanwhile, some members commented that the European Central Bank kept its interest rate unchanged after having reduced it in the previous policy decision. Some members mentioned that both the Bank of Canada and the Bank of England lowered their reference rates. One member pointed out that in the case of the Bank of Canada, this is the second consecutive reference rate cut. He/she explained that said institute underlined that, although inflation continues above its target and the services component remains high, some measurements of core inflation have exhibited a positive performance recently. He/she added that in the case of the Bank of England, its monetary policy statement pointed out that risks persist, that inflation could rebound above its target and that the monetary policy stance will remain restrictive for as long as necessary. Another member anticipated that the rate-cutting cycle by central banks in advanced economies will continue during the rest of the year, although this could happen intermittently. One member commented that, despite some heterogeneity in monetary policy cycles, going forward, central banks will acknowledge the need to avoid excessively restrictive monetary policy stances in view of progress in disinflation. Most members pointed out that international financial markets have recently been volatile. They considered that certain employment data suggesting a lesser dynamism of the labor market in the United States as well as the surprise increase in the reference rate in Japan, contributed to the above. Some members stated that the latter led to a significant appreciation of the yen and to a notorious depreciation in currencies typically used in carry trade positions with said currency, which tended to unwind. Regarding the recent US labor market data, some members expressed that these contributed to widespread reductions in government bond yields globally. Some members highlighted the decline in the main stock market indices, particularly in the technology sector, given prospects of a greater-than-expected slowdown in the US economy. One member added that capital flows to emerging economies had a divergent behavior by asset class, with outflows in fixed-income assets and historically high inflows in equity assets. He/she mentioned the flows to China by local state-owned funds. The majority underlined that, according to the GDP flash estimate for the second quarter of 2024, productive activity registered low growth and continued showing the weakness it has exhibited since the end of last year. Some members pointed out that the deceleration in economic activity was greater than anticipated. One member stated that during the last three quarters growth has been below expectations. Another member specified that GDP registered an annual growth of 1.1%. One member indicated that it was Another member commented that such weak performance occurred in a context in which growth of the US economy surprised to the upside. Some members noted that the second quarter of 2024 marks three consecutive quarters of economic weakness. Some members detailed that in the last three readings the economy exhibited quarterly variations below 0.5%, specifically 0.3 and 0.2% in the two most recent ones. One member added that these results have been observed after the economy grew at a quarterly rate close to 1% for eight consecutive quarters. Regarding the behavior of Mexico’s economic activity by sector, most members highlighted that secondary activities continue showing sluggishness. One member commented that in the second quarter of 2024 these expanded at an annual rate of 0.5%. Another member added that, although these activities reactivated somewhat during that quarter, they are still below the levels of October performance of this sector is largely due to the weakness in manufacturing. One member pointed out that manufacturing fell at a monthly rate of 1.8% in May. Another member detailed that manufacturing associated with transportation equipment has not been able to reverse the contraction it registered at the end of 2023. Meanwhile, the majority stressed that timely data indicate a loss of dynamism in the tertiary sector. One member mentioned that in the second quarter of the year this sector expanded at an annual rate of growth in this sector mainly derives from lower commercial activity, which accounts for around one third of this component. He/she added that a high degree of heterogeneity prevails in the behavior of the subsectors that constitute this sector. Finally, some members noted the contraction of the primary sector during the second quarter of the year. Regarding domestic demand, most members reactivating somewhat. One member stated that gross fixed investment increased at an annual rate of been mainly driven by the construction sector. However, one member emphasized the weakening of investment in machinery and equipment. In addition, some members pointed out that, excluding the behavior of imports of capital goods, investment has been contracting for two quarters. Some members pointed out that consumption maintains its dynamism. One member added that total consumption grew at an annual rate of 2.8% and remains at high levels. Another member noted that the latest information indicates that aggregate demand grew at an annualized quarterly rate close to 6% in the first quarter, mainly driven by household consumption. Some members highlighted that consumption has exhibited signs of moderation. One member noted that, while the indicator of private consumption in the domestic market had still expanded in a dynamic manner in the first quarter of the year at an annualized quarterly rate of 7.5%, in the second quarter it contracted around 1.9% with April and May data. Another member pointed out that private consumption shows a lower dynamism in both domestic goods and services. He/she added that consumption of imported goods registers high levels, although they are already declining. One member commented that estimates of consumption directed to the domestic market exhibit a slowdown. Regarding the external sector, one member pointed out that as of the second quarter of the year, the value of automotive manufacturing exports reactivated moderately and remained at high levels. He/she added that the value of non-automotive exports showed some sluggishness and a lateral trend. Another member estimated that the behavior of imports, in terms of both private consumption and investment, is related to the appreciation of the real exchange rate, which demonstrates the transmission of the monetary restriction to the economy through the exchange rate channel. Some members noted that, looking ahead, although forecasts suggest that economic activity will continue expanding, said growth would be modest. One member added that he/she expects a pace of growth below its historical average throughout the forecast horizon. He/she also mentioned that, in this regard, the economy seems to be transitioning towards a low growth path. Another member considered that the balance of risks to economic activity is biased to the downside. He/she deemed that the main risk to the downside is the materialization of lower-thanexpected growth in the US economy. He/she emphasized that the risks associated with geopolitical conflicts and commercial tensions stand out, as well as those related to various electoral processes and their possible results, mainly in the United States. He/she mentioned that all these factors contribute to the increased risk of lower-thanexpected growth in private investment in Mexico. One member added the greater uncertainty regarding the performance of the global economy and volatility in financial markets derived from idiosyncratic and global factors. Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, most members mentioned that the point estimate of the output gap has been narrowing. One member indicated that it is essentially at zero. Some members highlighted that it would be persistently negative throughout 2025. One member expressed that the output gap estimates are generally not statistically different from zero. He/she pointed out that, additionally, when the sector that includes outsourcing services is excluded from the gap estimate, the gap increases by a couple of percentage points. Another member stated that the slack indicator based on principal components remained in positive territory. One member specified that this indicator decreased slightly. He/she added that, although the indicator more closely related to the labor market is positive, the indicator related to consumption is close to zero. Another member said that the seemingly looser slack conditions should not be expected to promptly contribute to the reduction of inflation. He/she mentioned that, despite the downward revisions to growth forecasts, these do not yet point to a contraction that would lead to a fullfledged easing of slack conditions. Meanwhile, one member warned that, although slack measures entail a high degree of uncertainty, one cannot fail to recognize that hard data indicate that the economy has already exhibited three consecutive quarters of weakness. He/she considered that in the face of a notable downward bias in the balance of risks to growth, the cyclical conditions of the economy will be a relevant element in the price formation process. Most members underlined that some labor market indicators show signs of moderation. Some members mentioned that despite the above the labor market continues showing strength. Most members highlighted the slowdown in formal employment creation. One member pointed out that this slowdown has been taking place since mid2023. Another member noted that the annual growth of the employed population is trending downwards. Some members mentioned the decline in the labor force participation rate and a slight increase in the unemployment rate in their latest readings. One member detailed that for the first time in 12 months the labor participation declined below 60% in June. He/she added that unemployment and underemployment increased with respect to the previous month. Another member indicated that unemployment rates, nonetheless, remain near their historic lows. Some members noted some reduction in wage growth rates. However, one member mentioned that said rates remain high. He/she specified that, based on figures as of June, the nominal annual variation of the daily wage of IMSSinsured workers registered 9.5%, while the moving average of contractual wage revisions for public and private firms recorded 4.1% and 9.3%, respectively. Another member considered that, looking ahead, the strength of the labor market is expected to further diminish, considering a growth of economic activity lower than expected some months ago. Most members agreed that the fading shocks geopolitical conflict in Ukraine, as well as the monetary policy stance adopted, have allowed for a significant progress in disinflation in Mexico since the most critical moments of the current acknowledged that the inflationary environment remains complex. One member expressed that an unfavorable inflationary dynamic has developed in recent months. Another member recalled that it was already anticipated that the disinflation process would not be linear. All members pointed out that since the last monetary policy decision, annual headline inflation continued increasing, registering 5.57% in July. Most members noted the increase it has exhibited since October 2023, when it stood at 4.26%. Some members considered that the upward trajectory of headline inflation has been more evident since March 2024. All members acknowledged that its increases were exclusively due to the upward trend of the non-core component, given that core inflation has remained on a downward trend. One member stated that on few occasions was it possible to identify the concentration of inflationary shocks in a single inflation component with such clarity. Another member pointed out that of the 131 basis points by which headline inflation has increased since October 2023, non-core inflation has contributed with 235 basis points, while core inflation has contributed downward with 104 basis points. In this context, most members argued that generalized increases are being observed. Some members specified that indicators that better represent the medium-term trend of headline inflation do not suggest that generalized price increases are taking place. One member pointed out that the trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation, which excludes extreme upward and downward figures, registered 4.3% in July. Most members highlighted that core inflation continued decreasing and registered 4.05% in July. Some members pointed out that this level is the lowest since March 2021, before Banco de México began its hiking cycle. One member emphasized that its seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate was 3.53% in July 2024. Some members observed that, based on figures from July, this component accumulated eighteen consecutive months of reductions. However, one member warned that since then it has declined at a slower rate. Another member stated that it has shown a very significant decline compared to other disinflation periods. One member mentioned that the fall in core inflation is particularly relevant, since this component better reflects the medium-term trend of headline inflation. The majority pointed out that the downward trend in core inflation is due to the behavior of merchandise inflation. One member argued that the factors that have contributed to the disinflation process have been reflected faster and more notably on merchandise prices than on services prices. Another member pointed out that in July annual merchandise inflation was 3.09%, accumulating twenty consecutive months of reductions. Some members noted that annual inflation figures for both food and non-food merchandise are at historical lows. Some members deemed that these segments are unlikely to decline much further, and therefore, looking ahead, the reduction in core inflation will depend, to a greater extent, on the performance of services inflation. Most members mentioned that services inflation continues showing persistence. One member noted that in July it stood at 5.22% and has exhibited a lateral trend for over thirteen months. Another member stated that it remains above its historical average. One member argued that services companies continue making price adjustments stemming from the pandemic shocks, which they had not been able to implement because demand for services recovered slowly. Some members forewarned that housing inflation is trending upwards. One member added that inflation of education services has not yet reached an inflection point. However, some members agreed that, in recent months, some indicators have performed more favorably. They highlighted that, after having attained a maximum inflation of 7.72% in March housing and education registered an inflation of this figure is the lowest in over two and a half years, except for June 2024 when it was 5.96%. Another member noted that, while the seasonally adjusted annualized monthly rates of this subcomponent were above 6% in the first months of the year, the average of the last three months was 4.05%. He/she expressed that, while during 2021 the percentage of the basket of services with price variations greater than 10% accounted for more than 25%, based on more recent data said percentage was 1.8%. All members mentioned the upward trend in non- core inflation. One member recalled that after having reached a historically low level of -0.67% in July 2023, non-core inflation has been subject to upward pressures by an unfortunate sequence of adverse shocks. Most members pointed out that in its last reading of July 2024, non-core inflation registered 10.36%. Some members noted that in this month it again recorded double-digit annual variations comparable to those observed in August observed in July is located at the 99[th ]percentile of the empirical distribution of such variations of this component, thus suggesting that its rebound in that month was highly atypical. Some members emphasized that this component is characterized by its high volatility. One member considered that it is subject to shocks that can cause significant adjustments between each reading, which can be both upward and downward. In this context, he/she stated that inflation of agricultural and livestock products went from 3.16 to 13.72% between July products increased from -7.82 to 9.17% in the same period. Most members underlined that non-core inflation dynamics respond to supply shocks. Some members mentioned the increases in international reference prices for energy goods. Most members highlighted the incidence of climatic events. One member noted that adverse weather conditions like those observed recently had not occurred in over a decade. Some members highlighted the significant increases in the prices of some fruits and vegetables. One member pointed out that more than 50 basis points of annual headline inflation are attributed to just ten CPI items within the fruits and vegetables subcomponent. Another member underlined that, when analyzing the deviation of headline inflation from its historical behavior, it is observed that it stands at 157 basis points above its average, 102 points of which are explained by the behavior of agricultural and livestock products. Regarding inflation expectations drawn from surveys, most members highlighted that longer- term inflation expectations remained relatively stable, although at levels above target. One member indicated that their distribution continues improving. Regarding short-term expectations, the majority mentioned that those corresponding to headline inflation for the end of 2024 increased. They attributed this to a deterioration adjustment reflected the increase in observed inflation. Most members added that, in contrast, expectations for the core component for the end of 2024 decreased. Regarding expectations for the next twelve months, they noted that those for headline inflation declined. However, some members pointed out that those for the end of 2025 adjusted slightly upwards. As for expectations drawn from market instruments, one member noted that they remained relatively stable. Another member stated that breakeven inflation deteriorated due to a reversion of risk premia to their historical average. Some members argued that headline inflation expectations drawn from surveys remain above Banco de México's forecasts. One member mentioned that this is also reflected in market expectations. Another member commented that none of the analysts anticipate that inflation will reach a rate close to 3% by the end of 2025. He/she noted that core inflation expectations are also above the central bank forecasts. He/she added that surveys point to stagnation in the latter component around its current levels. Most members stated that in view of the supply shocks that have affected non-core inflation, the central bank’s forecasts for headline inflation were revised upwards for the short term. They underlined that considering the nature of these shocks, their effects on inflation are anticipated to begin dissipating relatively quickly, and thus headline inflation would resume a downward trajectory. They added that the forecasts for core inflation remain unchanged, and therefore it is expected to continue decreasing. One member pointed out that core inflation is foreseen to be at that headline and core inflation are still expected to converge to 3% in the fourth quarter of 2025. Thus, most members highlighted that, looking ahead, disinflation is expected to continue. Some members commented that forecasts consider the fading effects of the global shocks, the weakness of domestic economic activity, and the effects of the monetary policy stance. Most members considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. Some members warned of the risk of prolonged high levels of non-core inflation contaminating core inflation. One member stated that this risk is not minor, as adverse weather conditions are becoming more frequent with deeper and longer-lasting effects. Some members argued that previous inflationary episodes show that increases in the non-core component are usually followed by increases in the core component. One member pointed out that this occurred in 2021 and 2022 as well as in 2017. However, he/she noted that, in those cases, alongside the pressures on the non-core component, the economy was also facing other types of shocks that led to increases in the core component, and for that reason it was necessary to implement significant adjustments to the reference rate. In contrast, he/she underlined that the current situation is different, as core inflation has consolidated a clear downward trend for a year and a half and the reference rate is at a much higher level. He/she added that the analysis carried out does not point to any effects on core inflation, despite the pressures on the non-core component being felt since the end of last year. Thus, some members argued that the effect on core inflation of the shocks that non-core inflation is currently experiencing would be limited. Most members noted that the behavior of analysts' consensus does not anticipate any negative effects either. Some members mentioned that non- core inflation items which have registered the highest price increases, such as various fruits and vegetables, generally are not essential inputs in production processes. They also noted that, given the availability of close substitutes, they have a high price elasticity of demand, and thus economic agents that use them as inputs can, to a certain extent, substitute them for other alternatives. Some members mentioned the upside risk of persistence in core inflation, particularly in its services component. Some members highlighted the risk of further exchange rate depreciation. One member indicated that it will be necessary to assess the possible implications of exchange rate adjustments on inflation dynamics. He/she added the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. Another member pointed out the risks related to the labor market and to fiscal policy. Regarding downward risks, most members highlighted the lower-than- anticipated economic activity. However, one member argued that this could be offset by the resilience of aggregate demand supported by a robust labor market and high disposable personal income. Another member noted that the economic weakness could help improve services inflation and limit the pass-through on costs. Most members commented that after the volatility observed at the beginning of June in weeks financial markets in Mexico performed better. They indicated that the adjustments in financial variables that took place at the beginning of June, associated with idiosyncratic emphasized that trading conditions in both foreign exchange and fixed-income markets improved in July with respect to the previous month. Most members noted that the yield curve for government bonds decreased, especially in the medium term, in a context of improved trading conditions with highlighted the increase in trading volume. The majority indicated that domestic markets experienced by international markets at the beginning of August. They highlighted that such volatility was associated with the release of employment data in the United States and with Japan’s monetary policy decision. One member added that these events led to the unwinding of carry trade positions of the Mexican peso against the yen. Some members pointed out that the evolution of the electoral process in the United States also influenced markets. In this context, all members highlighted the recent depreciation of the Mexican peso. Some members mentioned that it traded in a wide range. One member noted that in early August the exchange rate reached intraday levels above 20 pesos per dollar. He/she added that trading conditions have not returned to levels prior to the episode of turbulence in June and its metrics have exhibited a bias towards depreciation. Another member stated that from June onwards, sovereign credit risk indicators registered increases, albeit smaller than in other stress episodes. He/she pointed out that the foreign exchange market is becoming increasingly deeper, and thus, despite the volatility, interventions in the foreign exchange market have not been necessary. Some members commented that additional bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out. One member considered that, in an uncertain environment, markets have tended to overreact to economic news. Some members argued that, in the case of Mexico, robust macroeconomic fundamentals and a risk-adjusted interest rate spread that continues being among the most attractive, imply that the economy is in a solid position to handle potential challenges. One member stated that expectations implied by TIIE swaps for the trajectory of the reference rate decreased, with a rate of 10.80% anticipated for this decision. He/she added that a rate of 10.20% is expected for the end of 2024. He/she mentioned that the analysts' consensus is divided as to the date of the next adjustment and expects a reference rate of although differences persist between markets and surveys, both incorporate graduality and caution in their trajectories. Another member stated that despite the sharp monetary restriction, financing to the non-financial private sector continued expanding. He/she specified that it grew at a real annual rate of this regard, he/she emphasized that commercial bank credit to firms, consumer credit and mortgage lending continued trending upwards, with the former two registering especially high expansion rates. Regarding credit risk, he/she indicated that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will dissipate over the next quarters. It took into account core inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated that, although the outlook for inflation still calls for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the discussing reference rate adjustments. It will consider that global shocks will continue fading and the effects of the weakness in economic activity. It will take into account the incidence of the monetary policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member argued that the analysis of the evolution of the inflationary outlook suggests that conditions are appropriate to lower the level of monetary restriction. He/she emphasized the notable progress in the reduction of core inflation, which better reflects the medium-term trend in inflation, as well as the prospect that this component will continue declining. He/she pointed out that the nature of the shocks that have exerted upward pressure on the non-core component and headline inflation should be considered. He/she reiterated that the effects of said supply shocks tend to dissipate relatively quickly, which would lead headline inflation to resume a downward trajectory in the following months. He/she also stated that, although it is necessary to acknowledge that non-core inflation at double-digit levels has exerted significant pressures on headline inflation, it is also important to consider that this represents a change in relative prices rather than generalized pressures. He/she argued that both domestic and external environments are conducive to a continuous moderation of inflationary pressures. He/she highlighted the disinflation progress at the global level. In this regard, he/she indicated that since Mexico is an economy open to international trade, the country’s disinflation benefits from the lower levels of external inflation. He/she added that, domestically, the expected weakness of national economic activity would contribute to mitigate inflation pressures over the planning horizon. Finally, he/she stated that the level of monetary restriction should be consistent with the fading of pressures stemming from the global shocks, which at the time led to a rise in the reference rate for 15 consecutive meetings, accumulating 725 basis points of increases. Considering all of the above, he/she noted that this decision should be communicated in the context of progress in global shocks’ fading, and taking into account that the effect of the rebound in non-core inflation on headline inflation is only in the short term, as well as the current level of monetary restriction and that prevailing in the event of an interest rate cut. He/she highlighted that it will be essential to emphasize that, in line with the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate, the monetary policy stance will continue being clearly restrictive and, therefore, will continue acting to ensure that inflation converges to the 3% target. He/she estimated that, looking ahead, the inflationary environment will allow to continue discussing reference rate adjustments. However, he/she acknowledged that a gradual approach will need to be maintained. Another member commented that both the reversal of shocks associated with the pandemic and geopolitical conflicts as well as a restrictive and timely monetary policy stance by the central bank have allowed for significant progress in the disinflationary process. However, he/she considered that the outlook for the conduct of monetary policy continues to be very complex in light of the unfavorable inflationary dynamics in recent months. He/she highlighted that headline inflation has continued increasing due to a greater and longerlasting rebound in the non-core component than expected. He/she argued that the supply shocks that have led to this rebound will not necessarily dissipate rapidly, potentially contaminating core inflation. He/she stated that the latter depends, in part, on their effects on inflation expectations, as well as on the monetary policy response. For this reason, he/she warned that it would be risky to begin a downward cycle when non-core inflation is trending significantly upwards. He/she pointed out that the recent slower decline in core inflation has occurred despite the monetary restriction. He/she stated that the forecast of lower inflationary pressures in light of the weakening of economic activity could be offset by the ongoing resilience of aggregate demand. He/she noted that tensions in financial markets due to idiosyncratic and global factors have added to this complex inflationary dynamic. He/she indicated that exchange rate pressures could continue and escalate, which could hinder the disinflationary process even in light of the expected slowdown in economic activity. He/she highlighted that both inflation expectations and the exchange rate have been the two main channels through which monetary restriction has been operating. He/she noted that since the adoption of a floating exchange rate regime, the pass-through effect has diminished, although this does not mean that exchange rate dynamics are not relevant for the trajectory of inflation. He/she argued that the pass-through effect can only remain bounded if markets’ confidence in the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate is maintained. He/she considered that this is an additional reason to conduct monetary policy with caution in episodes of high exchange rate volatility such as the current one. He/she argued that in this environment an adjustment in the monetary policy stance should not be rushed and, instead, a risk management approach should be favored. One member considered that the conduct of monetary policy requires analyzing both the observed data and the expected determinants of inflationary dynamics. With respect to inflation data, he/she pointed out that the recent readings show a differentiated behavior in its components. He/she highlighted the decline in the core component over since the implementation of the inflation-targeting regime and clearly responds to the monetary restriction. He/she mentioned that, in contrast, noncore inflation has continued rising due to different supply shocks. He/she stated that these shocks appear as short-term determinants of inflation; however, since they concentrate in agricultural and livestock product prices, they only have limited indirect effects, provided that expectations remain anchored. He/she also mentioned, among mediumterm determinants, the weak economic activity data, which could contribute to better behavior of the services subcomponent. He/she added that two inflation determinants, expectations and the exchange rate, are also the two transmission channels that have performed better in the current cycle and are unlikely to cease contributing to disinflation, provided that an absolute restrictive stance and an adequate relative stance are maintained. He/she emphasized that a long-term determinant is the central bank's unwavering commitment to reducing inflation towards its target, as shown by the level of monetary restriction attained. In this regard, he/she recalled that the real ex-ante rate is more than twice the upper limit of the neutral range and that the nominal rate is almost twice the observed inflation. He/she stated that the difference between the interest rate gap and the inflation gap is one of the highest among the main emerging economies and is the largest if core inflation is considered. He/she argued that the monetary restriction should also be evaluated in terms of its duration, which is nearing two years and which, he/she considered, will extend throughout the planning horizon. He/she indicated that, even after taking into account the reference rate adjustment, there will be a stance adequate and consistent with the expected pressures on inflation. He/she considered that the pauses in May and June allowed to assess both the disinflationary process and the functioning of the transmission channels. He/she indicated that the monetary policy stance should be as efficient as possible in order to consolidate disinflation and ensure an orderly adjustment of the economy and markets. In this regard, he/she stated that it should be emphasized that the task is yet to be concluded and that a vigilant approach should be maintained. He/she commented that it is appropriate to continue with a data-dependent approach in which gradualism prevails. He/she highlighted that, looking ahead, adjustments may even continue to be spaced out and not proportional to the expected decline in inflation for the remainder of the year. Another member recalled that in the previous monetary policy decision the target rate remained at persistence in services inflation, inflation expectations above the central bank's forecasts, and a balance of risks for inflation biased to the upside. He/she mentioned that in the last six weeks, in his/her opinion, data have not improved and suggest an even more complex environment, in which increased uncertainty has not dissipated. He/she warned that, in an environment in which the expectations channel is the most important, there is a lack of credibility in Banco de México's inflation forecast, given that none of the expectations surveys anticipate reaching the 3% target by the end of 2025 and, on the contrary, they foresee higher inflation levels. He/she argued that chronic optimism stemming from an inflation forecast targeting framework that considers a target rate determined under the assumption that the 3% inflation target is attained in a horizon of eight quarters should be avoided. However, he/she pointed out that if this assumption is not imposed, forecast inflation would not be very different from analysts’ expectations, which could be reflecting the perception of a monetary policy that has a low incidence. Therefore, he/she stated the need to maintain a firm restrictive policy stance, given an inflation that is off the target range. He/she emphasized that credibility is a central issue, and therefore it is crucial to convey to the public that all possible measures will be taken to meet the inflation target in order for monetary policy to be more effective. He/she estimated that, with inflation risks to the upside, an increasing inflation trajectory, and unfavorable inflation expectations, the monetary policy stance cannot be eased yet. He/she considered that the mixed signals from the Federal Reserve regarding further easing, exchange rate depreciation, and the recent volatility in financial markets, should play a secondary role in the monetary policy decision given their limited progress in curbing inflation. He/she stated that the effects of the external environment on the relative monetary policy stance are yet to be defined. He/she argued that a premature monetary easing could hinder the attainment of the primary objective and that for this reason the monetary policy stance cannot be adjusted at this time. He/she pointed out that both international institutions and multiple academic studies warn about the relevance of avoiding a premature easing. He/she stated that the signal sent by this adjustment would be more relevant than the level of the reference rate itself and that, under the current conditions, lowering the target rate would send the wrong message of being content with rising headline inflation. He/she added that if services inflation does not show any progress, headline inflation is not declining, and inflation expectations are not more aligned with the central bank's targets, it will be difficult to send signals in another direction. One member stated that the economy continues facing two shocks that have become more intense and have opposite effects on inflation. He/she mentioned that, on the one hand, the exchange rate continued registering volatility and depreciated, while, on the other hand, he/she expects a slightly greater easing of slack conditions than previously anticipated in June. He/she recalled that the passthrough from the exchange rate to prices is low, and that the greater economic slack will help mitigate the risk of a greater pass-through. He/she added that signs of deceleration would indicate that the shock to economic activity will last longer, affecting the entire monetary policy horizon. He/she delved into the information suggested by the central bank’s forecast, by reiterating, on the one hand, that the revision to headline inflation is attributed to supply shocks, with the convergence timeline remaining unchanged, and, on the other hand, that core inflation is anticipated to continue decreasing. He/she highlighted that expectations for core inflation for decreased, which indicates that markets do not perceive that shocks are contaminating core inflation. Regarding the level of monetary restriction, he/she mentioned that, given the behavior of inflation expectations, the 25-basis point reduction in the reference rate in March has resulted in a decrease of only 9 basis points in the real ex-ante interest rate. He/she underlined that its level is almost twice the upper limit of the neutral range, making it highly restrictive under any metric. In view of the shift in the monetary policy outlook in other economies, he/she stated that even with rate cuts, the relative monetary policy stance will continue to be robust. Considering this solid absolute and relative policy stance, he/she rejected the notion that reductions reflect complacency. In this regard, he/she commented that a restrictive stance will continue to be essential and, in this regard, he/she considered that the monetary policy stance has margins. He/she stated that, although at the time it was necessary to take the reference rate to maximum levels, in response to the unprecedented shocks, now the current inflation challenges are of a different nature, given that the higher readings of headline inflation are explained by its non-core component. In this context, he/she emphasized that convergence to the inflation target and an adjustment to the level of monetary restriction are compatible. He/she added that reference rate cuts aligned with the central scenario must not be postponed, as there is the risk of managing monetary policy with a lag, incurring unnecessary costs for the economy. He/she pointed out that monetary policy should be conducted prospectively, considering both the observed and the expected determinants, without overweighting any specific data point. He/she considered that a gradual approach allows for acknowledging progress in the disinflationary process, while continuing to address the prevailing challenges in a responsible manner. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will dissipate over the next quarters. It took into account core inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated that, although the outlook for inflation still calls for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the inflationary environment may allow for discussing reference rate adjustments. It will consider that global shocks will continue fading and the effects of the weakness in economic activity. It will take into account the incidence of the monetary policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, and Omar Mejía. Irene Espinosa and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.00%. Given the complex inflationary environment, we should avoid rushing into adjusting the monetary policy stance. It is imperative to remain cautious and prioritize a risk management approach, for the benefit of the central bank’s credibility. Headline inflation has continued to increase consecutively for five months, reaching levels unseen in more than twelve months and deviating further from the 3% target. Our forecasts have once again been adjusted upwards; core inflation decreases ever more slowly; non-core inflation continues at high levels and will likely remain above our forecasts, while the risk of the core component becoming contaminated is not negligible; inflation expectations remain above our forecasts and do not show any signs of inflexion; and the balance of risks continues biased to the upside. Looking ahead, foreign exchange volatility could intensify due to domestic and external factors. This would jeopardize the disinflationary process, even considering the anticipated slowdown in economic activity. Under the circumstances and risks outlined above, a reference rate cut would undermine the central bank’s credibility regarding its commitment with the constitutional mandate of ensuring price stability. The decision to ease the monetary policy stance undermines our credibility given that headline inflation has increased in the last five months and is now at 5%. Core inflation is currently at 4.0%, and surveys indicate that it will remain at that level at the end of 2024 and barely reach 3.8% at the end of inflation. Nine institutions even anticipate that in December 2024 core inflation will be higher than its current levels. Our trajectory for core inflation for the next eight quarters is overly optimistic and lacks credibility. Current inflation figures and its mediumterm expectations simply do not support this decision. The monetary policy regime that Banco de México adopted many years ago aimed at eliminating fiscal dominance and focusing the Governing Board’s efforts on price stability above all. Voting in favor of easing the monetary policy stance at this time, given a high fiscal deficit and a yet-to-beconfirmed weakness of economic activity, while inflation is still far from target, may be interpreted as premature as long as there is no certainty that inflation is on track, as supported by more solid data.