Some members of the Board mentioned that available indicators suggest that during the third quarter of 2024 world economic activity grew at a rate similar to that of the previous quarter. One member considered that it has continued expanding at a moderate pace. Most members highlighted that countries. One member noted that, relative to the first half of the year, the lower rate of expansion in advanced economies has been offset by a strongerthan-anticipated recovery in emerging economies. Most members noted that growth continues being driven mainly by the services sector. Some members highlighted the sluggishness in manufacturing. One member underlined that, looking ahead, the expectation of a mild slowdown in global growth in 2024 and 2025 prevails, and thus a “soft landing” is still anticipated. However, he/she cautioned that such scenario is subject to high uncertainty. He/she warned that among the most relevant risks for global economic performance are those associated with the electoral process in the United States, the loss of dynamism in the Chinese economy, the escalation of geopolitical conflicts, and the high level of fiscal deficits in several economies. In the case of the United States, another member considered that the fading of factors that once supported the resilience of its economy, such as the financial position of households, which is already weakening, suggests that some downward risks have gained relevance. One member added that, according to analysts, the probability of a recession in that country in the next 12 months is still low. However, he/she recalled that about 80% of them consider that the full impact of interest rates on that economy has not yet materialized. Most members noted that labor markets in the major advanced economies have shown signs of lower dynamism. Some members pointed out that unemployment gaps have been narrowing in several of these economies, except for the euro area, as noted by one member. In the case of the United States, most members highlighted the better balance between supply and demand in the labor market. Some members pointed out that wage growth in that country has been declining. They indicated that the unemployment rate has been increasing and is above 4%. Most members agreed that the disinflation process continues at the global level. Some members noted the differentiated behavior of inflation across countries. Some members highlighted that headline inflation in advanced economies is currently closer to central banks' targets, as compared to the beginning of the year. One member added that in these economies, the trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation shows a downward trend. Most members mentioned that the recent moderation of headline inflation in these economies was mainly due to reductions in the non-core component. One member detailed that the latter is associated with lower food inflation. He/she added that, in contrast, in some cases, core inflation rebounded at the margin. Some members highlighted that this component, especially the services segment, continues showing persistence. However, one member argued that, although core inflation is declining moderately, it lies below the levels of the beginning of 2024. In the particular case of the United States, some members highlighted the favorable behavior of headline inflation, which decreased from 2.9% in July to 2.5% in August. Regarding emerging economies, one member mentioned that inflation’s behavior has been more favorable in Asia and emerging Europe than in Latin America. He/she pointed out that in a large number of emerging economies, headline inflation lay within the central banks' variability range. Another member commented that it registered decreases in these economies due to a moderation in food and energy inflation. However, he/she acknowledged that the core component remains elevated. Regarding international commodity prices, some members mentioned that energy prices trended downwards due to the expectation of increased production by OPEC. One member argued that the expectation of lower global economic growth was also a contributing factor. Another member added that there was a rebound in wheat, corn and sugar prices due to climate-related factors affecting various regions. He/she stated that metal prices also increased due to supply issues in Russia. All members highlighted that the US Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points. Most members noted that the magnitude of the adjustment had not been fully incorporated by the markets ahead of the decision. One member commented that rate cuts of such magnitude have only occurred in episodes of marked deceleration, such as in 2001, 2008 and conference, the chairman of that institution argued that the labor market and the economy continue showing a solid performance, and thus he foresees that the magnitude of the rate cut could help maintain the strength of the labor market and the economy. Some members highlighted that in its statement the Federal Open Market Committee indicated that has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward its target. One member added that commitment to the maximum employment mandate was also highlighted. Another member underlined the reference that risks to achieving its employment and inflation goals are in balance. Some members indicated that the Federal Open Market Committee projections point to an additional cumulative loosening of 50 basis points for the remainder of 2024. One member added that additional cuts of 100 basis points are expected in the chairman of said institution mentioned that there is no predefined trajectory for the reference rate. The majority noted that the central banks of other reference rates. They detailed that the European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada cut their reference rates again by 25 basis points. One member highlighted that these institutions did not commit to a predetermined path for the reference rate and that they maintained a data-dependent approach. As for the European Central Bank's decision, some members indicated that said institution noted the resistance to decline of the services component. One member added that said central bank also emphasized the tightness of the euro area's labor market. Another member stated that the rate cut was implemented while that institution still anticipates a slight rebound in inflation towards the end of the year. Regarding the Bank of Canada, he/she highlighted that, in its monetary policy statement, it noted that downside risks to inflation continue gaining relevance. Some members pointed out that the Bank of England left its reference rate unchanged. One member indicated that this was in line with the cautious tone of its previous policy decision. Some members commented that the Bank of Japan also left its target rate unchanged, although a second-rate hike is expected for the rest of the year. Some members mentioned that markets anticipate that, looking ahead, the moderation of monetary restriction will continue in most advanced economies. One member estimated that the monetary policy normalization cycle will be a discontinuous process, in terms of both sequence and magnitude. Regarding emerging economies, another member highlighted the heterogeneity of their monetary cycles. However, he/she detailed that most of them are expected to continue reducing their monetary restriction until they converge to their neutral positions in 2025. One member noted that the Bank of Brazil increased its reference rate by 25 basis points and stated that the inflationary outlook will require a more restrictive monetary policy stance. The majority commented that volatility in international financial markets eased in the last few weeks. They noted that given the prospects of reference rate cuts by several central banks, government interest rates decreased, mainly short-term ones. They mentioned that gains in the main stock market indexes and a generalized depreciation of the US dollar were registered. One member added that in recent weeks the performance of financial markets showed greater heterogeneity by region and asset class. All members agreed that Mexico's economic activity is undergoing a period of weakness. The majority indicated that it has registered a visible loss of dynamism since the last quarter of 2023. One member underlined that the national accounts data published at the end of August showed downward revisions for the most recent quarterly variations, indicating that the economy has been practically stagnant. Another member stated that data for the second quarter showed that the slowdown has taken place in both supply and demand. One member attributed the economic weakness to the uncertain environment associated with idiosyncratic factors, as well as to the expectation of a lower US economic activity and to the ongoing electoral process in that country. Another member estimated that the lack of economic dynamism is a consequence of the stagnation of US manufacturing production, which affects the export sector, and of a slowdown in investment, which typically occurs around federal government transitions. He/she considered that despite the signs of a slowdown, an economic contraction is not anticipated. Most members added that information available at the beginning of the third quarter shows a certain rebound. One member stated that the IGAE of July increased at a seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.6%. Some members pointed out that this expansion partly reflected the growth in primary activities. One member noted that this sector rose 11.6% at the margin. Another member highlighted that although July figures suggest a slight progress, the economy is expected to maintain its relatively low dynamism throughout the planning horizon. Regarding the sectoral performance of economic activity, some members emphasized the slowdown in secondary and tertiary activities. One member pointed out that sluggish industrial production has affected wholesale trade, which together with a weaker evolution of other services has made the tertiary sector lose dynamism. Some members warned that there is a generalized weakening in manufacturing components. One member pointed out that two thirds of the subsectors that comprise it register negative annual variations. Some members noted that in recent months economic activity improved slightly, associated with a certain rebound in construction. One member mentioned that, although building construction has shown dynamism, civil engineering works have slowed down due to the completion of different government projects. indicated that consumption slowed down. Some members considered that it has even stagnated. Most members highlighted that this component contracted in the second quarter. One member stated that it registered a negative quarterly variation of 2.20% in seasonally adjusted annualized figures. He/she member indicated that this setback is the first one since mid-2020. Most members noted a contraction in consumption of imported goods. One member pointed out that social transfer payments were brought forward to the first quarter, and thus their absence in the second quarter would have partly explained the observed trend in consumption. He/she argued that these payments resume in the third quarter, consumption is expected to rebound to some extent. He/she added that, looking ahead, other factors would also support consumption dynamics, such as the increase in income from remittances denominated in pesos, boosted by the recent exchange rate depreciation, as well as wage revisions. However, another member mentioned that several indicators related to consumption as well as timely data indicate that its moderation will continue. Most members pointed out that investment has continued registering a lack of dynamism since mid-2023. They noted that this was observed in all its categories. As for external demand, one member indicated that it has remained sluggish. However, most members pointed out that the value of both automotive and non-automotive reactivation in July. One member noted that this was mainly due to an improvement in shipments to the United States. Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, some members indicated that the point estimate of the output gap calculated with GDP data continued narrowing from positive levels. Some members pointed out that it is expected to remain close to zero in the remainder of 2024 and to be persistently negative in 2025. One member stated that a significant negative gap is unlikely, since a recession is not expected. Another member indicated that some slack indicators, such as the labor market, remain in positive territory. One member noted that the indicator based on principal components has become less positive, in light of a slightly negative consumption gap. He/she recalled that, in general, measuring economic slack involves a high degree of uncertainty. However, he/she pointed out that hard data confirm the economic slowdown. He/she considered that the cyclical conditions of the economy could continue to be a relevant factor in the price formation process. Some members stated that Mexico's economic activity is expected to expand at a moderate pace in balance of risks to growth of economic activity remains biased to the downside. One member argued that a downward risk factor that has gained relevance is the possibility of a lower-than-expected growth of the US economy, to the detriment of Mexico's external demand. He/she added that another risk is the environment of high uncertainty that prevails due to both domestic and external factors. All members indicated that the labor market remains solid. Most members highlighted that the unemployment rate remains close to its historic lows. One member underlined that labor force participation rates are at levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. Another member stated that both the participation rate and the employment-to-working-age population ratio remain high. However, all members acknowledged that job creation has slowed down. One member indicated that recent readings suggest that after having shown high dynamism, growth of employed population has aligned more closely with its prepandemic trend. Another member underlined that the slowdown in job creation is visible both in the employed population reported by the ENOE and in IMSS-insured jobs. He/she detailed that lower job creation is more noticeable in construction, manufacturing and trade, and therefore it seems to be closely associated with the weakness of the industrial sector. One member added that the slowdown in the pace of employment growth could intensify due to the weakness of the prevailing economic activity. Some members mentioned that, nevertheless, wage increases remain high. One member detailed that average IMSS-insured wages increased by 4.5% in real terms. Another member highlighted that the annual variation of nominal wages of IMSS-insured workers stood at 9.7% in August. He/she added that the negotiation of contractual wages in private firms resulted in an increase of 9.3% in the same month. However, one member argued that wage growth shows some moderation. Another member added that the distribution of wage revisions in recent years has been affected by past inflation figures and by increases in the minimum wage. He/she pointed out that these benchmarks are expected to be lower in Most members agreed that Mexico's inflation outlook has been improving, after the significant global shocks of previous years. However, they forewarned that it still faces challenges. One member stated that the current level of core inflation is evidence of this improvement. Some members considered that the gradual reversal of the shocks associated with the pandemic and geopolitical conflicts as well as a timely and consistent restrictive monetary policy by the central bank have contributed to the significant disinflation progress. One member pointed out that this process has been heterogeneous across inflation components and non-linear. Most members underlined that headline inflation decreased from 5.57% in July to 4.66% in the first fortnight of September. One member highlighted that headline inflation started to decrease after having increased for five consecutive months. Another member warned that, although headline inflation is beginning to resume a downward trend, it is still above the levels observed in October 2023. The majority pointed out that this decline was mainly due to the partial reversal of the effects of the supply shocks that have affected non-core inflation. They commented that this reversal was already anticipated. One member noted that non- core inflation’s contribution was greater than that of core inflation. Another member detailed that headline inflation was affected by the prices of various fruits and vegetables, along with increases in some energy prices mainly due to higher international references. Some members emphasized that given the nature of the shocks and the fact that their effects concentrated in few CPI items, these did not lead to a generalized increase in prices. One member added that various trend indicators, such as inflation’s trimmed mean, showed low sensitivity to these shocks. He/she noted that, instead, what took place was an adjustment of relative prices. Another member pointed out that there are no signs of a pass-through of the aforementioned shocks, which are temporary, to the core component. All members noted that core inflation continued trending downwards, registering 3.95% in the first fortnight of September. Some members emphasized that this component has clearly trended downwards for almost two years. One member underlined that it is currently at levels unseen since the first quarter of 2021. Some members highlighted that since November 2022, when it peaked during the current inflationary episode, this indicator has decreased 456 basis points. Some members noted that the rate of decline of this component has slowed down recently. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that the average of the last 6 months of the seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variation, which stands at 3.4%, better reflects its most recent favorable behavior. Some members noted that annual merchandise inflation stood at 2.94% in the first fortnight of September. One member emphasized that such level had not been reached since early 2016. Most members mentioned that in its last reading food merchandise inflation was 3.95%, while that of non-food merchandise was 1.69%, in both cases averages. One member stated that these values have not yet reached their respective historical minimum values. He/she specified that the 3-month averages of the seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations of these subcomponents are at detailed that the last time food merchandise inflation was below 4.0% was eight years ago. One member recalled that, in this episode, both components reached their highest levels since the inflation targeting regime was adopted in Mexico. Some members considered that merchandise inflation will hardly continue declining. All members stated that services inflation continues showing persistence. Some members mentioned that between July and the first fortnight of September it went from 5.22 to 5.15%. One member noted that it remained at levels close to those registered over the past 14 months. Another member highlighted that it has been above 5% since the second fortnight of July 2022, exhibiting a lateral behavior since then. One member stated that the components of services inflation have exhibited a differentiated behavior among them. He/she pointed out that the improvement in the category of other services has been the most notable compared to the levels reached at the beginning of 2023. He/she argued that its recent increase partly responds to the rise in tourism services prices, which are volatile. He/she highlighted that in the first fortnight of September, the variation at the margin of services excluding education, housing and tourism was -0.07%, laying below its historical average and being the lowest variation for an equivalent fortnight since 2020. He/she added that while services inflation remains high, it is necessary to acknowledge the signs of improvement. Another member stated that the dynamics of services prices have been highly correlated with the evolution of wages. He/she noted that this has resulted in relevant costs in several key subcomponents, such as housing and other services. He/she indicated that these cost-related pressures have passed on to final prices, given the resilience that the economy had exhibited. However, he/she argued that this behavior is unlikely to continue indefinitely, given that, in view of the decline in inflation and minimum wage increases lower than those observed in previous years, wage revisions are expected to moderate. members indicated that it declined significantly from 10.36% in July to 6.73% in the first fortnight of September. One member highlighted that this component interrupted the upward trend it had been displaying since last February. Another member added that said reversal was greater than expected. The majority stated that this was due to the decline in inflation both of agricultural and livestock products and of energy. Some members pointed out that annual inflation of agricultural and livestock products decreased from 13.72 to 6.50%, while inflation of energy products shifted from 9.17 to that the non-core component is highly volatile. One member added that at times it exhibits a significant downward trend, improving headline inflation’s performance, but at other times it exerts an upward influence. expectations drawn from surveys remained relatively stable. Some members mentioned that these remain above Banco de México's forecasts. One member stated that, overall, they continue without showing a downward trend. He/she indicated that the median of headline inflation expectations for year-end 2024 increased, while those for the end of 2025 and the next 12 months declined. Another member pointed out that short-term expectations have evolved in line with their historical averages and noted that their dynamics are unlike those observed during 2021 and surveys, core inflation is projected to lie at levels similar to the current ones by the end of 2025. Some members commented that medium- and long-term expectations remain at levels above target. One member noted that expectations for the next 4 years increased, while those for the next 5 to 8 years remained unchanged. Another member attributed the resistance to decline of headline inflation expectations to the anticipated behavior of the noncore component, since medium- and long-term expectations of core inflation have registered downward adjustments. Regarding inflation expectations drawn from market instruments, some members reported that these declined marginally. One member added that they have exhibited inertia. Another member stated that they also remain above Banco de México's forecasts. One member noted that there was a decrease in the risk premium and in the breakeven inflation rate derived from market instruments. Most members mentioned that forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised slightly downwards for some quarters in the short term. Some members commented that, in the case of headline inflation, it was due to a faster-thananticipated reversal in supply shocks. Most members stated that headline inflation is expected to resume its downward trend, and core inflation, to continue trending downwards. Some members pointed out that headline inflation is still expected to converge to the target in the fourth quarter of 2025. One member added that core inflation is also foreseen to register 3% in that same quarter. The majority considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member argued that such bias persists even when accounting for the observed and expected weakness of economic activity. Another member highlighted that, after the global shocks, the inflation environment continues improving. One member specified that, based on risk distribution estimates derived from economic conditions for core inflation, the latter has improved throughout the year. Most members mentioned the persistence of core inflation as an upward risk. Some members specifically highlighted the services component. One member added the risk that merchandise inflation may rebound, reverting to its historical average, and that services inflation fails to decrease due to domestic pressures. Some member underlined the risk of a greater exchange rate depreciation. One member mentioned the possibility of climate-related impacts on the prices of agricultural and livestock products. Some members pointed to the risk of greater cost-related pressures. One member noted the possibility of additional increases to the minimum wage in early 2025. However, another member commented that as the economic slowdown deepens, the pass-through of costs is expected to face limits. Regarding risks to the downside, some members highlighted the possibility of a lower-than-anticipated economic activity in Mexico or in the United States. One member warned that, in his/her opinion, said risk has become more relevant. Another member added that the impact of the exchange rate depreciation on inflation could be of lesser magnitude than anticipated, as well as the risk of a lower passthrough of certain cost-related pressures. Most members stated that since the last monetary policy decision financial markets in Mexico continued registering volatility. Some members mentioned that, nevertheless, said volatility has moderated recently. One member added that trading conditions improved, which was most clearly observed in the fixed-income market. Most members underlined that the Mexican peso has traded within a broad range. They indicated that the peso has experienced depreciation episodes, and that such depreciation partially reversed. Some members pointed out that the exchange rate volatility derived from idiosyncratic factors, as well as from the unwinding of carry trade positions against the yen and the evolution of the electoral process in the United States. One member considered that the effects of these factors were partially attenuated by the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decision. Some members argued that, in an uncertain environment, further bouts of financial volatility cannot be ruled out. One member emphasized that said volatility could be observed in the coming months, particularly in November, given the electoral process in the United States. Another member underlined that the bias towards depreciation in medium-term expectations prevails and could materialize due to both idiosyncratic and global factors. However, one member added that Mexico has robust fundamentals and that the riskadjusted interest rate spread remains among the most attractive. Another member considered that the central bank should remain vigilant of the orderly behavior of financial markets. Most members noted that the government bond yield curve decreased, especially at the short end. One member commented that a similar behavior was observed in the interest rate derivatives market. He/she indicated that the implied trajectory for the monetary policy rate in TIIE swaps anticipates a level of 10.46% for the monetary policy decision of September, 10.14% for the policy decision of November, and 9.81% for the end of the year. He/she underlined that a 50-basis point decrease is not ruled out in the November or December decisions. He/she added that the consensus of surveyed analysts anticipates an adjustment of 25 basis points at this monetary policy meeting and a 10.00% policy rate by the end of 2024. He/she noted that risk premia have decreased in both default protection insurance and the spread between yield rates on bonds issued by the Mexican government and those issued by the US Treasury. He/she highlighted that the stock market was not immune to the uncertainty and exhibited high levels of variability. Another member stated that said market performed slightly unfavorably, due to the expectation of lower local growth and increased uncertainty. He/she stated that financial conditions tightened further reaching their highest level since October 2022, as a result of the behavior of variables related to the foreign exchange market and country risk. He/she noted that the economic policy uncertainty index increased significantly in August and September, due to both domestic and external factors. One member mentioned that, regarding capital flows, there were inflows to fixed-income markets for all maturities. With respect to financing in the economy, another member stated that in July financing to the nonfinancial private sector continued increasing, albeit at a slower pace than in recent months. He/she specified that domestic financing to this sector grew at an annual rate of 3.3%, exhibiting a lower dynamism compared to 2023. He/she added that, in the same month, commercial bank credit to businesses, consumption and housing also grew at more moderate rates. Regarding credit risk, he/she noted that delinquency levels remain low and stable. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will continue dissipating over the next quarters. It took into account core inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated that, although the outlook for inflation still calls for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight Looking ahead, the Board expects that the reference rate adjustments. It will consider that of the weakness in economic activity. It will take into account the incidence of the restrictive monetary policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member considered that macroeconomic conditions and the prospective assessment of the inflationary environment suggest that the reference rate can be adjusted downwards once again by 25 basis points to a level of 10.50%. He/she argued that the level of monetary restriction would thus moderate in line with the inflation outlook. He/she highlighted that key factors in this decision are that, first, the supply shocks that exerted upward pressure on noncore inflation are dissipating and are expected to continue to do so. In this regard, he/she reiterated that headline inflation has resumed a downward trajectory, which is expected to persist over the following quarters. Second, he/she noted the substantial progress in reducing core inflation, which better reflects the medium-term trend of inflation, as well as the expectation that this component will continue declining. Third, he/she stressed that the economic environment is conducive to a sustained moderation in inflationary pressures. He/she emphasized that the decline in inflation abroad, especially in the United States, along with the weakening of economic activity in Mexico will continue to support this trend. He/she considered that it should be communicated that, going forward, the inflationary environment is expected to allow for further reductions in the reference rate. He/she emphasized that, given the levels that core inflation has already attained, the magnitude of adjustments could be evaluated. He/she indicated that, in this process, the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates will be considered. He/she also argued that it must be acknowledged that inflationary pressures persist, as the effects of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine have not fully dissipated. In that regard, he/she highlighted that a restrictive monetary policy stance continues being necessary, like the one that would prevail even after the adjustment to the reference rate proposed in this monetary policy meeting and any potential adjustments in future meetings has been made. He/she added that it is essential to reinforce the message that Banco de México will remain committed to attaining its primary mandate of ensuring the stability of the peso’s purchasing power, as this is the most effective way to contribute to the country’s development. Another member explained that, since the last monetary policy meeting, headline inflation and its components have performed slightly better than anticipated, opening the possibility of easing monetary restriction. He/she expressed that the press release should emphasize that the proposed indicates progress in the right direction; however, this does not imply that the fight against inflation is over, given that significant risks prevail. He/she noted the importance of conveying that future decisions will be based on incoming information. He/she warned that the coming months will likely bring significant uncertainty due to both external and domestic factors. Therefore, he/she stated that the monetary policy stance must remain sufficiently restrictive to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process. He/she highlighted the role played in this process by the exchange rate as a monetary policy transmission mechanism. He/she recalled that, under the floating exchange rate regime, the pass-through effect can be limited if market confidence in the central bank’s commitment to its primary mandate remains strong. He/she mentioned that, although weak economic activity is expected to contribute to the disinflationary process, this possibility has not yet materialized. He/she added that services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, keeps showing a resistance to decline and remains at high levels. He/she estimated that said persistence could continue given the resilience of private consumption. He/she noted that non-core inflation is still above the level needed for headline inflation to converge to the target. He/she added that further shocks that could divert it from its expected downward trajectory cannot be ruled out. He/she considered that unless a clear downward trend in this component consolidates, easing the monetary restriction should be approached with great vigilance. In short, he/she argued that significant risks and a high level of uncertainty persist, which could jeopardize disinflation, and therefore future decisions should be made with caution. He/she estimated that adopting a risk management approach will enhance the credibility of this central bank in its commitment with its primary mandate and will increase the likelihood of achieving the convergence of inflation to the target. One member noted that the inflationary outlook is consistent with ongoing adjustments to the reference rate. He/she also mentioned that a decrease in the tightness conditions of the economy can be observed, while the distributions of medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain stable and anchored. He/she stated that monetary restriction is well-positioned to manage different risks. Also, he/she emphasized that, despite volatility in financial markets in recent months, several metrics indicate an improvement in trading conditions in both debt and foreign exchange markets. He/she argued that, consequently, no deterioration in the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanisms is perceived, including the multilateral real exchange rate, which he/she noted is at levels comparable to those observed in 2015. As a result, he/she considered that medium-term determinants of inflation suggest that the process of convergence will continue. Nevertheless, he/she commented that, when adjusting the reference rate, the following factors must be taken into account: i) that the monetary policy stance is sufficiently restrictive to ensure the convergence of inflation to its target within the forecast horizon; ii) that it is as efficient as possible to facilitate orderly adjustments in price dynamics, financial markets, and the economy overall; and iii) that it allows the continued management of risks to inflation on both sides of the balance of risks. He/she considered that throughout the monetary restriction cycle, the response of the reference rate was more than proportional to the increase in inflation in terms of both magnitude and duration. He/she added that the downward recalibration, which began in March this year, has been both prudent and gradual, aiming to maintain a monetary policy stance that mitigates upward risks to inflation. He/she pointed out that this has led to a slower monetary cycle compared to previous episodes. He/she warned that, despite the improved inflationary outlook, new bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out, which will continue to require caution from the central bank. He/she stated that, if the distribution of risks to inflation continues improving, it may be advisable to adopt a path of continuous datadependent adjustments, in such a way that the policy stance is consistent with the constitutional mandate at all times. headline inflation has resumed a downward trend, more certainty is still needed that progress in the inflation outlook is significant before lowering the reference rate. He/she warned that long-term inflation expectations have been anchored for some time at levels above target because in the past the central bank did not maintain a restrictive policy stance for the necessary duration to consolidate inflation at 3%. He/she argued that, in contrast, the previous reference rate cuts were initiated prematurely, and expansionary and accommodative policy stances were maintained when inflation was above target. In this regard, he/she noted that between 2009 and 2016 the ex-ante real interest rate averaged at levels close to zero. He/she deemed that the above contributed to generating the perception that the central bank was content with inflation being slightly below 4%. He/she added that, in the current juncture, core inflation, which reflects the mediumterm trend of inflation, is slightly below 4%. He/she deemed that, as a result, markets currently anticipate that the existing level of inflation will be tolerated until the end of 2025, leading to a continuous reduction in the reference rate. He/she pointed out that this new opportunity must now be leveraged to avoid sending the message of complacency as in the past, by prematurely and automatically confirming a ratecutting cycle. He/she argued that, in contrast, the degree of certainty about an adjustment of the monetary policy stance should be assessed in each decision. He/she added that emphasis should be placed on core inflation, which is sensitive to monetary policy actions, rather than on non-core inflation, which is highly volatile. He/she warned that it is necessary to break the persistence of services inflation in order to achieve a further decline in core inflation. He/she commented that the larger-thanexpected cut to the federal funds rate should be considered within the context of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. He/she stated that since Banco de México has a sole inflation mandate, the evolution of economic activity should not be overestimated in policy decisions, while more certainty is required regarding the direction and magnitude of the new phase in the economic cycle in order to assess if the reaction function needs to be recalibrated. He/she also reiterated that lack of growth in Mexico is not attributed to the monetary policy stance, but rather to other domestic and external factors. He/she stressed the importance of attaining the 3% inflation target despite the challenging outlook for the rest of 2024 and for 2025. He/she indicated that having greater confidence that core inflation continues trending downwards and that the inflationary outlook continues improving will allow assessing the level of monetary restriction needed to reach the inflation target, without undermining the credibility of the commitment to the price stability mandate. One member recalled that in March the Governing Board decided to begin lowering the reference rate, given the significant progress in the inflation outlook. He/she highlighted the decrease in both headline and core inflation from their peaks and a less adverse balance of risks compared to previous years. He/she commented that the disinflationary process has continued albeit with both upward and downward risks, and therefore has considered it congruent to adopt a gradual approach in conducting monetary policy. He/she added that starting in the June decision, risks to the downside began taking on more significance, and thus since then there were arguments supporting the continuation of adjustments to the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that the above arguments still hold and new ones have emerged, further widening the room for adjustment. He/she highlighted: i) that core inflation continues trending downwards and that its trajectory has not been affected by shocks to the non-core component, which have started to reverse faster than anticipated; ii) that the evolution of economic activity continues suggesting an increased slack, as the output gap has closed and is expected to turn negative towards the end of 2024; iii) that in recent weeks volatility in the Mexican peso’s exchange rate has moderated, and although additional episodes of depreciation cannot be ruled out, the risk of a greater pass-through to prices would be offset by other factors, such as the economy's cyclical conditions; and iv) that the magnitude of the Federal Reserve's reference rate cut, previously observed only during periods of marked economic weakness, creates room for adjustment in terms of the relative policy stance, and the signs of a slowdown in the US economic activity and labor market have further implications for demand and for the anticipated slack conditions in Mexico. He/she estimated that the inflationary context allows to anticipate the continuity in adjustments to the level of restriction. He/she added that, in the absence of further shocks, discussions could begin regarding the level of reference rate cuts. He/she emphasized that, given the high degree of restriction achieved, even with additional adjustments, the reference rate will remain restrictive, which will be necessary throughout the forecast horizon. He/she considered that continuing to adjust the level of monetary restriction is not only timely but also necessary to conduct monetary policy efficiently, while addressing the prevailing risks and considering the progress in the inflation outlook, ensuring that a policy stance aligned with convergence is maintained. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will continue dissipating over the next quarters. It took into account core inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated that, although the outlook for inflation still calls for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate to 10.50%. Looking ahead, the Board expects that the inflationary environment will allow further reference rate adjustments. It will consider that global shocks will continue fading and the effects of the weakness in economic activity. It will take into account the incidence of the monetary policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Omar Mejía. Jonathan Heath voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at We need to be patient in order for the current monetary policy stance to have the desired effect on the persistence in services inflation. Furthermore, initiating a cycle of monetary easing prematurely could send a signal of complacency and that we are content with the high levels of headline inflation, since adjustments to the monetary policy stance at the margin are a more relevant signal than the level of the monetary restriction per se. For the moment, we need a bit more time to confirm the trend the current positive signals seem to suggest as well as to assess if we need to adjust our reaction function given the global cyclical and monetary conditions we will face in the coming months.