Most members stated that world economic activity continued expanding during the third quarter of 2023. Some members highlighted that it surprised to the upside. One member noted that growth was higher than that registered in the second quarter. Some members underlined that economic dynamism continued despite the tightening of global financial conditions. However, one member indicated that economic activity in the euro area remained weak, while in China, industrial production stagnated and fixed investment continued declining. information suggests that the pace of expansion of world economic activity would have slowed down during the fourth quarter of 2023. One member added that a deceleration is foreseen for economic moderation in the euro area for that year. Furthermore, one member mentioned that in China economic growth is expected to remain below the average observed from 2013 to 2019 and that, therefore, authorities have announced new stimulus measures, while greater heterogeneity prevails in the rest of the emerging economies. Meanwhile, another member argued that in the United States manufacturing continues showing a lack of dynamism. He/she added that some important companies revised their sales projections for 2024 downwards in their corporate reports, given the recent trend in consumption. Some members noted that, despite the expected slowdown, growth prospects for the United States have been continuously revised upwards. Regarding the balance of risks to global economic activity, one member considered that it remains biased to the downside. He/she noted that some factors have become more relevant, such as the uncertainty about the impact of tighter credit conditions, the reduction in households' excess savings in the United States, and the effect of higher interest rates on businesses and households when they face the need to refinance. He/she also noted the problems in China’s real estate sector. Most members highlighted that labor markets in several countries remain tight. One member considered that the US labor market continues being strong despite the tightening of monetary conditions. However, most members mentioned that these markets have shown signs of some easing. One member described that, in the United States, during the second half of 2023, the non-farm payroll registered monthly increases close to their prepandemic average, vacancies continued trending downwards, and labor force participation rates moderated somewhat. Another member stated that job creation figures in that country had been surprising to the downside, although the most recent non-farm payroll report did so to the upside. disinflationary process continued advancing at the global level. They mentioned that headline inflation kept declining in most economies, although it remains above their central banks' targets. One member highlighted that in the United States inflation even surprised to the downside in more recent readings. Another member argued that the decline in global inflation has been due to the fading of supply shocks associated with the pandemic, to the lower pressures on energy, food and goods prices, as well as to central banks’ restrictive policy stances. decreased globally, although more gradually than headline inflation. They attributed the latter to the persistence of services inflation. One member stated that, looking ahead, uncertainty prevails about the pace of convergence of inflation to the central banks’ targets, which is expected to occur between the end of 2024 and the first half of 2025. Another member pointed out that there were slight reductions in inflation expectations implicit in shortand long-term financial instruments, as well as in consumer expectations, although they remain above the monetary authorities' targets. As for commodity prices, some members stated that, in general, they decreased significantly in 2023. However, they highlighted the increase in the international prices of sugar. The majority pointed out that, since the last monetary policy decision, continued trending downwards. However, one member warned that, given the global demand and production cuts, this trend could reverse. Most members mentioned that the central banks of the major advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged. They added that these are expected to have reached the end of their upward cycles or be nearing them. One member noted that analysts and market participants no longer anticipate additional increases in the Federal Reserve's federal funds rate. Another member stated that the European Central Bank and the Bank of England are expected to keep their interest rates unchanged in their December decisions and to begin their cutting cycles in June the first policy rate cut was brought forward in these economies. Some members pointed out that lower reference rates are now expected for 2024 and 2025, as compared to those previously anticipated. One member highlighted that fewer concerns about the geopolitical conflict in the Middle East, the downward trend in inflation in most economies, the moderation in the labor market, and lower fiscal pressures in the United States, have contributed to the perception in financial markets that the message of high interest rates lasting longer in the major advanced economies is less likely to hold. Some members indicated that, looking forward, the central banks will maintain a data-dependent approach. Most members mentioned that in its last meeting the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged. They indicated that such institution reiterated that it will proceed dependent approach. One member highlighted that, both in the monetary policy statement and at the press conference, it was stated that the monetary restriction will remain at its current level for some time. He/she added that the Fed's most recent forecasts show that there could be between two and four 25 basis-point cuts next year. Another member pointed out that these forecasts consider that at the end of 2024 and 2025 the federal funds rate will be previous projections. He/she added that inflation forecasts were also revised slightly downwards. He/she highlighted that these modifications take place in a context in which Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) members have placed greater emphasis on the effects of high interest rates on households and firms, which have started to postpone their investment plans due to high financing costs. Most members stated that markets expect the first cut in the second quarter of 2024. Some members indicated that expectations implied by market instruments for the end of 2024 point to a greater decline in the federal funds rate than the Federal Reserve's projections. Most members agreed that several factors contributed to the recent developments in international financial markets. In particular, they mentioned the expectation that the central banks of the major economies will begin lowering the anticipated. In this regard, one member considered that this was influenced by the moderation in the dynamics of the US labor market. Another member added the slowdown in the rate of expansion of economies worldwide. Most members stated that this was also due to decreased concerns about the possibility of an escalation of geopolitical conflicts, and less uncertainty regarding the US fiscal environment. Most members argued that markets have recently exhibited greater risk appetite. In this context, they highlighted that interest rates on government securities declined globally, the US dollar registered a generalized depreciation, and valuations of major stock markets rebounded. One member considered that all of the above was reflected in an easing of global financial conditions. Another member underlined the positive performance of financial markets in Latin America and Emerging Europe. However, he/she pointed out that capital outflows were registered in both fixed-income and equity markets. In this regard, the majority highlighted the volatile behavior of international financial markets. One member noted that this has been due to the fact that, in an uncertain environment, they have been highly sensitive to economic data. Another member stated that, looking ahead, bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out given the data-dependent approach of some central banks. All members mentioned that Mexico's economic activity has continued showing dynamism. Most members stated that GDP growth in the third quarter of 2023 was driven by the three sectors of economic activity. One member highlighted that it registered a seasonally adjusted quarterly growth rate of 1.1%, expanding for eight consecutive quarters. Another member added that this implied an acceleration with respect to the first two quarters. One member highlighted that growth was higher than anticipated. Another member noted that, during the year, the observed pace of expansion of economic activity has surpassed on several occasions the forecasts by different organizations. He/she mentioned that Banco de México's growth forecasts for 2023 have been continuously revised upwards. He/she stated that, looking ahead, more recent projections suggest that economic growth will remain robust in 2024, thus consolidating one of the longest expansions in recent years. One member pointed out that it cannot be ruled out that, looking forward, Mexico's economy turns out to be more resilient than expected. In this regard, another member noted that it is becoming increasingly feasible that the nearshoring process will continue. He/she added that, furthermore, the slowdown in the US economy could be less profound than expected. However, one member stated that such slowdown could be greater than anticipated. Therefore, he/she considered that risks to economic activity are perceived as balanced. On the production side, most members noted upwards, driven by the dynamism of the construction sector. Some members mentioned that manufacturing continues showing sluggishness. One member pointed out that this mirrors the weakness exhibited by the same sector in the United States. Another member indicated that manufacturing, excluding transportation equipment, has contributed only to a small extent to growth due to weakness in most of its subsectors. Most members highlighted the dynamism of services and their contribution to the expansion of economic activity. However, some members considered that its subsectors performed heterogeneously. As for domestic demand, all members pointed dynamism. Most members mentioned the high levels of non-residential construction, although one member added that it declined marginally in September. Some members explained that these high levels are largely attributed to the performance of public investment. One member stated that private investment has also contributed to the above, given the positive expectations on nearshoring. Most machinery and equipment component has also contributed to the strength of investment. As for private consumption, all members argued that it continued expanding. Some members underlined its sound performance. Some members pointed out the positive behavior of consumption of imported goods. One member noted the performance of consumption of services. Some members emphasized that the strong dynamism of the labor market has supported consumption. As for external demand, most members pointed out that it has been resilient, mainly supported by the rebound in automotive exports. However, some members highlighted that non-automotive exports remain weak. Most members indicated that the point estimate for the output gap widened in positive territory. One member stated that it remains on an upward trend. Another member pointed out that the economy is projected to continue growing above its potential rate. However, one member underlined that the output gap estimate is not statistically different from zero. He/she added that it is expected to approach zero during the forecast horizon. All members considered that the labor market remains strong. Most members highlighted that unemployment rates remain at historically low levels. Some members stated that employment registers high levels of growth. One member mentioned that the unemployment gap is in negative territory. Another member expressed that the labor participation rate is at levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. Nevertheless, some members stated that certain timely indicators drawn from surveys conducted by Banco de México suggest a possible moderation in the labor market's dynamism. In this regard, they described that these indicators point to shorter time-to-hire periods, less difficulty in hiring workers, and a decline in the number of vacancies. One member added that the growth of formal employment has slowed. Most members highlighted that wages continue underlined that the average base salary of IMSSinsured workers has increased by more than 6% in real terms in the last three months. One member added that the real wage bill of this group of workers is growing at a rate close to 10%. Another member stated that the annual variation of workers’ average nominal wage calculated by the National Occupation and Employment Survey (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish) shows a clear upward trend for both formal and informal wages. He/she added that the minimum wage will increase by 20% in 2024. One member indicated that wage dynamism has remained high throughout the year and that the increased fraction bound by the minimum wage has led to an increasingly large pass-through on to the average wage. He/she added that, although these increases are not yet proportional, and for a long period there was enough space to make these adjustments, it will be important to monitor that wage increases are consistent with price stability. Most members considered that inflation has decreased significantly throughout the year. Some members pointed out that progress in disinflation is illustrated by comparing current inflation levels with those registered in 2022 and early 2023. One member indicated that annual headline inflation has declined by approximately 250 basis points since March 2023 and currently stands significantly below its peak of 8.70% observed in August 2022. Another member stated that in September 2022 headline inflation was 570 basis points above target, whereas now it is 132 basis points above it. He/she asserted that during this episode headline inflation has declined faster than in other periods. He/she noted that in 2009 and 2017 headline inflation decreased at an average monthly rate of 25 and 16 basis points, respectively, while in the current episode it has done so at a rate of 35 basis points per month. Some members underlined the improvement in various metrics such as the decrease in the proportion of CPI items with high variations, the increase in the proportion of those with variations under 3%, and the decline in the trimmed mean indicator. One member added the trend of seasonally adjusted monthly inflation and the evolution of the inflation rates observed across different Mexican cities. Another member added the reduction in the frequency of price revisions. Most members estimated that inflation pressures have Most members pointed out that after reaching 4.26% in October, headline inflation increased slightly to 4.32% in November. They mentioned that this upward adjustment was due to the rise continued decreasing. One member asserted that in recent months core inflation has had a larger contribution to the disinflation process. Some members recalled that disinflation processes are complex. One member stated that the recent rebound does not imply that the disinflationary process has come to a halt. He/she argued that the non-linear behavior of the disinflationary process is a result of a heterogeneous timing in the decline of the different components of inflation. Most members pointed out that core inflation registered 5.30% in November. One member underlined that this reading is the lowest since October 2021. Another member noted that annual core inflation has declined in every month of the year. Some members highlighted that this component has dropped 321 basis points since November of last year when it reached 8.51%. Some members indicated that most of this decrease occurred since March 2023, when the reference rate reached its current level. One member pointed out that core inflation has fallen by 299 basis points since that month. He/she added that it has fallen at a rate of 27 basis points per month during this inflationary episode, compared to 16 and 15 basis points during the episodes of 2009 and 2017, respectively. Another member stated that the annualized seasonally adjusted monthly inflation of the core component, which had been declining, registered an inflection point during the second half of 2023. Regarding the components of core inflation, most members noted that merchandise inflation continued decreasing, registering 5.33% in November. One member highlighted that the favorable performance of this indicator has been due to both the appreciation of the exchange rate, which has eased pressures on the prices of imported goods, and the moderation of international prices of several intermediate goods. However, some members pointed out some deterioration in the dynamics of food merchandise prices at the margin, highlighting the increase in sugar prices. One member indicated that the seasonally adjusted monthly variations of food merchandise prices have been increasing so far in the fourth quarter, after having fallen to levels below 4%. Another member added that annual food merchandise inflation remained at high levels, registering 6.78% in November. Most members agreed that annual services inflation still does not show a clear downward inflection point and indicated that in November it registered 5.28%. One member noted that trend indicators of this component, which accounts for one third of headline inflation, continue showing no signs of improvement. He/she stated that monthly variations of services prices have remained at high levels. Some members asserted that the higher relative demand for services after the lockdown appears to be enabling this sector’s businesses to pass onto consumers the accumulated costs as a result of the shocks associated with the pandemic and the military conflict. One member stated that the above resulted in an important distortion of the relative price of merchandise relative to services, which lies well above its long-term equilibrium, and therefore it is natural to continue observing adjustments in relative prices, which does not necessarily imply the emergence of new sources of inflationary pressures. Most members pointed out that non-core inflation registered 1.43% in November. One member expressed that this component declined during the first seven months of the year, although it has exhibited an upward trend in the last four months. Some members considered that this component has started to revert towards its historical average. However, one member noted that the November reading still remains at low levels. Regarding inflation expectations, one member considered that their distribution continues showing improvement for all terms. He/she stated that expectations for the next 12 months kept decreasing and accumulated a 107 basis-point drop since headline inflation reached its peak. However, inflation expectations remain at levels above target. He/she pointed out that they are above their historical average registered prior to 2020. He/she added that expectations drawn from surveys and those implicit in market instruments remain above the central bank’s projections. He/she warned that they are not decreasing at a pace required to reach the target by the second quarter of 2025. One member noted that, even though the monetary policy stance has allowed analysts' expectations to remain anchored, their distribution still lies to the right of that prevailing prior to the pandemic. He/she indicated that expectations drawn from market instruments continue exhibiting few signs of improvement. He/she also pointed out that business sector expectations are still at high levels. He/she underlined that breakeven inflation for different terms remains elevated. Most members highlighted that the central bank’s forecasts for headline inflation were revised upwards for some quarters. Some members mentioned that forecasts for core inflation were also adjusted upwards. Most members indicated that current forecasts consider a more gradual decline in food merchandise inflation and in services inflation. One member stated that, in the revised forecasts for headline inflation, the higher pressures on services and food merchandise prices are partially offset by the lower variations foreseen in energy prices. The majority mentioned that the new forecasts do not imply a change in the inflation trend and that the outlook of a continuing disinflationary process is maintained. They added that inflation is still expected to converge to the target in the second quarter of 2025. One member asserted that this forecast considers the monetary policy actions implemented and the fading of shocks’ effects. Another member estimated that the easing of the shocks will be reflected in a more noticeable decline in services inflation. One member expressed that the disinflationary process is undergoing a phase in which progress will be slower. He/she added that non-core inflation is expected to continue trending upwards during the first six months of 2024. Most members stated that the inflation outlook continues posing challenges. They considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member warned that it cannot be ruled out that inflation may take longer to converge to the target. However, some members pointed out that, despite the risks, the current inflationary outlook has improved as compared to that prevailing in late 2022 and in early 2023. Among upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the persistence of core inflation at high levels. Some members warned about the possibility of a greater-than-expected resilience of the Mexican economy. One member mentioned that the output and unemployment gaps, along with other slack indicators, suggest the presence of demandrelated inflationary pressures. He/she considered that said pressures are reflected in the high levels of services inflation. In addition, he/she underlined the risk of annual merchandise inflation halting its downward adjustment. He/she added that the exhaustion of the comparison base effect poses a challenge for the process of convergence to the inflation target. He/she expressed that core inflation’s downward trend may be interrupted in December and January. Another member warned that a prolonged deviation of inflation from its historical average could affect the formation of prices, wages, and expectations, making price dynamics more vulnerable to emerging shocks, even if they were moderate. He/she indicated that this would represent a challenge to the pace of convergence, especially if such shocks altered the dynamics of the non-core component beyond what was anticipated. He/she pointed out that the foreseen trajectory will depend on the favorable evolution of the non-core component, the duration of the shocks’ effects, and on the absence of new pressures on inflation. Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. Some members noted that such pressures could arise from the evolution of the exchange rate. One member added that they could result from changes in the international references of various inputs. Another member mentioned that there is high uncertainty regarding commodity prices. Some members indicated the possibility of pressures arising from wage adjustments. One member added to the above some idiosyncratic factors, such as those associated with insecurity, water scarcity, and climate-related phenomena. Some members identified the procyclical fiscal policy as a risk to the inflation outlook. In this regard, some members expressed the possibility that the fiscal stance may entail a higher aggregate demand. One member mentioned that, although the outlook for sovereign credit ratings remains stable, the trajectory of the public debt-to-GDP ratio, which is relevant for credit ratings, is sensitive to macroeconomic assumptions. He/she argued that a lower-thanexpected growth or an exchange rate depreciation could negatively impact the public debt-to-GDP ratio and, consequently, credit ratings. He/she added that the greater dependency on federal government support without a plan to ensure Pemex’s feasibility poses a risk to the sustainability of public finances. He/she underlined that the electoral process in the United States could lead to episodes of foreign exchange rate volatility similar to those observed between 2016 and 2017. He/she added that, in addition to the above, this time said event will occur simultaneously with Mexico’s general elections. Regarding risks to the downside, another member mentioned the possibility of a greater-than anticipated slowdown of the world economy, particularly in the United States. The majority indicated that, in line with the developments in international financial markets, domestic financial assets performed favorably. They mentioned that trading conditions in the foreign exchange market improved. They added that the Mexican peso appreciated slightly. One member highlighted that in recent weeks it traded again at levels below 17.50 pesos per dollar. Some members underlined that so far in 2023 the Mexican peso has accumulated an appreciation of almost stands out among emerging economies’ currencies. macroeconomic fundamentals are among the factors that have contributed to support the national currency. One member added to the above the higher risk appetite among investors and the solid monetary policy stance. Another member underlined the wide volatility-adjusted spread between external and domestic interest rates, the optimism regarding nearshoring, and the generalized depreciation of the US dollar. One member mentioned that the Mexican peso is highly sensitive to external factors that could increase its volatility. However, he/she stated that throughout the year the national currency has exhibited flexibility and resilience. Most members noted that, since the last monetary policy decision, government bond yields decreased, mainly those for medium and long terms. One member highlighted inflows from non-resident investors to various government securities. Another member underlined that sovereign risk premia decreased, behaving similarly to other emerging economies. One member noted that, during the same period, the stock market performed favorably, exhibiting gains of over 6%. Another member mentioned that it has accumulated a 12% increase in 2023. He/she added that TIIE swaps decreased in all of their nodes. Some members argued that, in this regard, both markets and analysts incorporate a cut in the reference rate in the first quarter of 2024, as well as a 200 basispoint reduction for the entire 2024. Regarding total financing in the economy, one member noted that it continued growing in real terms. Some members highlighted the expansion of the domestic component. One member underlined the growth of credit to firms and consumer credit. He/she pointed out that, in contrast, external financing weakened. He/she stated that, based on October figures, the financial conditions index for Mexico has slightly tightened and remains in restrictive territory. He/she added that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels, although those corresponding to consumption and corporate loans have recently registered a marginal increase. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude determinants, along with the evolution of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference rate must be maintained at its current level for some time. The latter, taking into account that although the outlook remains complicated, progress on disinflation has been made. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member argued that, in light of ongoing pressures on the core component, especially on food merchandise and services’ prices, and considering the revised inflation forecasts, the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25% in this monetary policy meeting. He/she deemed it prudent to emphasize in the monetary policy statement the need for the reference rate to remain at its current level for some time in order for inflation to converge to the target. He/she underlined that, while the nominal rate has remained unchanged since March expectations, the ex-ante real interest rate continued increasing as required by the complex inflationary environment, and its whole distribution lies clearly in restrictive territory. He/she added that, during the same period, the disinflation process continued making significant progress. He/she pointed out that since march headline inflation declined by about 250 basis points, and core inflation by 280 points. He/she specified that the latest inflation readings illustrate considerable progress in disinflation, and that the current situation is less adverse than that faced in he/she acknowledged that the inflationary environment continues posing challenges. He/she pointed out that headline inflation is still above the foreseen trajectory remains biased to the upside. In this context, he/she mentioned that, during the meetings of the first quarter of 2024, caution must be exercised when evaluating the possibility of lowering the reference rate. He/she indicated that a cautious approach implies that, when macroeconomic conditions allow, downward adjustments should be gradual, and decisions be such that the monetary policy stance remains solid to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target. He/she stated that the prevailing level of monetary restriction will be weighed against further decreases in inflation, its levels at that time, its outlook, as well as that of its determinants. He/she explained that all of this will imply monitoring a wide range of variables, and that decisions made at the time will be data-dependent. He/she reiterated that, in compliance with the primary mandate of Banco de México, monetary policy’s priority is to reduce inflation levels and consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation to the benefit of Mexico’s population. Another member expressed that there are still risk factors that could hinder the foreseen trajectory of inflation towards the 3% target, which could complicate the conduction of monetary policy next year. He/she highlighted the possibility that the resilience of economic activity continues through the horizon of monetary policy planning, the cyclical position of the economy in positive and increasing territory, that the labor market remains tight and does not show signs of easing, the persistence of core inflation, inflation expectations that are not declining to the required levels, and the procyclical fiscal policy. He/she added that new episodes of peso depreciation could occur and affect inflation, in case of adjustments in expectations regarding the Federal Reserve’s actions. He/she also mentioned the high uncertainty regarding commodity prices, especially energy-related ones, as a result of a potential escalation or continuation of geopolitical conflicts. In view of the environment of high uncertainty and the risks mentioned above, he/she considered it essential to maintain the level of monetary restriction attained. Thus, he/she indicated that in this meeting the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25%. He/she argued that, in his/her opinion, monetary policy communication should maintain a cautious tone and emphasize that the balance of risks for the trajectory foreseen for inflation remains biased to the upside. Likewise, he/she considered that, given this environment, the reference rate will likely need to remain at its current level longer than expected by markets. As a result of the above, he/she emphasized that a data-dependent approach should continue to be followed, allowing flexibility in future decisions and avoiding any sign of complacency, as the outlook can change rapidly due to both external and domestic factors. He/she concluded that the Mexican economy has a high exposure to both external and domestic risks, and the materialization of these risks would further deteriorate the already complex inflation outlook and affect monetary policy implementation. Under these conditions, he/she expressed that now more than ever a message of prudence and caution must be conveyed. One member argued that, despite the strong monetary restriction implemented for over a year, economic activity remains robust, bank lending is growing in real terms, and risks to inflation remain biased to the upside. Thus, the inflationary problem continues. He/she mentioned that the economy’s cyclical position requires a restrictive policy stance. He/she argued that certain idiosyncratic factors hinder the transmission of the restrictive policy stance, such as the lack of synchronization between fiscal and monetary policies. He/she also mentioned structural factors such as low levels of financial depth, low credit penetration, high levels of informality, and lack of competition in both the financial system and other sectors. He/she stated that the latter allows an environment of high margins by firms. Given the above, he/she considered that the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25% in this monetary policy meeting. He/she deemed it necessary to maintain the forward guidance unchanged in this occasion in order to communicate that the reference rate will be left at that level for some time. He/she added that monetary policy must still remain restrictive for an extended period. He/she highlighted that caution and prudence should be maintained in 2024 so as to avoid a premature easing. He/she pointed out that the real ex-ante interest rate has had a tightening cycle like no other since the adoption of the inflation targeting regime. He/she stated that, since November 2021, it has increased by 671 basis points, 84 of which have occurred since March 2023 when the reference rate was set at its current level. He/she warned that such rate should not exceed the range of 7-7.5%, which he/she deemed appropriate to ensure inflation convergence. Given the risk of an excessively restrictive policy stance that could impact economic activity or financial stability, he/she noted that a finetuning adjustment to the reference rate should be considered for the end of the first quarter or during the second quarter of 2024. He/she stated that, in order to evaluate monetary policy adjustments at the margin, it is imperative that upward risks do not materialize, that the pressures onto core inflation abate, that inflation adheres to the projected trajectory through the ongoing disinflation process, and that twelve-month inflation expectations continue declining, getting close to the target range. He/she mentioned that it should be clarified that a fine-tuning adjustment does not imply the beginning of a cycle of consecutive reference rate cuts, as the absorption of inflationary shocks, the decline in inflation, and the improvement of expectations are not continuous, constant, and homogeneous processes. He/she added that these fine-tuning adjustments would need to be implemented in a spaced, gradual, and cautious manner, which will represent the main communication challenge. Another member argued that the disinflation process advanced significantly in 2023, associated with the fading of the shocks. He/she underlined the normalization of global supply chains and the decline in commodity prices. He/she explained that this, along with the monetary policy stance adopted, led to a better balance between supply and demand in various sectors. He/she indicated that, based on the international experience, when an economy is subject to shocks of great magnitude, inflation tends to decline significantly once the impact of such disturbances dissipates. However, he/she warned that inflation moderates its pace of deceleration once the original effects of the shocks that caused the price increases fade away. In this regard, he/she stated that disinflation will be characterized by being slower, just as the latest forecasts show, and that convergence to the target still requires a tight and cautious monetary policy stance given the upward biased distribution of risks. He/she highlighted that during 2023 it was necessary to consolidate a markedly restrictive policy stance in order to anchor inflation expectations and prevent disruptions in price formation in the economy. He/she noted that the expectations channel and the exchange rate channel played a key role in allowing inflation to decline rapidly and efficiently. Nevertheless, he/she underlined that during 2024 the channels most associated with demand will likely need to play a more relevant role. He/she pointed out that the experience suggests that these channels are particularly sensitive to the duration of tight monetary conditions, since the lags with which they operate are considerably long. He/she considered that, looking ahead, the challenge will be to calibrate both the magnitude of the restriction and its duration. He/she added that the communication strategy should allow for sufficient flexibility in each policy meeting, as the materialization of risks under a rigid forward guidance approach could lead to a time inconsistency. He/she reiterated that, in view of a complex inflationary outlook, and considering the uncertainty associated with inflection points, a datadependent approach should be maintained, incorporating all available information and keeping various options on the table. He/she underlined that the monetary policy stance should be assessed according to the circumstances and prudently, in order to comply with the constitutional mandate and to ensure an orderly adjustment of the economy and of financial markets. One member considered that there are conditions to begin discussing the possibility of reference rate cuts in the next policy meetings. He/she highlighted the need to take into account the progress in the disinflationary process. He/she reiterated the significant reduction in both headline and core inflation from their peak levels. He/she added that, since March, when the reference rate reached its current level, the decline of the core component has been more evident, and remarked that during this period a passive tightening of 84 basis points has been accumulated. He/she underlined that, given the current policy stance, inflation is expected to continue trending downwards. Second, he/she pointed out that, even with reference rate cuts, the monetary policy stance will remain sufficiently solid to continue supporting the convergence of inflation. He/she noted that, although the recent inflationary episode has been atypical, the current level of the reference rate is above any historical reference, taking into account the current level of inflation. He/she specified that the current level of the reference rate is higher than the average observed during periods in which headline inflation has been between 4 and 4.5%, of 5.95% for the nominal rate, and of 2.06% for the real one. He/she pointed out that when core inflation was between 5 and 5.5%, the nominal and real rates averaged 7.28 and 2.93%, respectively. Third, he/she added that the recent dynamics of services prices responds to a necessary adjustment, after merchandise prices deviated from their long-term equilibrium relative to services prices due to the shocks faced. He/she mentioned that the absolute monetary policy stance attained is sufficiently robust to address possible changes in the relative stance. He/she also considered that some inflation determinants have improved compared to what was observed at the end of last year. He/she highlighted that the challenge ahead is to adjust the degree of monetary restriction in a non-linear disinflationary context. He/she argued that future policy meetings should assign greater weight to the already observed and expected behavior of the inflationary outlook in its entirety, including the evolution of its determinants and its balance of risks, and not rely exclusively on specific data. He/she added that it will be necessary to take into account that inflation, while remaining above target, has declined considerably. Finally, he/she estimated it pertinent to communicate that the reference rate will remain at its current level for some time and that, given the expected evolution of the overall outlook and the prevailing uncertainty, adjustments would be gradual and not necessarily continuous. The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price formation process. It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference rate must be maintained at its current level for some time. The latter, taking into account that although the outlook remains complicated, progress on disinflation has been made. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.