Some members expect world economic activity to have continued increasing during the second quarter of 2024, although at a slower pace than in the previous quarter. One member argued that the sound global economic performance expected for this year would be driven by a stronger growth in advanced economies, while a more generalized weakening is expected in emerging economies. Among global growth risks, he/she mentioned that several of them persist, including those stemming from the expectation of higher interest rates for a longer period, the high levels of fiscal deficits in a large number of economies, the political uncertainty associated with various electoral processes, particularly in the United States, and geopolitical tensions. Regarding the US economy, he/she underlined the soundness of domestic demand as a result of the boost provided by private consumption. He/she considered that the US labor market continues showing resilience. Another member noted some of the factors behind this resilience, the fading of which could affect economic activity in the future. He/she argued that fiscal support together with unconventional monetary stimulus measures to mitigate the effects of the pandemic contributed, on the one hand, to generate excess savings and an improvement in households' financial position, mainly in the United States, which supported private consumption. On the other hand, he/she noted that limited refinancing needs were observed in the corporate sector, which took place under relatively favorable credit conditions. However, he/she added that currently the outlook is different, given the less sound financial situation of firms and households. Regarding households, he/she stated that in the United States, for example, excess savings and leverage are already at their pre-pandemic trend levels, while real disposable income has moderated its growth. Thus, he/she indicated that, although consumption of services in that economy continues showing dynamism, consumption of goods has somewhat declined, which reflects consumers that are more aware of the signs of moderation in the labor market. As for firms, he/she pointed out that greater refinancing needs are expected, which, according to forecasts, will be at higher rates. Finally, he/she stated that, in his/her opinion, in light of the fading of these factors that once supported economic resilience, a more efficient pass-through of restrictive monetary policy stances is expected. Some members expect a moderation of the US economy in the next quarters. One member expressed that this could be more evident in that country's industrial activity. Most members highlighted that the disinflation members pointed out that headline inflation has continued decreasing in most advanced economies. The majority indicated that this was due to lower pressures on food prices. Some members added that it was also due to a reduction in goods inflation. Nevertheless, some members considered that the recent progress in disinflation has been moderate. Most members highlighted that there is some heterogeneity in the behavior of inflation across economies. Some members indicated that US inflation decreased between April and May. One member noted that in the euro area, annual headline inflation rose during the same period due to an increase in the core component and a rebound in energy inflation. Another member stated that some emerging economies registered increases in headline inflation due to higher pressures on energy prices and, in some cases, due to a rise in food prices. One member added that services inflation resistance to decline is a global phenomenon with low correlation to the cyclical phase of different economies. Most members agreed that the disinflation process is expected to continue. However, some members pointed out that inflation is still anticipated to remain above central banks' targets. One member indicated that there is a prevailing expectation that in some economies convergence to the inflation target will be postponed again until early 2025. The majority noted that some central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged, while others lowered them. Some members stated that most of them maintained a cautious tone. One member pointed out that these institutions emphasized a greater data dependence in their future decisions. Another member indicated that, despite the heterogeneity in the monetary cycles of different economies, the discussion in most central banks has focused on avoiding the adoption of an overly restrictive monetary policy stance. All members mentioned that the Federal Reserve left the federal funds rate unchanged for the seventh consecutive occasion. Some members noted that its policy statement acknowledged modest progress towards the inflation target in recent months. One member pointed out that the statement reiterated that risks to achieving its employment and price stability goals have moved towards better balance. However, some members highlighted its restrictive tone. Most members underlined that the chairman of said institution stated that there is still uncertainty as to whether inflation is steadily moving to the 2% target. One member added that said chairman stated that evidence clearly shows that the monetary policy stance is restrictive and is having the expected effects. Most members expressed that the European Central Bank lowered its interest rates at its June meeting after having left them unchanged for nine months. Some members specified that this rate cut was accompanied by an upward revision of their inflation forecasts. One member added that said central bank indicated that it will maintain a restrictive monetary policy stance as long as necessary to achieve convergence of inflation to its target. Most members pointed out that the Bank of Canada also made its first policy rate cut in June. One member noted that this central bank argued that it has greater confidence that inflation is on a trajectory towards its target. Another member indicated that various monetary authorities in Latin America and Eastern Europe continued lowering their reference rates. All members noted that the Federal Reserve's economic projections included a lower number of rate cuts anticipated for this year. Most members added that slightly higher rates are also projections. Some members expressed that the median of projections for the long-term interest rate increased. One member pointed out that this change was from 2.6 to 2.8%. He/she considered that the greater dispersion among members' projections for the long-term interest rate reflects greater uncertainty as to where the US economy might converge. In this regard, he/she ruled out implications for monetary policy in the short term. Regarding emerging economies, another member pointed out that in most of them the expectation that reference rates will remain high for a longer period has strengthened. Most members noted that international financial markets exhibited some volatility, although end- to-end variations were mixed and moderate. Some members added that the release of higherthan-anticipated US inflation and employment figures led to an adjustment in expectations about the path of the federal funds rate. One member mentioned that in light of better-than-expected figures US government bond yields declined slightly. Another member highlighted that the evolution of geopolitical tensions also contributed to said volatility. One member commented that since the previous decision, fixed-income markets have exhibited mixed movements. Another member expressed that fixedincome markets performed differently across regions. Some members noted that stock market indices registered gains. One member pointed out that developed countries registered increases, while emerging ones registered losses. Another member argued that the materialization of adverse events related to electoral processes, geopolitical conflicts, and global economic growth could intensify international financial volatility, with negative effects particularly for emerging economies. The majority pointed out that, at the beginning of the second quarter of 2024, Mexico’s economic activity continued exhibiting the weakness observed since the end of 2023. Some members pointed out that the IGAE registered a contraction in April. One member stated that this result was caused by decreases in the three main sectors of economic activity. Another member mentioned that annual growth rates showed an expansion in the secondary and tertiary IGAE sectors and a contraction in the primary one. Most members asserted that recent dynamism. One member warned that this, together with the timely indicator for May, suggests that the economic slowdown has extended, contrary to what had been anticipated. Another member added that this slowdown contrasts with the previous expectation that economic activity would be at high levels in the first half of the year. Nevertheless, one member expressed that INEGI estimates an expansion in May that could offset the fall in April. He/she added that various indicators of production, demand and employment show mixed signals, which, together with greater uncertainty associated with the country’s political transition, make it difficult to anticipate the economy's performance for this year and the next one. Regarding the performance of the productive sectors, the majority noted that IGAE data of decreased at a monthly rate due to a greater sluggishness in manufacturing. Most members argued that construction has expanded at lower monthly rates than those registered in previous months. One member mentioned that there is some weakness in railway, oil and petrochemical construction works. Some members also mentioned the weakness in the mining sector. Likewise, one member pointed out the weakness of the electricity sector. Some members noted that the services sector remains heterogeneous in its different subsectors. One member indicated that due to the fall in some of these subsectors, the progress made in previous months has reversed, and thus total services remain at the same levels as those observed at the end of 2023. Another member stated that the tertiary sector as a whole seems to be affected by the weakness of secondary activities, especially those more related to industrial use, such as commercial activities. Meanwhile, he/she noted that timely estimates suggest that the weakness in the primary sector could extend throughout the quarter. One member pointed out that, nevertheless, considering the annual variation of economic activity data for the first quarter, a 1.9% growth rate is observed. Regarding domestic demand, most members indicated that private consumption has remained strong. One member considered that this has been mainly associated with the dynamism of consumption of imported goods, while that of domestic goods and services has been lower. Another member pointed out that in its annual variation the consumption of domestic goods rose 3.3% in March, its highest growth in eighteen months. Regarding forwardlooking indicators, some members mentioned that those related to consumption of services suggest a slowdown. However, one member argued that the risks of the recent exchange rate depreciation and its effects on consumption capacity attributed to remittances should be considered. Some members expressed that investment reactivated slightly in March. One member stated that the growth registered in that month was supported by construction and domestic machinery and equipment. He/she added that in that same month gross capital formation maintained a strong expansion of 10.9% in annual terms, although this figure is lower than those observed during most of investment spending has grown at lower rates. One member reiterated that its deceleration is noticeable with respect to the first half of 2023. Most members noted that external demand exhibited sluggishness. Some members pointed out that automotive manufacturing exports have shown weakness. One member noted a similar behavior in the non-automotive ones. Another member considered that the latter have changed marginally. One member mentioned that automotive exports grew at an annual rate of 19.7%, while nonautomotive exports contracted 2.8%. He/she added that, therefore, in their annual variation, manufacturing exports grew 4.2%. Some members commented that, looking ahead, economic growth is expected to be lower than previously anticipated. They considered that the balance of risks to economic activity has become biased to the downside. One member stated that there is the risk that private investment will continue losing dynamism, considering the tight financial conditions and the environment of greater uncertainty generated by financial volatility in Mexico, as well as by the upcoming electoral process in the United States. He/she added that while a low contribution to economic growth from external demand is expected over the next quarters, the latter could decelerate more than anticipated if the weakness prevailing in the US manufacturing sector worsens. He/she noted that this could extend the low dynamism of domestic manufacturing production, limiting the positive spillover effects that this sector tends to have on other sectors of the economy. Regarding the output gap estimated with GDP data, one member pointed out that it decreased in the first quarter of 2024, although it remained in positive territory. Another member noted that said gap is expected to close faster than previously anticipated. Some members commented that it is expected to be in negative territory as of the last quarter of 2024. One member mentioned that the point estimate of the output gap calculated with IGAE data up to April is already in negative territory, although without being statistically different from zero. He/she added that, although slack measures are unobservable factors and their estimation is subject to uncertainty, it cannot be ignored that timely data indicate that the economy has had three consecutive quarters of marked weakness. Some members indicated that the cyclical conditions of the economy will be a relevant factor in the price formation process. All members noted that the labor market continued showing strength, although most members mentioned that it has shown some signs of moderation. Some members highlighted the high labor force participation rate and the fact that the unemployment rate remains at historic lows. One member indicated that formal employment in the manufacturing and construction industries has lost momentum. Some members noted that, despite its relative slowdown, the wage bill continues growing at levels higher than those prior to the pandemic. One member expressed that the expectation of significant wage increases in 2025 persist. Another member highlighted the high level of nominal annual variation of the daily wage of IMSS-insured workers, as well as contractual wage revisions in public and private firms. He/she mentioned that wage increases are much higher than productivity increases. However, one member pointed out that nominal and real wage growth rates have declined. Meanwhile, some members commented that formal job creation has grown at a slower pace and that, given the prospect of a slowdown in economic activity, this trend is likely to become more pronounced. Most members indicated that annual headline inflation rose from 4.65% in April to 4.78% in the first fortnight of June. They pointed out that this was due to an increase in non-core inflation. Some members highlighted that headline inflation has trended upwards since March. One member commented on the scant progress in disinflation since more than half a year ago. Another member considered that, although headline inflation has remained on an upward trend in recent readings, various metrics suggest that this is mainly due to a change in relative prices rather than to generalized price increases. Most members underlined that core inflation continued decreasing from 4.37 to 4.17% between April and the first fortnight of June. Some members pointed out that it has decreased for sixteen consecutive months. One member highlighted that the seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations of this component have fallen to levels close to 3%. Some members emphasized that this component reflects the medium-term trend of inflation. Most members agreed that its downward trend is mainly explained by the reduction in merchandise inflation, while all members pointed out that services inflation does not yet show a Delving into the behavior of merchandise inflation, some members pointed out that it has decreased for eighteen consecutive months. One member noted that its most recent reading is below its historical average. Another member stated that it decreased from 3.67 to 3.33% between April and the first fortnight of June. Regarding its components, food merchandise inflation went from 4.79 to 4.28%, while that of non-food merchandise fell from 2.34 to 2.18%. Another member highlighted that the annual inflation of non-food merchandise has been below 3% for the last five months. He/she added that monthly variations of food merchandise prices have been below their historical average so far this year. Some members stated that services inflation continues being affected by cost-related pressures and a lagged pass-through to consumers. One member expressed that although this is a global problem it is not possible to anticipate that the easing pressures on this component abroad will have a similar outcome in Mexico. He/she mentioned that its performance is influenced by domestic conditions such as the resilience of consumption, despite some mixed signals from its determinants, expectations of significant wage increases in 2025, a tight labor market, and the high growth of the wage bill, despite its relative deceleration. Another member added that signs of moderation are beginning to be observed in some items, and various metrics point to a better performance. Some members mentioned that services inflation remains above 5%. One member pointed out that it registered 5.19% in the first fortnight of June. Another member noted that it shows generalized pressures in all its items and, in some of them, it exhibits rates that are twice as high as the inflation target. One member stated that practically half of the CPI items that make up this subcomponent register seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations above 5%. However, another member indicated that the proportion of the basket of services with annualized monthly variations above 5% has decreased. He/she highlighted that the annualized monthly variations show an improvement in inflation at the margin. He/she pointed out that while the average of these variations in the last twelve months is 5.21%, the corresponding for the last six and three months is 5.05 and 4.42%, respectively. Likewise, one member indicated that the annual inflation of services other than housing and education was registered in two and a half years. Another member stated that it has decreased from the peak levels of pointed out that the monthly inflation rate of this item has been moderating. He/she specified that the average of the last twelve months is 6.06%, while the average of the last six and three months is 5.56 and Most members pointed out that non-core inflation increased from 5.54 to 6.73% between April and the first fortnight of June. All members agreed that this was driven by the higher annual variations in the prices of agricultural and livestock products and energy. One member noted that the annual inflation of agricultural and livestock products increased from 7.35 to 8.99% during the same period, while that of energy products rose from 4.38 to 5.52%. Another member argued that non-core inflation continues growing above its historical average of around 6%. He/she pointed out that there have been significant increases in the inflation of agricultural and livestock products since March and an upward trend in energy prices since mid-2023. Some members emphasized that non- core inflation is very volatile and tends to face shortlived shocks. One member expressed that monetary policy has little impact on this component. Another member estimated that it is necessary to remain alert to the increases that this component has exhibited since mid-2023. Most members mentioned that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2024 were revised upwards. Some members commented that those for the next twelve months declined. Most members stated that those for the end of 2025, as well as those for the medium and long terms, have remained stable. One member indicated that analysts' expectations are above the central bank's intermediate targets for 2024 and 2025. Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, another member noted that those for the 1 to 5-year average and for the 6 to 10-year average increased slightly. One member highlighted that breakeven inflation implicit in government securities curves exhibited mixed changes during the period, although it remains at levels similar to the previous policy decision, above 400 basis points. Most members noted that the forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised slightly in some quarters. One member pointed out that this adjustment was due, in part, to the impact of the exchange rate depreciation on merchandise inflation, which tends to be more clearly affected by the Mexican peso exchange rate. Another member highlighted that the impact of the depreciation on merchandise prices would be reflected with a certain lag and the degree of the pass-through will depend on the timing of the exchange rate adjustment and the behavior of other inflationary determinants. The depreciation of the Mexican peso impacts inflation forecasts upwards, its effects are partly offset by those associated with the greater weakness exhibited by economic activity. One member considered that the lower economic activity would allow the decline in headline inflation to resume shortly. He/she pointed out that the adjustment was also explained by the greater persistence expected in housing and education inflation, as well as by the greater variations in agricultural and livestock products' prices. Most members mentioned that headline inflation is still expected to converge to the 3% target in the Most members considered that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside. One member stated that the upward bias became more pronounced and that a more uncertain inflationary outlook is now currently faced. He/she indicated that since the balance of risks is determined with a forward-looking approach, less weight should be given to the already observed decline in inflation from its peak, and more weight should be granted to the fact that progress in disinflation has paused since October 2023 and is at risk of reverting. Another member expressed that the shock associated with the slowdown in economic activity will last longer than the volatility shock associated with idiosyncratic factors, and thus the former will play a more relevant role in inflation dynamics. The majority held that there is the risk of a greater pressure on inflation. One member pointed out that the intensity and duration of adjustments in financial markets are uncertain and could hinder the convergence of inflation to the target within the planning horizon. He/she anticipates that risk aversion and its consequences on domestic financial markets will persist. He/she considered that, in addition to tight international financial conditions, the electoral process in the United States could generate bouts of volatility. However, another member deemed it possible that part of the exchange rate shock may be temporary or may moderate to some extent, which could imply a lower exchange rate pass-through. The majority added that the expected economic slowdown could mitigate the risk of the exchange rate pass-through. One member highlighted that studies on the Mexican economy show that the coefficient of the exchange rate pass-through to inflation is lower under greater slack conditions. He/she argued that the anchoring of inflation expectations has significantly reduced the pass-through over the last two decades. Another member pointed out that, although the pass-through of the depreciation to costs has been low in recent years, the nature and magnitude of the exchange rate shock, its duration and slack conditions, among other factors, will be decisive in its inflationary effects. Meanwhile, one member argued that a recent study shows that in both advanced and emerging economies the magnitude of the exchange rate pass-through depends on the nature of the shock that contributed to the currency depreciation. He/she pointed out that, according to said study, in the case of Mexico, the pass-through is greater when the nature of the shock is idiosyncratic, with demandrelated shocks and risk premium shocks having the largest effects. Most members highlighted as an upward risk the persistence of core inflation, especially of its services component. One member considered that the persistence of services inflation could continue due to the lag in the relative price readjustment and because cost increases have not yet fully passed on to consumer prices. He/she warned that merchandise inflation could decline less, potentially halting the deceleration of the core component. He/she added that the decline in food merchandise inflation could reverse direction once the favorable shocks to this component dissipate and the comparison base effect becomes more relevant. He/she deemed that non-food merchandise inflation is reaching low levels that are difficult to sustain. He/she warned about the risk that non-food merchandise inflation, as it converges to its mean, may no longer offset the persistence of services inflation, initiating an upward trend in core inflation. Among additional upward risks, the majority warned about the possibility of greater cost- related pressures of various nature. They highlighted pressures associated with climate- related impacts. One member mentioned the challenges that could arise from the fiscal boost during 2024. Another member indicated that the understanding the fiscal framework, spendingrelated pressures, and support measures for Pemex. Meanwhile, he/she recalled that the risk of non-core inflation remaining above the central bank's projections, at levels consistent with its historical averages, prevails. One member emphasized the risks associated with an intensification of the geopolitical conflicts. Some members stated that some of the mentioned risks could be offset by a lower-than-anticipated economic activity. One member estimated that greater slack, in addition to offsetting the potential effects of currency depreciation, will contribute to a decline in services inflation. He/she stated that the easing of slack conditions has increased and is likely to last longer than the volatility shock. Some members noted that during the weeks following the last monetary policy meeting, domestic financial markets exhibited a stable behavior. However, one member mentioned that markets faced an adverse environment in May in light of the expectation of smaller reference rate cuts in advanced economies. The majority mentioned that volatility in domestic markets in early June. All members underlined that trading conditions emphasized that the Mexican peso depreciated considerably. One member specified that after having been below 17 pesos per dollar in May, in June the exchange rate reached levels similar to those observed in the early months of 2023, although still below those registered in 2022. Another member highlighted that the Mexican peso briefly reached a level of 19 pesos per dollar, making it the emerging economy currency with the highest depreciation on certain trading days. Some members added that the currency exhibited a broad trading range. One member indicated that, in his/her opinion, the Mexican peso returned to levels close to its fundamentals, thus correcting the overvaluation observed in the past year. Some members argued that this behavior of the Mexican peso was due to a lower appetite for local assets and the liquidation of long Mexican peso positions, mainly in short-term foreign exchange derivatives. One member specified that this was partly due to the unwinding of carry trade positions following the decline in the volatilityadjusted interest rate spread. He/she emphasized that volatility and the skew implied in the options market increased significantly, reaching year-high levels. He/she underlined that, consistent with the above, there has been an increase in the demand for hedging in view of possible subsequent depreciation episodes. Another member pointed out that, in the medium term, expectations continue signaling a bias towards depreciation. One member considered that, in light of the deterioration in trading conditions, the proper functioning of the foreign exchange market should be monitored, and underlined that this does not imply that there is a specific target level. The majority pointed out that part of the exchange rate adjustment has reversed in recent days. One member added that recently the Mexican peso exchange rate has performed in line with other similar currencies. All members noted that interest rates on medium- and long-term government bonds increased idiosyncratic factors. Some members mentioned a deterioration in market conditions and historical highs in some nodes of the nominal yield curve. One member added that broad trading ranges were observed. Another member pointed out that a certain reversal in said rates has been observed in recent days. One member mentioned that a more restrictive stance of the US Federal Reserve and expectations of less reference rate cuts for the remainder of the year, along with idiosyncratic factors, have contributed to the increase in the interest rate spread of Mexican bonds. He/she added that, despite the above, this spread appears less attractive after adjusting for the volatility of the Mexican peso, although it remains at levels higher than most comparable emerging currencies. Another member stated that in recent weeks there was a capital outflow mainly of M-Bonos held by nonresidents. He/she mentioned that the interest rate derivatives market exhibited a similar behavior to that of government bonds, with significant increases and high volatility. He/she argued that part of the movements is explained by closing positions, as well as by demand for currency hedging in view of changes in interest rates. He/she indicated that the implied expectations for the trajectory of the reference rate in TIIE swaps discount with a higher probability that the next reference rate cut will occur only until the November policy decision, and that the reference rate will close the year at 10.60%. He/she emphasized that this contrasts with the median of expectations of private sector analysts, who anticipate the next reference rate adjustment in August and a year-end rate of 10.25%. He/she added that, in both cases, there has been a correction in monetary policy expectations. The majority highlighted that sovereign risk premia increased. One member stated that the risk premium is still at levels higher than those observed before the election in June. He/she warned that, in the medium term, expectations of a higher risk premium prevail. However, another member commented that increases in risk premia have been limited compared to other stress episodes. Most members pointed out that the stock market performed unfavorably due to the lower risk One member considered that, looking ahead, incoming information can help mitigate uncertainty and contribute to the further stabilization of domestic financial markets. He/she stated that a number of factors can contribute to the above, such as the sound macroeconomic fundamentals, particularly compared to other emerging economies. He/she highlighted fiscal discipline, sustainable external accounts, a well-capitalized Mexican banking system with no currency imbalances, a developed financial derivatives market that allows economic agents to hedge the exchange rate risk, and adequate levels of international reserves. He/she noted that two primary pillars of the country's macroeconomic policy framework are an autonomous central bank with a price stability mandate and a flexible exchange rate regime. Some members underlined that, under this regime, the exchange rate acts as a shock absorber, helping the economy to adjust in an orderly manner. Most members highlighted that total financing in the economy continued increasing. One member attributed said growth to the domestic component. He/she added that domestic financing to the private sector exhibited solid growth in April, although it continued decelerating. Some members indicated that commercial bank credit maintained its dynamism. They specified that financing to businesses and for consumption registered high rates of expansion. However, one member highlighted that these segments have shown some moderation. He/she warned that, looking ahead, the evolution of credit to firms should be monitored, as the economic slowdown could be reflected in both demand- and supply-side adverse factors for credit. Another member mentioned that delinquency levels remain low and stable. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of challenges and risks on both sides of the balance call for continuing conducting monetary policy prudently. With the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains restrictive and will continue being conducive to the convergence of inflation Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the discussing reference rate adjustments. It will take into account the prospects that global shocks will continue dissipating and the effects of a weaker-than-anticipated economic activity. It will consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member stated that this is one of the most complex decisions of the monetary cycle as the economy experiences two shocks acting in opposite directions on inflation. He/she pointed out that, on the one hand, there is a period of volatility associated with idiosyncratic factors, while, on the other hand, the risk of a greater-than-expected easing of slack conditions has gained relevance, the latter factor lasting longer. He/she expressed that an adjustment in the monetary restriction is consistent with risks to the outlook, given the highly restrictive policy stance and the progress in disinflation. Among these risks, he/she highlighted the risk of a higher depreciation. He/she stated that, while volatility should be monitored, the conduction of monetary policy should address it to the extent that it affects inflation. He/she added that, given the expectation of greater slack conditions, the pass-through to prices could be lower, as suggested by the evidence of Mexico, and would also contribute to reduce services inflation. Therefore, he/she considered that, as a result, the risk associated with the economic slowdown gains more importance due to its implications for inflation dynamics. He/she expressed that a gradual approach allows to take actions responsibly, addressing all inflation determinants within monetary policy’s horizon. He/she argued that failing to address changes in the inflation outlook in a timely manner, such as the current intensification of risks to the downside, could imply larger adjustments in the future, making the conduction and communication of monetary policy more challenging. He/she considered it inappropriate to adopt a highly datadependent stance, as this would be equivalent to incorporating only part of the information and conducting monetary policy with lags, which would imply unnecessary costs. He/she added that an optimal conduction of monetary policy should de forward-looking, considering both the observed and the expected inflation determinants. He/she underlined that making additional adjustments to the reference rate does not imply abandoning a restrictive policy stance, which will remain necessary throughout the forecast horizon, given the challenges that prevail. He/she indicated that the challenge lies in defining the pace of such adjustments, taking into account the behavior of inflation with respect to intermediate targets, the performance of its determinants, the prevailing risks, and assigning weight to the outlook for the inflation environment. Another member expressed that, since the last monetary policy meeting, the challenges of persistence and of a slowdown in the disinflation process have continued. He/she added that currently there is also an unforeseen shock of financial volatility generated by idiosyncratic factors, which represents an additional obstacle to achieving the convergence of inflation to the target within the planning horizon. He/she mentioned the risk that the monetary restriction might be insufficient to achieve such convergence if the reference rate is reduced or if inflation expectations increase. He/she considered that, therefore, the outlook for the conduction of monetary policy has become more complex. In this regard, he/she underlined headline inflation’s upward trend, the mixed changes in inflation expectations between April and May, the adjustment in inflation forecasts, and a labor market that remains tight. He/she expressed that the strength of consumption and, to a lesser extent, of investment, as well as the fiscal policy outlook, would imply a lesser-thananticipated deterioration for economic activity for the remainder of 2024. He/she considered that all of the above, coupled with a balance of risks for inflation biased to the upside, indicates that monetary policy should continue being conducted cautiously. He/she estimated that, given the current environment of high uncertainty and financial volatility, a reference rate cut would come as a surprise to most market participants and could increase exchange rate volatility and raise inflation expectations. For this reason, he/she considered that a risk management approach should be prioritized in an environment of increasing uncertainty, fueled by idiosyncratic and external shocks. He/she argued that refraining from modifying the target rate will help maintain inflation expectations anchored and strengthen Banco de México's credibility and its commitment to the primary mandate of price stability. He/she expressed that the central bank’s communication should place emphasis on a cautious and data-dependent approach. One member mentioned that, since the last monetary policy decision, the international outlook has had few changes, while domestically, two shocks have been observed of different nature, magnitude, and duration that, for the moment, have tended to offset each other. He/she mentioned that one of them is associated with the increased uncertainty that led to financial volatility during the period, while the other one refers to the Mexican economy decelerating at a faster-than-anticipated pace, in a context in which high dynamism was anticipated for the first half of the year. He/she pointed out that the financial volatility registered this month has led to an environment of greater uncertainty compared to previous decisions, although in recent days volatility has moderated, in line with Mexico’s solid macroeconomic fundamentals. In this regard, he/she argued that uncertainty shocks have implications for both the real and financial sectors. He/she expressed that, in both sectors, economic agents postpone making decisions as they await more precise information and proceed cautiously, being less reactive to changes in the economic environment, including reference rate adjustments. He/she added that, in environments of lesser certainty, the reference rate may have a lesser effect on long-term bond rates if risk premia adjust in the opposite direction, thereby complicating transmission along the yield curve. He/she emphasized that, while the monetary policy stance is undoubtedly restrictive, given the uncertainty surrounding certain inflation determinants, it is appropriate on this occasion to extend the pause in order to continue assessing both the disinflation process and the monetary policy transmission mechanism. He/she expressed that if their behavior is as expected and if macroeconomic conditions, including aggregate demand, contribute to fostering a more favorable price dynamic, it would be appropriate to resume the downward adjustments in order to pursue a more efficient balance in the conduction of monetary policy. He/she stated that this decision seeks to manage both upward and downward risks to inflation and to foster an orderly adjustment of markets and the overall economy, in compliance with the constitutional mandate. Another member estimated it is not necessary to lower the reference rate before there is greater certainty that inflation, specifically core inflation, including its services subcomponent, show a downward trend and displays a clear convergence to the 3% target. Similarly, he/she considered that the target rate should be consistent with the deterioration in market trading conditions and with the expectation of high rates due to greater domestic risk premia. He/she pointed out that external monetary conditions and the rate differential are beginning to gain relevance in determining the monetary policy stance. He/she deemed that a high and prolonged restrictive stance is required given its lagged effects on aggregate demand and the low effectiveness of its transmission mechanisms. He/she noted that bank credit, despite certain moderation, and monetary aggregates in real terms maintain a vigorous dynamic, indicating that the effects of the monetary policy stance have not yet fully materialized. He/she added that, in view of the observed depreciation, the exchange rate channel may cease to contain certain pressures, despite the low pass-through of the foreign exchange depreciation. He/she considered that a strategy of occasional and gradual datadependent calibrations to the monetary policy stance is adequate. He/she noted that further fine-tuning requires a downward trend in services inflation, a substantial improvement in inflationary expectations, and that convergence to the projected inflation target by the end of 2025 materializes. He/she pointed out that any eventual adjustments would be implemented in order to maintain the ex-ante real interest rate in a March decision, such rate has increased by 12 basis points, thus laying towards the middle of said range. He/she underlined the importance of monitoring the effects of inflationary and exchange rate pressures on inflation expectations. He/she asserted that the anchoring of inflation expectations at 3% must be ensured, and that, since they remain above the central bank forecasts, changes in slack conditions or the tightening of financial conditions should continue to be of secondary consideration. He/she expressed that, in the face of increased uncertainty, utmost caution must be used regarding the signals provided to the public. He/she pointed out that keeping the reference rate unchanged shows caution and sends the message that the central bank is not satisfied with the inflation dynamics. He/she stated that the direction of future adjustments will represent an even stronger signal than the level of the reference rate by itself. One member pointed out that in early June an episode of volatility occurred in domestic financial markets, which implied a notable depreciation of the Mexican peso. He/she emphasized that, nevertheless, the impact of said depreciation on the central bank's inflation forecasts was partly offset by the effects corresponding to expectations of a weaker Mexican economic activity than previously anticipated. He/she added that the forecast of these pressures takes place in a context where headline inflation, the measure over which the central bank's target is set, has been increasing for several months due to the behavior of the non-core component. He/she estimated that, taking into account all elements of the macroeconomic and financial environment combined, it is prudent to maintain the reference rate at 11% on this occasion. He/she emphasized that this decision, which implies extending the pause in reference rate adjustments, does not mean that the possibility of lowering the reference rate in future meetings is no longer considered. He/she recalled that, despite the fluctuations exhibited by headline inflation this year, it remains at levels visibly lower than the highs registered during this inflationary episode. He/she also mentioned that, since the last monetary policy meeting, core inflation, which better reflects the trend in inflation, has continued decreasing. He/she stated that the current inflationary environment is undoubtedly less adverse than that of 2022 and early continue throughout the forecast horizon. In this context, he/she highlighted that the central bank is at a stage where progress in disinflation and the prevailing degree of monetary restriction allow to discuss possible reference rate cuts and, in his/her opinion, this will be undertaken in upcoming monetary policy meetings. He/she stated that moderation of inflationary pressures will be considered in light of the expectation that global shocks will continue to dissipate and in view of prospects of a weaker-than-anticipated economic activity. He/she underlined that the incidence of both the restrictive monetary policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates will be considered. The Governing Board assessed the behavior of inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation expectations. It stated that the challenges and risks on both sides of the balance call for continuing conducting monetary policy prudently. With the presence of all its members, the Board decided by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains restrictive and will continue being conducive to the convergence of inflation to the 3% target in the forecast horizon. Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the inflationary environment may allow for discussing reference rate adjustments. It will take into account the prospects that global shocks will continue dissipating and the effects of a weaker-thananticipated economic activity. It will consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable inflation. Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath. Omar Mejía voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 10.75%. The inflation outlook faces two opposing shocks, whose effects tend to counter each other: a depreciation resulting from idiosyncratic events and evidence of a greater-than-expected economic weakness. I anticipate that the easing of slack conditions will last longer and thus will play a more relevant role in inflation dynamics throughout the horizon. In addition, there are specific instruments to ensure the well-functioning of markets, and monetary policy must react accordingly to their impact on our central baseline scenario, which, given the impact of both shocks combined, does not display relevant changes and allows to continue adjusting our monetary policy stance, which should be set to enable the convergence of inflation, ensuring an orderly adjustment of the economy and markets. I deem it responsible to reflect in depth about the appropriate level of monetary restriction in the current context, characterized by the evident progress in the inflation outlook and prospects of greater slack conditions. For this reason, it is also appropriate to conduct monetary policy with a prospective approach and refrain from overweighing the evolution of non-core inflation, over which monetary policy has little incidence. In view of the above, I believe it is appropriate to make an adjustment to the monetary restriction.