As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The analysis of the behavior of IBGE industrial output series and its components, at the margin, according to data available, suggests that production would have reached its lowest level in December-January.
However, the industrial activity continues to be influenced by the international crisis, due to its effects both over exports and credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
In this context, some industrial segments have been led to adjust inventories and reduce production, a process that has recently been particularly evident in the intermediate goods industry.
The recent slowdown in capital goods production reflects the persistence of the international financial turmoil and its consequences over business confidence.
On its turn, the recover, at the margin, in the pace of durable goods production expansion reflects, predominantly, the exemption tax measures and also some easing of credit conditions.
The future trajectory of industrial production should continue to be influenced by these factors, which counterbalance the deterioration of external demand and the process of inventories adjustment mentioned above.
Labor market has continued to record ambiguous indicators, combining positive aspects with signs of loss of vigor.
The manufacturing industry recorded the highest dismissal rate in March, with the reduction of 35,775 jobs, followed by the commerce sector, which habitually hires in this period of the year, with the reduction of 9,697 positions.
After falls in October, November and December, expanded retail sales data for January and February evidence a recovery influenced mainly by the increase in the sales of vehicles, in response to the sector incentives granted by the government and some recover in the access to vehicle credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the evolution in the access to credit supply and by the behavior of consumer confidence.
The reduction on Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to significant increase of the idle capacity level of the manufacturing industry.
On the other hand, data about the absorption of capital goods indicate continuity of retraction at the margin and compared to the same periods of last year.
In short, evidences suggest an ongoing process of reduction in demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry, although the speed of decline in the utilization rates has reduced.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month cumulative trade balance has been showing moderate growth at the margin.
The adjustment in relative prices and the accommodation in the pace of expansion of domestic demand contribute to the recovery of the trade surplus, but the deterioration in the terms of trade acts on the opposite direction.
However, the unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in the US and Europe, using wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in monetary markets, have moderated the perception of systemic risk.
In this environment, there are signs, albeit incipient, of reduction in risk aversion, but the return of confidence remains fragile, due to the susceptibility of the markets to the flow of economic and non-economic news.
Despite incipient, the decrease both in the risk aversion and in the scarcity of capital flows in the recent weeks encouraged the recovery of emerging economies currencies against the US dollar.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures.
The currently predominant view points to the contraction of global economic activity in 2009, which would recover just in The consensual projections point to an intense retraction of activity in the US, Europe and Japan, which wouldnt be totally offset by the economic dynamism of some emerging economies, especially in Asia.
There are evidences that the deeper weakening of economic activity in Europe and parts of Asia was in a significant manner due to the negative shock in the terms of trade caused by the elevation of commodities prices in 2008, which was reverted, allowing an increase in available income in these regions.
On the other hand, the problems in the international financial system have continued to be aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, focused on the US and Europe, which tends to reinforce the contraction in the financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of intensification in the deceleration.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity has decelerated considerably and for a longer period, inflationary pressures have reduced rapidly.
The disinflation process seems to have gained momentum also in the emerging economies, in spite of greater persistence of the inflation dynamics.
In this context, monetary policies stances have become highly expansionist in the mature economies, while the expansionary stance in the emerging economies has been more moderate.
At the same time, the authorities in the US, Western Europe and Asia have been announcing a series of important initiatives aimed at sustaining economic activity through fiscal incentives, which could contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
Its important to notice, however, that the estimates on the fiscal costs for macroeconomic stimulus and support packages to the financial sector have been increasing, which has caused pressures over the risk assessment of several sovereign credits, even in advanced economies.
Future markets quotations also increased.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging economies, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, in a scenario of uncertainty regarding the implementation and maturation of investments in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Available data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion has significantly cooled since the third quarter of 2008, partially as a reaction to the substantial and generalized economic activity deceleration in other developed and emerging economies.
On its turn, the increase in risk aversion and the constraint observed in liquidity conditions prevailing in the international markets observed so far, despite some marginal improvements, continue to impose adjustments in the balance of payments.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices, in several economies, evidences significant reduction of external inflationary pressures, especially over mature economies, but also over some emerging economies.
Consequently, the net impact of the global deceleration over the domestic inflation path continues to be, until the present moment, predominantly benign.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of the monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risk to the domestic inflation trajectory continues to diminish.
The Committee evaluates that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures initially located over consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that, according to available data, domestic demand behavior should exert less pressure over prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
Anyhow, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
These considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
In light of the international crisis effects over domestic financial conditions, the credit contribution to sustain domestic demand severely diminished, although there are some early signs of recovery, in particular relative to credit to individuals.
The severity of the international crisis negatively influenced consumers and businessmen confidence, but there are also signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, despite some improvement on financial conditions, the resumption of economic activity will strongly depend on real payroll expansion and the effects of governmental transfers that should occur in In short, the contracting effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context on which monetary policy has been acting, can become persistent, but will not be permanent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in the second half of 2009 and in The Copom understands that the loss of domestic demand dynamism has generated an increase in the idleness margin of factors, resulting on reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, remaining risks to the inflationary dynamics derive from the trajectory of Brazilian assets prices, despite some recent recovery, associated to the partial recovery of commodities prices, amidst a process of decreasing external funding sources, as well as price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of the prices of services and regulated items since the beginning of The balance of those influences over the prospective trajectory of inflation will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates leads to increase in risk premiums, both for private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Indeed, the evolution of the prospective scenario is reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee, as well as on inflation expectations set by independent analysts.
The Committee also understands that the improvement on the inflation prospective scenario for 2009 and 2010 has not been, so far, incorporated into the interest rate forward structure.
Nevertheless, although there is still some scope for an easing process, the monetary policy should be cautiously conducted, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the demand slowdown, stimulated by tightening of financial conditions and by the deterioration of the agents confidence, although some marginal improvement has been observed in both cases, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, has created a significant idleness margin of production factors that may not be rapidly eliminated in a scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
Such development should contribute to restrain the inflationary pressures, even in light of the consequences of the adjustment process of the balance of payments and the presence of mechanisms of inflation feedback in the economy, making room for a monetary policy easing process.
The Copom assessment over the scope for additional monetary easing, which depends on the inflation prospects relative to the targets path, takes into account the fact that changes on the basic interest rate have effects over activity and inflationary dynamics that accumulate over time.
Additionally, the Committee understands that the continuity of the monetary easing process makes urgent the update of aspects, resulting from the long period of high inflation, still embedded within the financial system institutional framework.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a long period of expansion, domestic demand has started to exert a contractionist influence over economic activity, despite the persistence of incentive factors, such as income growth.
On the other hand, the deceleration of global economy has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices, despite the exchange rate adjustment.
Under such environment, the monetary policy can be eased without jeopardizing inflation convergence to the targets path.
If the risk profile deteriorates in such a manner that implies shifts to the inflation prospective basic scenario considered by the Committee at this moment, the monetary policy stance will be promptly adjusted to the circumstances.
Partial inflation results for April indicate increase on consumer prices and a slowdown on the deceleration pace of wholesale prices, month-on-month.
The installed capacity utilization declined 0.1 p.p. in the same period.
The LSPA survey carried out by the IBGE in March pointed to the production of 136.4 million tons in 2009, up from 135.3 million tons estimated in February.
The conditions of credit markets in mature economies are still under stress, with banks limiting the access to credit.
The final demand for goods and services, especially the one related to household consumption, signalizes stability in the US and in the Euro Area.
However, the increase in the family savings continues to be the main theme in the definition of consistency and pace of consumption recovery.
Private investment continues in collapse, leading to unemployment rate growth, both in mature and emerging economies.
Considering the maintenance, or even a deepening, of credit restrictions, the crisis in the financial systems and the behavior of inflation, central banks from mature economies and also from emerging economies furthered the monetary policy easing.
Japan and the United States continue to work with a nominal interest rate policy close to zero.
It bears highlighting that in the United States, Japan and in the UK, the central banks have already started the long-run bond purchase program, aiming to facilitate the reduction of interest rates and the reduce the spread of corporate funding, which should be able to create some impulse in private investment.
The medium- and long-term rates showed inverse movement, mainly since the beginning of April, in reaction to the investors expectation of a faster recovery of the domestic and international economies, in response to fiscal and monetary stimuli implemented until now.
Between March 9 and April 27, one-, three-, six-month and one-year rates decreased by 124 bps, 99 bps, 56 bps and 12 bps, respectively.
On the other hand, the rates for two- and three-year maturity increased by 36 bps and 56 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 33 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
