As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The contribution of domestic absorption to the GDP growth totaled 3.2 p.p.
Data released for the last months point, in short, to the interruption of the industrial production expansion cycle since the last quarter of The industrial activity has been influenced by the international crisis, due to its effects both over exports and credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
In this context, several industrial segments have been led to adjust inventories and reduce production, a process that has recently been particularly evident in the intermediate goods industry.
The recent slowdown in capital goods production reflects the persistence of the international financial turmoil and its consequences over business confidence.
On its turn, the cooling in the pace of expansion of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, the tightening in credit conditions, the deterioration of consumer expectations and the process of inventories reduction mentioned above.
Such developments should continue to be evidenced by the data relative to the first months of the current year, despite with some recovery at the margin.
Labor market started to record ambiguous indicators, combining positive aspects with significant accommodation of formal job creation at the margin.
The manufacturing industry recorded the highest dismissal rate, with the reduction of 55,130 jobs, followed by the commerce sector, which habitually dismisses in this period of the year, with the reduction of 50,781 positions.
After falls in October, November and December, expanded retail sales data for January and February should evidence a recovery influenced mainly by the increase in the sales of vehicles, in response to the sector incentives granted by the government.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the evolution in the access to credit supply and by the behavior of consumer confidence.
The reduction on Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to significant increase of the idle capacity level of the manufacturing industry.
On the other hand, recent data about the absorption of capital goods indicate continuity in the slowdown of investments.
In short, evidences so far suggest an ongoing process of reduction in demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month accumulated trade balance has been showing stability at the margin.
The adjustment in relative prices and the accommodation in the pace of expansion of domestic demand contribute to the recovery of the trade surplus, but the deterioration in the terms of trade acts on the opposite direction.
Despite the unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in the US and Europe, using wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in money markets, systemic risk perception is still in evidence.
The contraction of international liquidity has continued to contribute to a process of deleverage by asset managers, which, in turn, has been pressuring down the prices of financial assets.
In an environment of increased risk aversion and shortage of capital flows, the volatility of emerging economies currencies remains present, despite not showing the generalized trend of depreciation against the US dollar observed in the last months of Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures.
The predominant view points to the contraction of global economic activity in 2009, recovering just in The consensual projections point to an intense retraction of activity in US, Europe and Japan, which wouldnt be totally offset by the economic dynamism of some emerging economies, especially in Asia.
There are evidences that the deeper weakening of economic activity in Europe and parts of Asia was in a significant manner due to the negative shock in the terms of trade caused by the elevation of commodities prices in 2008, which was reverted, allowing an increase in available income in these regions.
On the other hand, the problems in the international financial system have continued to be aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, focused on the US and Europe, which tends to reinforce the contraction in financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of intensification in the deceleration.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity has considerably decelerated, inflationary pressures have reduced rapidly.
In emerging economies, where the secondary effects of raw materials price increases over consumer prices and the heated demand pressures over the supply expansion capacity had been more intense, inflationary pressures have also been declining, although they show, in many cases, more persistence.
In this context, while the monetary policy stance is mainly expansionist in mature economies, in emerging economies, which, in addition to the facts already mentioned, have been affected by the exchange rate depreciation trend, the expansionist stance has been more moderate.
At the same time, the authorities in US, Western Europe and Asia have been announcing a series of initiatives aimed at sustaining economic activity through fiscal incentives, which could contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
However, the estimates on the fiscal costs for packages of macroeconomic stimulus and support to the financial sector have been increasing, which has caused pressures on the assessment of risk on many sovereign credits, even in advanced economies.
Future markets quotations have also shown volatility, without a defined trend.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging countries, on the prospects for evolution of global supply, in a scenario of uncertainties regarding the implementation and maturation of investments in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom, which assumes unchanged gasoline prices in 2009, remains plausible.
However, with the persistence of the current scenario in the oil market, it does not seem prudent to completely disregard the hypothesis of price reductions in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the reduction in international oil prices observed since the second half of 2008 can eventually affect domestic prices both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity available data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion has significantly cooled since the last months of 2008, amidst a significant generalized economic activity deceleration in other economies, developed and emerging.
On its turn, the increase in risk aversion and the unprecedented constraints observed in liquidity conditions in the international markets, unseen over the last few decades, continue to impose adjustments in the balance of payments.
Therefore, in general terms, the influence of the external scenario over the future path of Brazilian inflation continues to be subject to apparently contradictory effects, which can act with distinct intensity throughout time, surrounded by significant uncertainty.
On the one hand, the economic cooling has caused an increase in risk aversion, impacting the demand for Brazilian assets and consequently, depreciating their prices.
On the other hand, the more generalized economic deceleration observed in the last months which, despite not permanent, may persist in the upcoming quarters, has caused the cooling of both commodities prices and external demand, also negatively impacting local financial conditions.
Moreover, the trajectory of price indices evidences the reduction of external inflationary pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in some emerging economies.
As a consequence, the net effect of the global deceleration over domestic inflation path seems to be, so far, predominantly benign.
Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years, when inflation targets were systematically met.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risk to domestic inflation trajectory continues to diminish.
The Committee evaluates that the materialization of this pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures initially localized on consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that, according to available data, the behavior of domestic demand should exert lesser pressures over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
Anyhow, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
This point of view is even more important in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
It is particularly important to notice that the effects of the international crisis over domestic financial conditions have resulted in severe decline of the credit contribution to domestic demand support.
Additionally, the intensification of the international crisis has caused negative effect on consumers and businessmen confidence.
Under such circumstances, the economic activity dynamism tends to increasingly rely on payroll expansion and on the effects of the possibly enhanced governmental transfers that should occur in On the other hand, the contracting effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context of monetary policy, despite not permanent, may become persistent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts over the upcoming quarters.
The Copom evaluates that the loss of domestic demand dynamism should result in the reduction of inflationary pressures.
On its turn, the remaining risks for the inflationary dynamics derive from the trajectory of Brazilian asset prices, amidst a process of decreasing external sources of funding and mechanisms of price adjustments that contribute to prolong inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of the prices of services and regulated items during the beginning of The balance of those influences over the prospective trajectory of inflation will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates leads to increase in risk premiums, both for private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Indeed, the evolution of the prospective scenario is reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee.
Nevertheless, despite there is still some scope for an easing process, monetary policy should be cautiously conducted, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Committee believes that the demand slowdown, stemming from the tightening of financial conditions, the deterioration of agents confidence and global economic activity contraction, has created significant idleness margin of production factors.
Such development should contribute to restrain inflationary pressures, even in light of the consequences of the adjustment process of the balance of payments and the presence of mechanisms of inflation feedback in the economy, making room for a monetary policy easing process.
On the other hand, in addition to the fact that changes on the basic interest rate have effects over activity and inflation that accumulate over time, the Copoms evaluation about the scope for some additional monetary policy easing also takes into account aspects resulting from the long periods of high inflation, still embedded within the financial system institutional framework.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking prices dynamics, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
There are signs that, after a long period of expansion, domestic demand has started to have a contractionist influence over economic activity, despite persistence of stimulus factors, such as income growth.
On the other hand, the deceleration of global economy has generated downturn pressures over wholesale prices, despite the exchange rate adjustment.
Under such environment, monetary policy can be more flexible without putting at risk inflation convergence to the targets path.
Evidently, if deterioration on the risk profile implies shifts to the inflation prospective basic scenario considered by the Committee at this moment, the monetary policy stance will be promptly adjusted to the circumstances.
However, February data hit the second highest volume of sales in the historical series.
The hours worked was the only indicator that grew month-on-month.
The LSPA survey carried out by the IBGE in February pointed to the production of 135.3 million tons in 2009, up from 134.7 million tons estimated in January.
Still according to the FGV, businessmen confidence in the industrial sector was kept virtually unchanged the first two months of 2009, after falling in the last quarter of 2008, remaining at a level below 80 points.
For the second consecutive month, the seasonally adjusted index recorded growth, emphasizing the recovery of optimistic businessmen expectations about industrial activity.
By use categories, all indicators increased in the month, but stood below 100 points.
Consumer goods outperformed for being the use category with greatest confidence level and greatest level of recovery in the month, increasing 12.9 points, up from 4.1 points recorded by the general industry.
By industrial segments, the segment of transportation material registered the most significant recovery in ICI, 34.1 points, reaching 83 points in February.
The sectors of mechanics, cellulose and paper and other products reached a record low for the historical series.
Year-over-year, food products and pharmaceuticals showed the slightest fall in the confidence index, of 11.3 points and 14.3 points, respectively, while the general industry retracted 24.6 points.
Considering the industrial segments, only food products and pharmaceuticals and veterinary products expanded, respectively, 0.6 p.p. and 0.4 p.p., year-over-year.
Among economic activities, manufacturing industry recorded the highest number of dismissals, 55.1 thousand, followed by the retail sector, which eliminated 50.8 thousand jobs.
The leasing operations in the individuals segment continue losing momentum at the margin.
The global macroeconomic scenario continues to reflect the deepening of the international financial crisis, with impacts over the global credit and economic activity.
In this context, recent economic data have pointed to the contraction in consumption and private investment, worsening the loss of dynamism in international trade, increasing unemployment rates and widening the product gap.
The weakness of aggregate demand in mature economies also began to contaminate the emerging economies that still showed some resilience.
The current lack of liquidity conditions and further deterioration of growth prospects are set to be the most likely scenario for the short and medium term, which contributes for the global financial system to remain under severe stress.
As a result of the global recession outlook, energy and commodities prices have remained low, which resulted in significant reductions in inflation rates.
Considering the deepening of credit restrictions, the crisis in financial systems and the current behavior of inflation, central banks, both in the mature economies and in the emerging economies were urged to increase the amount of resources injected into their financial systems and further the monetary policy easing in order to mitigate the risk of deflation, especially in mature economies and in China.
Such easing is also noticeable in Latin America, where the central banks in Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Brazil and Peru have continued the cycle of interest rate reduction.
It bears highlighting that in the United States, Japan, UK, Canada, Sweden and Switzerland, where interest rates are very close to zero, central banks have begun considering or have already started to directly purchase long-term public or private securities.
Additionally, several measures of fiscal and monetary stimulus were edited or prorogated in order to reestablish the normality of private consumption, the housing market and the global financial markets.
For example, the US authorities have announced or launched loans programs for banks to encourage private consumption and activity of small companies, which adds up to new plans adopted based both on fiscal stimulus and also on support to the financial system.
This behavior was domestically mainly driven by the released indicators signaling strong retraction in economic activity and weakening of labor market, as well as by the improvement of current inflation rates and expectations.
The long-term rates ended the period showing less intensive reduction, mainly influenced by the maintenance of uncertainty regarding the direction of global economy.
Between January 19 and March 9, one-, three-, and six-month rates decreased by 143 bps, 154 bps and 148 bps, respectively.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates decreased by 116 bps, 88 bps, and 45 bps, respectively.
In the same period, the BCB borrowed money through 33 overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
In the period between January 20 and March 9, the BCB carried out traditional FX swap auctions, in which assumed a long position in domestic interest rate and a short position in FX.
