However, industrial activity recovery continues to be influenced by the international crisis, due to its effects both over exports and credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
The future behavior of industrial production recovery, which should not be uniform over time, will depend on these factors, as well as on the gradual recovery of consumer and businessmen confidence, counterbalancing the deterioration of external demand.
Labor market has continued to record ambiguous indicators, combining positive aspects with signs of loss of strength.
The manufacturing industry showed positive balance for the third consecutive month.
Similarly, the commerce sector continued the recovery trajectory initiated in April, with the positive result of 17,522 jobs.
The agricultural sector showed the greatest dynamism, generating 57,169 jobs.
After consecutive falls in the last months of 2008, expanded retail sales data have evidenced recovery, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of vehicles, in response to sector incentives granted by the government and to some improvement in the access to vehicle credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit supply and by the behavior of consumer confidence.
The reduction on the Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV, according to the same comparison basis, seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to significant idle capacity in the manufacturing industry.
Regarding the absorption of capital goods, data indicate continuity of retraction year-over-year and expansion at the margin.
In short, evidences suggest that demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry reduced, although the ones regarding the utilization rates have increased in the last months.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month cumulative trade balance recovered at the margin.
The adjustment in relative prices and the accommodation in the pace of expansion of domestic demand contribute to the recovery of the trade surplus, but the deterioration in the terms of trade acts on the opposite direction.
The unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in the US and Europe, using a wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in monetary markets, have continued to moderate the perception of systemic risk.
In this environment, there have been signs of reduction in risk aversion, but confidence recovery remains fragile and subject to reversals.
Anyway, the decreasing trend of risk aversion and scarcity of capital flows, as well as some concern about the fiscal situation in the US, continued to encourage the recovery of currencies, both from emerging and mature economies, against the US dollar.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures.
However, there are evidences that economic activity in G3 could be stabilizing, with signs of resilience in consumption in the US and recovery of manufacturing activity in Germany and Japan.
On the other hand, the problems in the international financial system might continue to be aggravated by the cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, focused on the US and Europe, which could reinforce the contraction in the financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of new intensification in the deceleration.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity has decelerated considerably and for a longer period, inflationary pressures reduced rapidly.
The disinflation process seems to have gained momentum also in the emerging economies, in spite of greater persistence of the inflationary dynamics.
In this context, monetary policies stances have become highly expansionist and focused on non-traditional instruments in the mature economies, while the expansionist stance in the emerging economies has been more moderate.
At the same time, the authorities in the US, Western Europe and Asia announced a series of important initiatives aimed at sustaining economic activity through fiscal incentives, which can contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
Its important to notice, however, that the estimates on the fiscal costs for macroeconomic stimulus and support packages to the financial sector are high, which has caused pressures over the risk assessment of several sovereign credits, even in advanced economies.
The accumulation of signs showing that global economy could be close to an inflexion point, as well as the deterioration of public finance, have resulted in the elevation of interest rate forward structure in advanced mature economies.
However, future markets quotations decreased.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging economies, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investments maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged gasoline prices in the rest of However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, or through the transportation costs for industry, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Under the market scenario, inflation projection for 2010 increased, but remains close to target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
The risk aversion increase and the constraint of liquidity conditions prevailing in international markets continue to impose adjustments in the balance of payments, but show significant easing at the margin.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices still evidences reduction of external inflationary pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in some emerging economies.
Consequently, despite the increase in commodities prices since early 2009, the net impact of the global deceleration over the domestic inflation path continues to be, until present, predominantly benign.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may impose risks to the inflationary trajectory is limited.
The Committee evaluates, however, that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures initially localized over consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that, according to available data, the behavior of domestic demand should exert less pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
Anyhow, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains on inflation control obtained in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
Such considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
In light of the international crisis effects over domestic financial conditions, credit contribution to sustain domestic demand has diminished although signs of recovery cumulate, in particular regarding credit loans to individuals.
The severity of the international crisis influenced negatively consumers and businessmen confidence, but in this case there are also more consistent signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, the rhythm of economic activity resumption strongly depends on real payroll expansion and on the effect of governmental transfers that will occur in 2009, and it should also benefit from the gradual easing of financial conditions.
In short, the most recent data on domestic economic activity seem to reinforce the evaluation, mentioned in previous Copom meetings minutes, that the contractionary effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context on which the monetary policy operates, could become persistent, but wouldnt be permanent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decisions will have impacts concentrated in the final months of 2009 and, particularly in The Copom understands that the loss of domestic demand dynamism has caused an increase in the idleness margin of factors utilization, resulting in reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, on the short term, from price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of services prices and regulated items since the beginning of 2009, as well as from a possible increase in commodities prices.
In the medium-term, the risk stems from the cumulative and lagged effects, from the financial conditions easing over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in a context of recovery of production factors utilization.
The balance of those influences over the inflationary prospective trajectory will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates leads to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the increase of the idleness margin of the economy relative, in particular, to the industrial capacity utilization rates and labor market indicators, as well as to the behavior of inflation expectations for relevant horizons, the prospects for the materialization of a benign inflation scenario, in which the IPCA would resume evolution in line with the target path, have remained favorable.
Such evolution of the forward-looking scenario is reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee, as well as on inflation expectations set by independent analysts.
Under such circumstances, in order to preserve the improvement of the prospective inflation scenario, under a macroeconomic scenario with significant uncertainty, the Copom evaluates that monetary policy should maintain a cautious stance, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the demand accommodation, motivated by tightening of financial conditions and by the deterioration of agents confidence, although marginal improvements continue to be observed, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, which could also be cooling, has created significant idleness margin of production factors, which should not be rapidly eliminated in a basic scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
The Copom also emphasizes that uncertainties around such basic scenario remain, with positive and negative biases over the pace of economic activity recovery.
Anyhow, such development, contemplated under the basic scenario, should contribute to restrain inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the Committee notices that the significant monetary policy easing, implemented since January will have cumulative effects over the economy, which will be evidenced with a time lag.
The Committee understands that decisions regarding the evolution of the basic interest rate have to take into account the magnitude of the total adjustment made since January, whose impacts on several economic indicators will be evident over time.
The Copom also evaluates that a more cautious stance will contribute to mitigate the risk of abrupt reversals of monetary policy in the future and, therefore, to the consistent recovery of the economy over the next quarters.
The Copom also evaluates that the preservation of benign inflationary prospects will require that the behavior of the financial system and the economy under a new level of interest rates be closely monitored over time.
Taking into account the fact that monetary policy easing implemented since January has lagged and cumulative effects over the economy, the committee evaluates, at the present moment, that this level of basic interest rates is consistent with a benign inflationary scenario, contributing to ensure the inflation convergence to targets path over the relevant time horizon, as well as to the non-inflationary recovery of economic activity.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a long period of expansion, domestic demand started to exert contractionist influence over economic activity, despite the persistence of incentive factors, such as income growth.
Additionally, it bears highlighting that inflation expectations for 2009, 2010 and 2011 remain in line with targets path.
It is also noteworthy that global economic deceleration has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices.
Under such environment, monetary policy could be significantly eased since January without jeopardizing the inflation convergence to targets path.
On the other hand, important monetary and fiscal stimuli were introduced in the economy over the last few months, and should contribute to the recovery of the economy, and consequently, to the reduction of the idleness margin of production factors.
The stimuli effects should be closely monitored over time and are important in the context where future monetary policy decisions, which should ensure the materialization of the convergence to targets path over relevant horizons, will be taken.
The various core inflation measures, calculated with the use of IPCA disaggregation, decelerated in June, both on month-on-month and on twelve-month trailing bases.
CNI indicators showed smooth recovery of industrial activity in May.
It represents the fourth consecutive monthly increase, and the recent recovery was mainly favored by the greater optimism of consumers regarding the future of economy.
In June, both the assessment of current situation and expectations for the next months outperformed those for May.
The research shows that the fear related to unemployment decreased in the second quarter of 2009, with the index reaching, in June, the same level registered in September 2008, when the effects of the international economic crisis were not still so pronounced in the Brazilian economy.
In relation to the expectations for the manufacturing industry, the FGV Manufacturing Industry Survey showed, in June, for the sixth consecutive month, improvement in businessmen confidence.
It is important to highlight that no sector of economic activity recorded net loss of jobs.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in one day in May, reaching 367 days, down from 378 days in December, the first increase since October The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 270 days in May, down from 302 days in December, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 495 days in May, up from the record high of 492 days observed in October.
The contraction of industrial production in the main developed countries slowed down, with indicators for Japan and the Euro Zone returning to positive levels.
The final demand for goods and services, especially household consumption, continues to present signs of stabilization, but doubts about the demand trajectory in the second semester persist.
In the short run, international trade should benefit from the current phase of inventories cycle, with stabilization or a possible recovery, conditioned to the expansion of final demand.
The behavior of twelve-month consumer price indices in the main economies has been benefited by the low rates of installed capacity occupation, by the production price deflation and by the favorable basis effect in the prices of energy and food.
In June, deflation continued to be present in consumer price indices in the US, Japan and China, and was also present in the Euro Area.
The VIX index continued a declining path, while the stock markets indicators in the main economies alternated periods of lows, in a first moment, with periods of highs, more recently observed.
The three-month Libor rate, in dollar, continued to retreat, despite in lower intensity.
However, the banking system still remains imposing severe restrictions to the last credit borrower.
Considering this scenario, the central banks from mature economies maintained the accommodative stance of their monetary policy, while the central banks of emerging economies such as Chile, Mexico, Peru, Colombia, Russia and Turkey continued to deepen the cuts in their basic interest rates.
On the other hand, the medium- and longterm rates behaved differently in the same period, which resulted in an upward movement in the slope of the curve, similar to the movement observed in the international market.
Between June 8 and July 20, one-, three- and sixmonth and one-year rates decreased by 74 bps, 60 bps, 50 bps and 43 bps, respectively.
The two- and three-year rates increased by 7 bps and 11 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 30 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
