As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
Moreover, it bears emphasizing that the severe climatic conditions observed in the South of the country also influenced the industrial performance in November.
Data already released for the last months point, in short, to the interruption of the industrial production expansion cycle in the last quarter of Industrial activity has been influenced by the international crisis, both due to its effects over credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
In this context, several industrial segments have been led to adjust inventories and reduce production, with highlights to the sectors of transportation, especially vehicles, mining, ironworks and petrochemical.
The recent slowdown in capital goods production reflects the persistence of the international financial turmoil and its consequences over business confidence.
On its turn, the cooling in the pace of expansion of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, the tightening of credit conditions, the deterioration of consumer expectations and the process of inventories reduction mentioned above.
Such developments should continue to be evidenced by the December data.
Labor market started to record ambiguous indicators, combining positive aspects with significant accommodation of formal job creation at the margin.
However, preliminary evidence for January points to some recovery in the sales of vehicles, partially in response to sectoral incentives granted by the government.
The steady growth of retail sales had been reflecting, in short, the performance of both the sectors more sensitive to income and employment expansions and those more sensitive to credit conditions.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution may be favored by inflation reduction, but it will also be affected by the changes in the access to credit supply and by the deterioration of consumer confidence.
The reduction on Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation on economic activity, and points to significant increase of the idle capacity level of the manufacturing industry.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services, to adequately meet demand conditions.
The trade balance continues to register deceleration at the margin, an already anticipated trend, and which is in line with assessments present in previous Inflation Reports and Copom Minutes.
The increased risk aversion, observed since mid-September, after the bankruptcy of an important US financial institution, led the authorities in the US, Europe and Oceania to intervene in an unprecedentedly way in their financial systems, using wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in money markets.
Systemic risk perception, which has shown some moderation, intensified in the last weeks.
The international liquidity contraction has been contributing to a deleverage process by asset managers, which, in turn, has been pressuring down the prices of financial assets.
In an environment of increased risk aversion and shortage of capital flows, the volatility of emerging economies currencies continues present, despite not showing the generalized trend of depreciation against the US dollar observed in the last months of Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures.
The dominant view still points to the expansion, despite at quite modest pace, of global economic activity in 2009, but data released in the last weeks indicate a more intense and generalized cooling of activity in mature economies and also in several emerging economies.
There are evidences that the deeper weakening of economic activity in Europe and parts of Asia was in a significant manner due to the negative shock in the terms of trade caused by the elevation of commodities prices, which is being reverted.
On the other hand, the problems in the financial system have been aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, which tends to reinforce the contraction in financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of intensification of deceleration.
The US economy, in particular, has been in recession since the end of 2007 and still continues to suffer the impacts of the housing sector crisis, with spillover effects on the labor market, whose weakening, together with the negative wealth effect associated to the fall in the prices of financial assets, has affected consumers confidence, significantly contributing for depressing expenditure.
Moreover, the prevailing interpretation is that the activity in Europe and Japan should continue to lose dynamism in the next months.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity is decelerating considerably, inflationary pressures have reduced fast.
In emerging economies, where the secondary effects of raw materials price increases over consumer prices and the heated demand pressures over the supply expansion capacity had been more intense, inflationary pressures have also been declining, although they show, in many cases, more persistence.
In this context, the monetary policy stance is mainly expansionist in mature economies, whereas in emerging economies, which have been affected by the exchange rate depreciation trend, in addition to the facts already mentioned, the reaction seems to be more heterogeneous, but expansionist bias also prevails.
In mature economies, the authorities have been announcing a series of initiatives aimed at sustaining economic activity, particularly through fiscal incentives, which could contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
On the other hand, estimates on the fiscal costs for packages of macroeconomic stimulus and support to the financial sector have been increasing, which has caused pressures on the assessment of risk on many sovereign credits, even in advanced economies.
Future markets quotations have also shown high volatility, without a defined trend.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging countries, on the supplys reaction to stimuli stemming from previous changes on relative prices and on the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute for the consolidation of a favorable longterm macroeconomic environment.
Economic activity data indicate that the pace of domestic demand expansion, which continued quite robust until the third quarter of 2008, and was at least partially responsible for the inflationary pressures, has considerably lost momentum since then.
This deceleration is partly a result of a substantial and generalized cooling of economy activity on both emerging and G-8 economies.
On its turn, the increase in risk aversion and the unprecedentedly constraints observed in liquidity conditions in the international markets continue to impose adjustments in the balance of payments.
In general terms, the influence of the external scenario on the future trajectory of Brazilian inflation continues to be subject to contradictory effects, which can act with distinct intensity throughout time and surrounded by significant uncertainty.
On the one hand, the economic cooling has caused an increase in risk aversion, impacting the demand for Brazilian assets, and consequently, depreciating their prices.
On the other hand, the more generalized economic deceleration in the last months, which may persist in the upcoming quarters, has caused the cooling of both commodities prices and external demand, and has also negatively impacted local financial conditions.
Moreover, the trajectory of price indices evidences the reduction of inflationary external pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in some emerging economies.
As a consequence, the net effect of the global deceleration over the inflation trajectory seems to be, so far, predominantly benign.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in this context is to guarantee the maintenance of favorable results achieved in the last years.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risks to domestic inflation trajectory diminished.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that, according to data available, domestic demand should exert lesser pressures over the prices of nontradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
In this context, the Copom reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
Copom emphasizes, once again, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
This point of view is even more important in periods of higher uncertainty.
It is particularly important to notice, the effects of the international crisis over domestic financial conditions have resulted in severe decline of the credit contribution to support domestic demand.
Additionally, the intensification of the international crisis has caused a negative effect on consumers and businessmen confidence.
If this situation persists, the strength of economic activity will increasingly depend on payroll expansion and on the effects of governmental transfers expected for These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in the upcoming quarters.
The Copom evaluates that the loss of strength on domestic demand should result in reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the remaining risks for the inflationary dynamics derive from the trajectory of Brazilian assets prices, amidst a process of decreasing external sources of funding and mechanisms of price adjustments that contribute to prolong inflationary pressures observed last year.
The balance of those influences over the prospective trajectory of inflation will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates leads to increase in risk premiums, shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Indeed, the evolution of the prospective scenario is reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee.
The Copom also understands that demand deceleration has reduced the pressure over supply conditions observed in most of 2008, which should significantly contribute to deflate the economy.
Still, monetary policy should be cautiously conducted, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path, despite some scope for an easing process.
The Committee believes that the consolidation of restrictive financial conditions for a longer period should exert in significant contraction effect over demand and, throughout time, a relevant deflation pressure.
Under such circumstances, the majority of the Copom members, taking into account the balance of risks for economic activity and, consequently, for the prospective inflation scenario, as well as the absence of clear evidence of effects over inflation stemming from the depreciation of the exchange rate, in an environment of global reduction of inflationary pressures, has decided, at this moment, to reduce the Selic rate by 100 bps.
Other Copom members evaluate that, in light of the presence of inflationary feedback mechanisms in the economy, as well as the consequences of the balance of payments adjusting process, a more moderate reduction of the Selic rate would represent a more consistent signal of the prospective trend of inflation convergence to the targets path and would be more adequate to an optimal pace of the easing process.
Five votes were in favor of this monetary policy action while three were in favor of reducing the Selic rate by 75bps.
With such action, the Committee has initiates a process of monetary policy easing, immediately accomplishing significant part of the Selic rate movement, without harming the commitment to the inflation target.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Committee guides its decisions according to projected inflation, analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking prices dynamics, and the balance of risks associated to their projections.
There are signs that, after a long expansion period, domestic demand has started to have a contraction influence over economic activity, despite persistence of incentive factors, such as income growth.
On the other hand, the strong global economy deceleration has resulted in downward pressures over wholesale prices, despite the exchange rate adjustment.
In such environment, monetary policy can be more flexible without putting at risk inflation convergence to the targets path.
Evidently, if deterioration on the risk profile implies shifts to the inflation prospective basic scenario, considered by the Committee at this moment, the monetary policy stance will be promptly adjusted to the circumstances.
The agricultural IPA behavior strongly contributed to this scenario.
Still according to the FGV, businessmen confidence in the industrial sector declined in December, similarly to the observed in the previous three months.
The index reached a record low since October 1998, emphasizing the pessimistic businessmen expectations about industrial activity, already captured in the November survey.
Considering industrial segments, only pharmaceuticals and veterinary products expanded, 3.6 p.p., year-over-year.
Manufacturing industry was the sector that recorded the higher number of dismissals, 273.2 thousand, followed by agriculture and services, which eliminated 134.5 and 117.1 thousand jobs, respectively.
Compared to November 2007, unemployment declined 0.6 p.p.
The relative stability of the unemployment rate in November, month-on-month, reflected the dismissal of 76 thousand workers from the labor market and the elimination of 95 thousand jobs.
The current economic and financial conditions have implied a decline in consumption and deterioration of business and consumer expectations, impacting negatively production, investment and real GDP, outlining the most severe economic reversal since The recession in United States, Japan, United Kingdom, Germany, Italy and Australia, among others; the dramatic decline in the installed capacity utilization verified globally; and the retraction in international trade are responsible for the deepening in the decline in the prices of commodities, oil in particular.
This fact, added up to the deepening of the non-functionality in the financial systems, has evidenced the need of anti-cyclical fiscal policies.
In this sense, new packages of fiscal stimulus, preferentially directed to expenditures in infrastructure and tax reduction, were released in the US, Japan, China, Germany, Spain, France and UK, among others.
This behavior was mainly driven by the fall in the current and expected inflation and by the released indicators that signaled the reduction of the expansion pace of economic activity, negatively impacting in the labor market.
Between December 8 and January 19, one-, three-, and six-month rates decreased by 51 bps, 87 bps and 141 bps, respectively.
Moreover, one-, two- and three-year rates decreased by 180 bps, 209 bps, and 211 bps, respectively.
In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, from December 9 to January 19, weekly five- and sevenmonth fixed rate repo operations, borrowing.
In the same period, the BCB borrowed money through 32 overnight repo operations.
The BCB also conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
