The slowdown of the IGP-DI has basically reflected the behavior of all its three components.
Regarding the IPA-DI, the inflationary deceleration, under this comparison basis, derives basically from the behavior of both agricultural and industrial prices.
As mentioned in previous Copom Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend on current and prospective demand conditions and price-setters expectations for the future inflation path.
The analysis of the behavior of IBGE industrial output series, and its components, suggests that production reached its trough in December-January, and has been followed by gradual recovery.
However, industrial activity recovery continues to be influenced by the international outlook, by business and households expectations, as well as by the developments of domestic financial conditions, supported by traditional sources of credit, besides the recovery of capital markets and the performance of financial public institutions.
The recovery, at the margin, in the dynamism of industrial production, led by production of durable goods, although more widespread than before, reflects, to a great extension, tax exemption measures and also some easing in credit conditions.
The future behavior of industrial production recovery, which should not be uniform over time, will depend on these factors, as well as on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, counterbalancing the still emerging recovery of external demand.
Labor market has behaved more favorably, with resilient aspects prevailing over signs of loss of strength.
The manufacturing industry showed positive balance of 74.6 thousand jobs, the seventh consecutive month of expansion and the best result of the series for the month.
Similarly, the commerce sector continued the recovery trajectory initiated in April, with the positive result of 68.5 thousand jobs, the best result for the month.
Also in the services sector, the creation of jobs in October was the best result for the month in the series.
The agricultural and livestock sector, on its turn, lost 11.6 thousand jobs, following the seasonal pattern.
Since the beginning of the year, expanded retail sales data have evidenced recovery, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of durable, in response to sector incentives granted by the government and to the improvement in the access to credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the inflation behavior, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit supply, influenced by the lagged effects of monetary policy and by the evolution of consumer confidence.
The reduction on the Nuci, according to the same comparison basis, results from a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, but more recent data suggest that idle margin has been reducing.
Data regarding the absorption of capital goods show retraction compared to the same periods of 2008 and expressive expansion at the margin.
In short, evidences suggest that the utilization rates have been increasing the last months, showing a reduction in the idle margin of the industry, accompanied by the resume of investments.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the recent narrowing of trade surplus.
The unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in mature economies, using a wide range of instruments, have continued to moderate the perception of systemic risk, in an environment of strong liquidity expansion.
Under these conditions the signs of reduction in risk aversion continue, as evidenced by the behavior of international equity markets, although this process remains subject to reversals.
The trend of reduction of risk aversion and of the scarcity of capital flows, as well as some concern among investors about the fiscal situation in the US, continued to encourage the recovery of currencies, both from emerging and mature economies, against the US dollar, yet in a more modest and heterogeneous terms in relation to the movement observed in previous months.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures in 2009, but recovery of economic activity seems to have been consolidating.
However, there are evidences of gradual recovery in the economic activity, but still subject to reversals, particularly due to the weakness in the labor market and economic activity in G3.
On the other hand, the risks that the problems of the international financial system may be aggravated by the cyclical deterioration of the credit quality, which could contain the distension of financial conditions, and consequently, difficulty the consolidation of recovery, persist, but seem to be slowing.
Therefore, the minimal points of inflation in mature economies seem to have been exceeded, despite the persistence, on a twelve-month trailing basis, of the disinflation process in several emerging economies.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in a significant number of countries, monetary policy seems to have begun a phase of stability, whereas the increase in public sector debt imposes limits on the scope of any additional fiscal stimuli.
Future markets did not show a consistent trend as well.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in the context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investment maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment.
The risk aversion and the liquidity conditions prevailing in international markets continue to show a normalization trend at the margin.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices still evidences external inflationary pressures contained.
Consequently, the impact of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path continues to be, up to now, predominantly benign.
On its turn, the possible consolidation of the world economy recovery might impact, although in a heterogeneous fashion, the global inflationary dynamics.
On the top of this, it should be added the uncertainty generated by the effects of the unprecedented liquidity expansion on mature economies, over the price behavior of both assets and commodities.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized pressures impose risks to the inflationary trajectory remains limited.
The Committee understands that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures, initially localized over the consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Incidentally, inflation expectations for 2010 and 2011 remain in line with the targets path and continue to be closely monitored.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that the domestic demand behavior tends to exert contained pressure over nontradable items, such as services, over the upcoming quarters.
Nonetheless, the Committee reaffirms that it will conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains on inflation control obtained in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation figures.
Such considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
Signs of credit recovery continue to accumulate, in particular regarding loans to individuals.
Also for consumer and businessmen confidence there are consistent signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, the rhythm of economic activity resumption strongly depends on real payroll expansion, on the effects of fiscal stimulus measures and on incremental governmental transfers, which will occur in the upcoming months.
It should also benefit from the easing of financial conditions, favored by the policy of official banks, among other factors.
In short, the most recent data on domestic economic activity seem to reinforce the evaluation mentioned in previous Copom meetings minutes that the contractionist effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context on which the monetary policy operates, could become persistent, but would not be permanent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decision will have concentrated impacts in The Copom understands that the risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, in the short term, from price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of services prices and certain regulated items since the beginning of 2009, as well as from a possible hike in commodities prices.
In the medium term, the risk stems from cumulative and lagged effects of the financial conditions easing and from the fiscal stimulus over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in a context of recovery of production factors utilization.
The balance of such influences over the inflationary prospective trajectory will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure that that the convergence of inflation towards the target path observed in 2009 continues to be registered in 2010 and Such strategy, which results have been evidenced throughout time, takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanisms and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the idleness margin of the economy, evidenced by indicators of capacity utilization in industry and of the labor market, and the behavior of inflation expectations for relevant horizons, the materialization of a benign inflation scenario, in which the IPCA would continue to evolve according to the target path, has remained favorable.
By the way, such evolution of the forward-looking scenario continues to be reflected on the inflation projections considered by the Committee.
Under such circumstances, in order to preserve the improvement of the prospective inflationary path, under a macroeconomic scenario with significant uncertainty, the Copom evaluates that monetary policy should maintain a cautious stance, aiming to assure the maintenance of inflation convergence to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the accommodation of demand, motivated by the tightening of financial conditions and by deterioration of the agents confidence, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, has been overcome, although significant idleness margin of production factors still persists, which should not be rapidly eliminated in a basic scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
The Copom also highlights that there are uncertainties around such basic scenario, which should be clarified over the upcoming months, with both positive and negative biases over the pace of economic activity recovery.
Anyhow, under such scenario of gradual recovery, which has been corroborated by current available data, inflationary pressures should remain restrained.
On the other hand, the Committee notices that the significant monetary policy easing, implemented between January and July, will have cumulative effects over the economy, which will be evidenced with a time lag.
The Committee understands that decisions regarding the evolution of the basic interest rate have to take into account the magnitude of the stimuli introduced into the economy, whose impacts on several economic indicators will be evident over time, in a context of a gradual and consistent recovery of production factors utilization.
The Copom also understands that a more cautious stance will contribute to mitigate the risk of abrupt reversals of monetary policy in the future and, therefore, to the consistent recovery of the economy over the upcoming quarters.
The Copom also evaluates that the preservation of benign inflationary prospects will require the behavior of the financial system and the economy under a new level of interest rates to be closely monitored over time.
Taking into account, on the one hand, the monetary policy easing implemented since January and, on the other hand, the idleness margin of production factors, among other factors, the Committee evaluates that such level of basic interest rate is now consistent with a benign inflationary scenario, contributing to assure the maintenance of inflation in line with the targets path over the relevant horizon for the non-inflationary recovery of economic activity.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a short period of contraction, domestic demand started to show signs of recovery, due to the stimulus factors effects, such as income growth.
Additionally, it bears noticing that, evidencing the credibility achieved by the Copom on the implementation of the regime, inflation expectations for 2010 and 2011 remain in line with the targets path.
It is also noteworthy that global economic deceleration has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices.
On its turn, important monetary, credit, and fiscal stimuli were introduced into the economy over the last quarters and should contribute to the activity recovery and, consequently, to the reduction of the idleness margin of production factors.
Those stimuli effects should be closely monitored over time and are important in the context where future monetary policy decisions, which should ensure the materialization of the convergence of inflation to targets path over relevant horizons, will be taken.
All the core IPCA measures increased in November, both on monthly and twelve-month trailing basis.
CNI indicators kept on showing in October the increase of industrial activity, according to data seasonally adjusted relative to September.
Relative to October 2008, the Nuci decreased 2 p.p., reaching fifteen among the nineteen activities in the manufacturing industry.
In relation to the expectations for the manufacturing industry, the FGV Manufacturing Industry Survey recorded, in November, the tenth consecutive high, showing the consolidation of manufacturing industry recovery after recent international crisis.
In the year through October and on a twelve-month basis, respectively, 1,163.6 thousand and 467.8 thousand jobs were created.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in October for the second consecutive month, reaching 377 days.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 267 days, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 513 days.
At the same time, the Japanese economy registered the second consecutive quarter of growth in the third quarter, accelerating from the expansion of the previous period.
The resumption of growth in the two largest economies has supported the recovery of international trade and economic activity in other regions of the world.
Among the emerging countries, China and India followed with acceleration on annual growth rates, while Mexico and South Korea registered high quarterly growth rates.
In the United Kingdom and in some emerging economies such as South Korea, Hungary and Turkey, the disinflationary process also began to reverse.
In the US and the Euro Area, the persistence of low rates of utilization of capacity, accompanied by stability in inflation expectations, should contribute to avoid inflationary pressures in the short and medium terms.
Despite the announcement of the debt restructuring of the Dubai World Sovereign Wealth Fund, which led, more recently, to an increased risk aversion, in general, international financial markets showed relative stability during the period.
In this environment, most central banks kept unchanged their basic interest rates.
In the opposite direction, in the United Kingdom, Japan and Russia, central banks increased the local monetary loosening, respectively through increasing the value of direct purchases of assets, by additional injection of liquidity and through the continuous reduction of basic interest rates.
The release of betterthan-expected data for the economic activity and labor market, and current inflation higher than expectations contributed to this movement.
Between October 19 and December 7, one- three- and six-month rates increased by 0.01 bps, 0.03 bps and 0.17 bps, respectively, whereas one- two- and three-year rates increased by 0.20 bps, 0.10 bps and 0.14 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 35 overnight repo operations and conducted two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations at the end of day.
