The future behavior of industrial production recovery, which should not be uniform over time, will depend on these factors, as well as on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, counterbalancing the still emerging recovery of external demand.
Labor market has behaved more favorably, with resilient aspects prevailing over signs of loss of strength.
The manufacturing industry showed positive balance of 123.3 thousand jobs, the sixth consecutive month of expansion and the best result of the series for the month.
Similarly, the commerce sector continued the recovery trajectory initiated in April, with the positive result of 50.3 thousand jobs.
The agricultural and livestock sector, on its turn, lost 17.1 thousand jobs.
After consecutive falls in the last months of 2008, expanded retail sales data have evidenced recovery, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of vehicles, in response to sector incentives granted by the government and to the improvement in the access to vehicle credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit supply, influenced by the lagged effects of monetary policy and by the evolution of consumer confidence.
The reduction on the Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV, according to the same comparison basis, results from a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to some idle capacity in the manufacturing industry.
Data regarding the absorption of capital goods show retraction compared to the same periods of 2008 and expansion at the margin.
In short, evidences suggest that demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry are contained, although the utilization rates have increased in the last months.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month cumulative trade balance reduced at the margin.
The greater resilience of domestic demand relative to the external demand contributes to the recent narrowing of trade surplus.
The unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in mature economies, using a wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in monetary markets, have continued to moderate the perception of systemic risk.
In this environment, the signs of reduction in risk aversion continue, as evidenced by the behavior of international equity markets, although this process remains subject to reversals.
Anyway, the improved trend of risk aversion and of the scarcity of capital flows, as well as some concern among investors about the fiscal situation in the US, continued to encourage the recovery of currencies, both from emerging and mature economies, against the US dollar.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures, but recovery of economic activity seems to have been consolidating.
However, there are evidences of gradual recovery in the economic activity, but still subject to reversals, particularly due to the weakness in the labor market and economic activity in G3.
On the other hand, the risk that the problems in the international financial system become aggravated by the cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit - which could contain the distension in financial conditions and, as a consequence, hinder the consolidation of economic recovery - still persists, but it seems to be reducing.
Therefore, the prospect of deflation in mature economies has retreated, despite the persistence, on a twelve-month trailing basis, of the disinflation process in several emerging economies.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in a significant number of countries, monetary policy seems to have begun a phase of stability and, in some cases, started a period of reversing the stimulus introduced during the sharpest international contraction period, whereas the increase in public sector debt imposes limits on the scope of any additional fiscal stimuli.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in the context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investments maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged gasoline prices in the rest of However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
The risk aversion and the liquidity conditions prevailing in international markets continue to show a normalization trend at the margin.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices still evidences reduction of external inflationary pressures.
Consequently, the impact of the international scenario over the domestic inflation path continues to be, until present, predominantly benign.
On its turn, the possible consolidation of the world economy recovery, which, to a certain extent, has been reproducing the disequilibrium observed in the period prior to the 2008 crisis, might impact, although in a heterogeneous fashion, the global inflationary dynamics.
On the top of this, it should be added the uncertainty generated by the effects of the unprecedented liquidity expansion on mature economies, over the price behavior of both assets and commodities.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized pressures impose risks to the inflationary trajectory remains limited.
The moderation of domestic demand pressures over the market of factors, at least in the short run, should contribute to contain the risk of pass-through of possible upward pressures over consumer prices stemming from wholesale prices.
The Committee understands that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures, initially localized over the consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Incidentally, inflation expectations for 2010 and 2011 remain in line with the targets path and continue to be closely monitored.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that the domestic demand behavior tends to exert less pressure over non-tradable items, such as services, over the upcoming quarters.
Nonetheless, the Committee reaffirms that it will conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains on inflation control obtained in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the assessment of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation figures.
Such considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
In light of the international crisis effects over domestic financial conditions, credit contribution for the support of domestic demand diminished, but signs of recovery continue to accumulate, in particular regarding loans to individuals.
The severity of the international crisis negatively impacted consumers and businessmen confidence, but also in this case there are consistent signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, the rhythm of economic activity resumption strongly depends on real payroll expansion, on the effects of fiscal stimulus measures and on incremental governmental transfers, which will occur in the upcoming months.
It should also benefit from the easing of financial conditions.
In short, the most recent data on domestic economic activity seem to reinforce the evaluation mentioned in previous Copom meetings minutes that the contractionist effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context on which the monetary policy operates, could become persistent, but would not be permanent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decision will have concentrated impacts in The Copom understands that the loss of domestic demand dynamism that occurred at the end of 2008 caused an increase in the idleness margin of production factors utilization, resulting in reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, on the short term, from price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of services prices and certain regulated items since the beginning of 2009, as well as from a possible hike in commodities prices.
On the medium term, the risk stems from cumulative and lagged effects of the financial conditions easing and from the fiscal stimulus over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in a context of recovery of production factors utilization.
The balance of such influences over the inflationary prospective trajectory will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure that inflation remains in a level consistent with the target path in 2009, 2010 and Such strategy, which should have its results evidenced throughout time, takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanisms and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the idleness margin of the economy, and the behavior of inflation expectations for relevant horizons, the materialization of a benign inflation scenario, in which the IPCA would continue to evolve according to the target path, has remained favorable.
By the way, such evolution of the forwardlooking scenario continues to be reflected on the inflation projections considered by the Committee.
Under such circumstances, in order to preserve the improvement of the prospective inflationary path, under a macroeconomic scenario with significant uncertainty, the Copom evaluates that monetary policy should maintain a cautious stance, aiming to assure the maintenance of inflation convergence to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the accommodation of demand, motivated by the tightening of financial conditions and by deterioration of the agents confidence, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, could have been overcome, although significant idleness margin of production factors still persists, which should not be rapidly eliminated in a basic scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
The Copom also highlights that there are uncertainties around such basic scenario, which should be clarified over the upcoming months, with both positive and negative biases over the pace of economic activity recovery.
Anyhow, under such scenario of gradual recovery, which has been corroborated by current available data, inflationary pressures should remain restrained.
On the other hand, the Committee notices that the significant monetary policy easing, implemented between January and July, will have cumulative effects over the economy, which will be evidenced with a time lag.
The Committee understands that decisions regarding the evolution of the basic interest rate have to take into account the magnitude of the total adjustment carried out between January and July, whose impacts on several economic indicators will be evident over time, in a context of gradual recovery of production factors utilization.
The Copom also understands that a more cautious stance will contribute to mitigate the risk of abrupt reversals of monetary policy in the future and, therefore, to the consistent recovery of the economy over the upcoming quarters.
The Copom also evaluates that the preservation of benign inflationary prospects will require the behavior of the financial system and the economy under a new level of interest rates to be closely monitored over time.
Taking into account, on the one hand, the monetary policy easing implemented since January and, on the other hand, the idleness margin of production factors, among other factors, the Committee evaluates that such level of basic interest rate is consistent with a benign inflationary scenario, contributing to assure the maintenance of inflation in line with the targets path over the relevant horizon for the non-inflationary recovery of economic activity.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides the decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a short period of contraction, domestic demand started to show signs of recovery, due to the stimulus factors effects, such as income growth.
Additionally, it bears noticing that, evidencing the credibility achieved by the Copom on the implementation of the regime, inflation expectations for 2010 and 2011 remain in line with the targets path.
It is also noteworthy that global economic deceleration has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices.
On its turn, important monetary and fiscal stimuli were introduced into the economy over the last quarters and should contribute to the activity recovery and, consequently, to the reduction of the idleness margin of production factors.
Those stimuli effects should be closely monitored over time and are important in the context where future monetary policy decisions, which should ensure the materialization of the convergence to targets path over relevant horizons, will be taken.
All the core IPCA measures increased in September, but decelerated on a twelve-month trailing basis.
Among the nineteen activities in the manufacturing industry, five showed increase in Nuci in August 2009, year-over-year.
According to the Consumer Expectations Survey carried out by the FGV nationwide, the ICC remained stable in September, month-on-month seasonally adjusted.
In relation to the expectations for the manufacturing industry, the FGV Manufacturing Industry Survey showed, in September, an increase of 3.8 p.p.
Yearover-year, the indicator decreased 5.5 p.p.
In the year through September and on a twelve-month basis, respectively, 932.7 thousand and 298.3 thousand new jobs were created.
The main economic activities expanded in September, with highlights for the manufacturing industry, with 123.3 thousand hires, reaching the best result of the series for the month.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, decreased in August, reaching 367 days.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 264 days, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 498 days.
The stabilization of financial markets and the inventories adjustments, whose trajectory has been suiting final demand, were crucial factors for the recovery of global economic activity.
Preliminary data suggest that economic recovery, already observed in Japan and in some emerging economies, has spread to other countries, with highlights to the USA and the Euro Area.
Signs of industrial production recovery in the developed countries strengthened, although they have slowed in the last months in Japan.
Data through August show that the USA, the Euro Area and Japan recorded two, four and six consecutive months of positive monthly changes, respectively.
Since May, China has recorded increasing growth rates on an annual basis.
The persistence of low rates of installed capacity occupation, added up to the stability of inflationary expectations in the medium-term, should continue to contribute inflation does not become a problem in the short- and medium-term in G3.
The financial market continues to recover, with key indicators pointing to increasing preference for risk.
The stocks exchanges of the major mature and emerging economies kept an upward trend, and among these last ones, except for China, are close to the record highs observed in the pre-crisis period.
Domestically, the release of improved data for the labor market, the increase of GDP growth projections, concerns with a possible reduction in the fiscal restriction and the expectation of a tax creation over foreign capital inflows contributed to this movement.
In the international scenario, the improvement of some US economic indicators and the decision of the Central Bank of Australia to increase its basic interest rate, being the first monetary authority to take this decision since the beginning of the crisis, have also influenced the upward movement of the yield curve.
Between August 31 and October 19, one- three- and six-month rates increased by 0.04 bps, 0.08 bps and 0.22 bps, respectively, whereas one- two- and three-year rates increased by 0.84 bps, 0.88 bps and 0.67 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 34 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations.
The main determinant factors of the liquidity increase in the period were the FX market interventions and the net redemption of securities by the National Treasury, during this period.
