However, industrial activity recovery continues to be influenced by the international crisis, due to its effects both over exports and credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
The loss of dynamism in capital goods production reflects the persistence of the international financial turmoil and its consequences over business confidence.
On its turn, the recovery, at the margin, in the dynamism of durable goods production reflects, predominantly, exemption tax measures and also some easing of credit conditions.
The future trajectory of industrial production will depend on these factors, which counterbalance the deterioration of external demand and a remaining process of inventories adjustment.
Labor market has continued to record ambiguous indicators, combining positive aspects with signs of loss of strength.
After five consecutive months of job losses, manufacturing industry showed stability in April.
After consecutive falls in the last months of 2008, expanded retail sales data have evidenced recovery influenced mainly by the increase in the sales of vehicles since the beginning of the year, in response to the sector incentives granted by the government and to some improvement in the access to vehicle credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit supply and by the behavior of consumer confidence.
The reduction on the Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV, according to the same comparison basis, seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to significant increase in the idle capacity margin of the manufacturing industry.
Regarding the absorption of capital goods, data indicate continuity of retraction year-overyear and expansion at the margin.
In short, evidences suggest that demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry reduced, although the ones regarding the utilization rates have increased in the last months.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month cumulative trade balance retreated at the margin.
The adjustment in relative prices and the accommodation in the pace of expansion of domestic demand contribute to the recovery of the trade surplus, but the deterioration in the terms of trade acts on the opposite direction.
The unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in the US and Europe, using a wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in monetary markets, have moderated the perception of systemic risk.
In this environment, there have been signs of reduction in risk aversion, but confidence recovery remains fragile and subject to reversals.
The decrease in both the risk aversion and the scarcity of capital flows, as well as some concern about tax situation in US, continued to encourage the recovery of currencies, both from emerging and mature countries, against the US dollar.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures.
There are evidences that economic activity in G3 could be stabilizing, with some improvement in disposable income and in demand for durable goods in the US and recovery of confidence of businessmen in Europe and real exports in Japan.
However, the problems in the international financial system have continued to be aggravated by a cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, focused on the US and Europe, which tends to reinforce the contraction in the financial conditions and, as a consequence, the risk of new intensification in the deceleration.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity has decelerated considerably and for a longer period, inflationary pressures have reduced rapidly.
The disinflation process seems to have gained momentum also in the emerging economies, in spite of greater persistence of the inflationary dynamics.
In this context, monetary policies stances have become highly expansionist and focused on non-traditional instruments in the mature economies, while the expansionist stance in the emerging economies has been more moderate.
At the same time, the authorities in the US, Western Europe and Asia have been announcing a series of important initiatives aimed at sustaining economic activity through fiscal incentives, which could contribute to a gradual economic recovery.
Its important to notice, however, that the estimates on the fiscal costs for macroeconomic stimulus and support packages to the financial sector have been increasing, which has caused pressures over the risk assessment of several sovereign credits, even in advanced economies.
The increasing signs that global economy would be close to an inflexion point, as well as the deterioration of public finance, have resulted in the elevation of interest rate forward structure in advanced mature economies.
Future markets quotations also increased.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, especially in emerging economies, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the rhythm of maturation of investments in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged gasoline prices in the rest of However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can eventually affect domestic prices both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
On the market scenario, the projection for 2010 remained stable, close to target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
The pace of demand expansion has significantly cooled since the third quarter of 2008, partially as a reaction to the substantial and generalized economic activity deceleration in other developed and emerging economies.
On its turn, the increase in risk aversion and the constraint observed in liquidity conditions prevailing in the international markets continue to impose adjustments in the balance of payments, but show some marginal improvements.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices still evidences reduction of external inflationary pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in some emerging economies.
Consequently, despite the recent increase in commodities prices, the net impact of the global deceleration over the domestic inflation path continues to be, until present, predominantly benign.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized inflationary pressures may cause risk to the inflationary trajectory has diminished.
The Committee evaluates that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures initially localized over consumer prices, still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that, according to available data, domestic demand behavior should exert less pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
Anyhow, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains obtained in inflation control in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
Such considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
In light of the international crisis effects over domestic financial conditions, credit contribution to sustain domestic demand severely diminished although there are some early signs of recovery, in particular regarding credit to individuals.
The severity of the international crisis negatively influenced consumers and businessmen confidence, but there are also signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, the resumption of economic activity strongly depends on real payroll expansion and on the effects of government transfers that should occur in 2009, but it should also benefit from the gradual easing of financial conditions.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decisions will have concentrated impacts in the final months of 2009 and, particularly in The Copom understands that the loss of domestic demand dynamism has caused an increase in the idleness margin of factors, resulting in reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, on the short term, from price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior in the price of services and regulated items since the beginning of 2009, as well as, if it persists, from the recent trend of increased commodities prices.
In the medium-term, the risk to the inflationary trajectory stems from the cumulative and lagged effects of the financial conditions easing over the evolution of domestic demand in a context of gradual recovery of the utilization of production factors.
The balance of those influences over the inflationary prospective trajectory will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates leads to increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over income distribution.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of signs of economic activity slowdown, regarding, for instance, industrial production indicators, labor market and industrial capacity utilization rates, as well as businessmen and consumers confidence, and of inflation expectations for relevant horizons, the prospects for the materialization of a benign inflationary scenario, in which the IPCA would resume evolution in line with the target path, have continued to consolidate.
Regarding this issue, the evolution of the forward-looking scenario is reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee, as well as on inflation expectations set by independent analysts.
Therefore, despite the residual margin for an easing process, the monetary policy should maintain a cautious stance, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the demand slowdown, motivated by tightening of financial conditions and by the deterioration of agents confidence, although some marginal improvement has been observed in both cases, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, has created a significant idleness margin of production factors that may not be rapidly eliminated in a scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
Such development should contribute to restrain the inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the Copom highlights that the significant monetary policy easing process that has been implemented since January, will have cumulative effects over the economy and will be evidenced after some time lag.
The Committee evaluates that decisions regarding the evolution of the basic interest rate have to take into account the magnitude of the total adjustment made since January, whose impacts on several economic indicators will be evident over time.
In such context, a few Copom members considered to be appropriate, under such circumstances, to immediately reduce the pace of the monetary easing process, implementing in a more smooth way the remaining portion of the adjustment process.
However, the majority of the Copom members, taking into account inflation projections, which have already incorporated the magnitude of the movement already made since January, decided, at this time, to maintain the adjustment pace unchanged.
It bears noticing, on the other hand, that there was consensus among the Committee members, taking into account the information available so far, relative to estimates regarding the scope for residual easing, which depends on the prospective scenario for inflation in light of the targets path and on the balance of risks for such scenario.
The Copom also understands that the preservation of benign inflationary prospects will demand that the economy and financial system behavior under a different interest rate level should be closely monitored.
Six votes in favor of the monetary policy action while two votes were in favor of reducing the Selic rate by 75 bps.
Taking into account the fact that changes on the basic interest rate have effects over the economic activity and over the inflationary dynamics that accumulate over time, the Committee agrees that any additional monetary easing should be implemented in a more parsimonious way.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a long period of expansion, domestic demand started to exert a contractionist influence over economic activity, despite the persistence of incentive factors, such as income growth.
Additionally, it bears highlighting that inflation expectations for 2009 and 2010 remain in a level consistent with the targets path.
It is noteworthy that the deceleration of global economy has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices.
Under such environment, the monetary policy could be significantly eased since January, without jeopardizing inflation convergence to the targets path.
If the risk profile deteriorates in such a manner that implies shifts to the inflation prospective basic scenario considered by the Committee at this moment, the monetary policy stance will be promptly adjusted to the circumstances.
It bears emphasizing the durable consumer goods production, particularly automobile vehicles production.
The LSPA survey carried out by the IBGE in February pointed to the production of 135 million tons in 2009, up from 134.7 million tons estimated in January.
The IBGE released data for Q1 2009 GDP.
Seasonally adjusted data showed relative stability in the employment level in April, month-on-month.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates reached 366 days in April, down from 378 days in December.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 273 days in April, down from 302 reached in December, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 491 days in April, up from 488 days observed in December.
Regarding economic activity, the most recent data already suggest that the pace of global economic activity contraction has decreased.
The US economic activity, for instance, has shown signs of stabilization in household consumption and in the housing market.
Likewise, the process of inventories adjustment, particularly in the retail sector, has advanced, making room for production recovery in the near future.
On the other hand, the recent hike in oil prices and the continuing rise in the rates of households savings and unemployment constitute risk factors for the recovery of consumption.
The key issue for the medium term is whether the positive signs stemming from financial markets will find, indeed, sustainability in economic activity.
In this sense, the ongoing deflationary process, for example, in the US, Japan and China, and the disinflation process, for example, in the UK and in most emerging economies, should still continue over 2009, due to the still uncertain recovery of economic activity and the fact that the prices of commodities, particularly oil, remain depressed when compared to the levels prevailing a year ago.
In Japan, the deflationary process is expected to last for some quarters.
In the period between the April and June Copom meetings, the future interest rates reduced significantly, especially short-term interest rates, reflecting the retreat in current inflation indices, the decline in inflation expectations and GDP growth projections.
The medium- and long-term rates showed similar trend, also influenced by expectations of an extended monetary policy easing cycle and by an increasing financial inflow coming from foreign investors.
After June 5, however, part of the downward movement of the curve was reversed, especially in its long segment, in reaction to the increase in the US Treasury bonds yield and the US dollar appreciation in the international market, noticeably after the disclosure of better-than-expected data on the US labor market.
Between April 27 and June 8, one-, three- and six-month rates decreased by 82 bps, 74 bps and 71 bps, respectively.
The one-, two- and three-year rates decreased by 64 bps, 48 bps and 30 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 29 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, one- and twoworking-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
On May 5, the BCB carried out reverse FX swap auctions maturing on June 1, aiming to anticipate the redemption of the traditional FX swap contracts maturing on the same date.
