However, industrial activity recovery continues to be influenced by the international crisis, due to its effects both over exports and credit conditions, and over business and households expectations.
The recovery, at the margin, in the dynamism of industrial production, led by production of the durable goods, reflects, predominantly, tax exemption measures and also some easing of credit conditions.
The future behavior of industrial production recovery, which should not be uniform over time, will depend on these factors, as well as on the gradual recovery of consumer and businessmen confidence, counterbalancing the deterioration of external demand.
Labor market tends to behave more favorable, in which resilient aspects prevail before signs of loss of strength.
The manufacturing industry showed positive balance for the fourth-consecutive month.
Similarly, the commerce sector continued the recovery trajectory initiated in April, with the positive result of 27,336 jobs.
The agricultural and livestock sector generated 29,483 jobs.
After consecutive falls in the last months of 2008, expanded retail sales data have evidenced recovery, mainly influenced by the increase in the sales of vehicles, in response to sector incentives granted by the government and to some improvement in the access to vehicle credit supply.
For the next quarters, the retail sales trajectory will continue to be sustained by fiscal transfers, as well as by real payroll growth, whose evolution should be favored by the reduction of inflation, but it will also be affected by the recovery in the access to credit supply and by the behavior of consumer confidence.
Considering the monthly series without seasonal adjustment, in June the Nuci was 3.4 p.p.
The reduction on the Nuci calculated by CNI and FGV, according to the same comparison basis, seems to be a result of a combination between the maturity of investment projects and accommodation of economic activity, and points to significant idle capacity in the manufacturing industry.
Regarding the absorption of capital goods, data indicate continuity of retraction year-over-year and expansion at the margin.
In short, evidences suggest that demand pressures over the productive capacity level of the manufacturing industry reduced, although the ones regarding the utilization rates have increased in the last months.
As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions.
The twelve-month cumulative trade balance reduced at the margin.
The adjustment in relative prices and the accommodation in the pace of expansion of domestic demand contribute to the recovery of the trade surplus, but the deterioration in the terms of trade acts in the opposite direction.
The unprecedented actions taken by the authorities in the US and Europe, using a wide range of instruments, in order to ensure minimum conditions of operation and liquidity in monetary markets, have continued to moderate the perception of systemic risk.
In this environment, there have been signs of reduction in risk aversion, but confidence recovery remains fragile and subject to reversals.
Anyway, the decreasing trend of risk aversion and scarcity of capital flows, as well as some concern about the fiscal situation in the US, continued to encourage the recovery of currencies, both from emerging and mature economies, against the US dollar.
Regarding the global macroeconomic scenario, contraction trends prevail over inflationary pressures, but recovery of economic activity seems to have begun.
However, there are evidences that economic activity in G3 could be stabilizing, with signs of improvements in industrial activity and stabilization in real estate market in the US, recovery of manufacturing activity and business confidence in Germany and industrial recovery in Japan.
On the other hand, the problems in the international financial system might continue to be aggravated by the cyclical deterioration in the quality of credit, focused on the US and Europe, which could reinforce the contraction in the financial conditions and, as a consequence, hinder the consolidation of economic recovery.
In mature economies, where inflation expectations are better anchored and economic activity has decelerated considerably and for a longer period, inflationary pressures reduced rapidly.
The disinflation process seems to have gained momentum also in the emerging economies, in spite of greater persistence of the inflationary dynamics.
In this context, after a period of aggressive monetary policy easing, in a significant number of countries, monetary policy seems to have entered into a stability phase, while the increase in public sector debt imposes limits on the scope of any additional fiscal stimulus.
Uncertainty concerning these quotations remains high, as the prospective scenario depends on the evolution of demand, in the context of global economic recovery, on the prospects for the evolution of global supply, subject to the pace of investments maturation in the sector, in addition to the geopolitical issues that affect the price of this commodity.
Nonetheless, despite the high uncertainty inherent to the projections regarding the trajectory of oil prices, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged gasoline prices in the rest of However, it bears highlighting that, regardless the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, the evolution of international oil prices can affect domestic prices through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, or through the transportation costs for industry, as well as through the potential effect over inflation expectations.
Assessment of Inflation Trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information.
For 2010, under the benchmark scenario, projection increased and is close to target, whereas decreased under the market scenario although remaining also close to target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable long-term macroeconomic environment.
The risk aversion increase and the constraint of liquidity condition prevailing in international markets continue to show significant easing at the margin.
However, it bears emphasizing that the trajectory of price indices still evidences reduction of external inflationary pressures, especially in mature economies, but also in some emerging economies.
Consequently, despite the increase in commodities prices since early 2009, the net impact of the global deceleration over the domestic inflation path continues to be, until present, predominantly benign.
The Copom emphasizes that the main challenge of monetary policy in such context is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved.
The Copom evaluates that the probability that initially localized pressures may impose risk to the inflationary trajectory is limited.
The moderation of domestic demand pressures over the market of factors, despite remaining subject to uncertainties, should contain the risk of pass-through of upward pressures stemming from wholesale prices.
The Committee, however, evaluates that the materialization of such pass-through, as well as the generalization of pressures initially localized over the consumer prices still depends critically on economic agents inflation expectations.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that the behavior of domestic demand should exert less pressure over the prices of non-tradable items, such as services, in the upcoming quarters.
Anyhow, the Committee reaffirms that it will continue to conduct its actions in order to ensure that the gains on inflation control obtained in recent years become permanent.
The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are important time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on economic activity and inflation.
Therefore, the evaluation of alternative options for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflation scenario and its risks, instead of current inflation indices.
Such considerations become even more relevant in periods surrounded by heightened uncertainty.
The Committee reaffirms that specific asset price movements are only relevant for monetary policy if they impact the forward-looking inflationary path.
In light of international crisis effects over domestic financial conditions, credit contribution to sustain domestic demand has diminished, although signs of recovery continue to cumulate, in particular regarding credit loans to individuals.
The severity of the international crisis influenced negatively consumers and businessmen confidence but also in this case there are more consistent signs of recovery.
Under such circumstances, the rhythm of economic activity resumption strongly depends on real payroll expansion and on the effects of fiscal stimulus and governmental transfers that will occur over the following months.
Additionally, it should also benefit from the easing of financial conditions.
In short, the most recent data on domestic economic activity seem to reinforce the evaluation mentioned in previous Copom meetings minutes, that the contraction effects of the international financial crisis over the domestic economy dynamism and, consequently, over the context on which the monetary policy operates, could become persistent, but would not be permanent.
These considerations become even more relevant considering the fact that the current monetary policy decision will have impacts concentrated in The Copom understands that the loss of domestic demand dynamism has caused an increase in the idleness margin of factors utilization, resulting in reduction of inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the risks to the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario derive, on the short term, from price adjustment mechanisms that contribute to lengthen inflationary pressures observed in the past, as evidenced by the behavior of services prices and regulated items since the beginning of 2009, as well as from a possible increase in commodities prices.
In the medium-term, the risk stems from the cumulative and lagged effects, from the financial conditions easing and fiscal stimulus over the evolution of domestic demand, taking into account the dynamics of consumption and investment, in a context of recovery of production factors utilization.
The balance of those influences over the inflationary prospective trajectory will be crucial to the assessment of the various alternatives available for the monetary policy stance.
International evidence, as well as the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase of risk premium, for both private and public funding, to the shortening of planning horizons and, consequently, to lower potential economic growth, besides having regressive effects over the income distribution.
As a consequence, the Copom strategy aims to ensure that inflation remains in a level consistent with the target path in 2009, 2010 and Such strategy, which should have its results evidenced throughout time, takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanisms and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation.
The Copom evaluates that, in light of the increase of the idleness margin of the economy relative, in particular, to the industrial capacity utilization rates and certain aspects of labor market, as well as to the behavior of inflation expectations for relevant horizons, the materialization of a benign inflation scenario, in which the IPCA would resume evolution in line with the target path, has remained favorable.
Incidentally, such evolution of the forward-looking scenario continues to be reflected on inflation projections considered by the Committee, as well as on inflation expectations set by independent analysts.
Under such circumstances, in order to preserve the improvement of the prospective inflation scenario under a macroeconomic scenario with significant uncertainty, the Copom evaluates that monetary policy should maintain a cautious stance, aiming to assure the convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Committee understands that the demand accommodation, motivated by tightening of financial conditions and by deterioration of agents confidence, although marginal improvements continue to be observed, as well as by the global economic activity contraction, which could also be cooling, has created significant idleness margin of production factors, which should not be rapidly eliminated in a basic scenario of gradual recovery of economic activity.
The Copom emphasizes that there are uncertainties around such basic scenario, with positive and negative biases over the pace of economic activity recovery.
Anyhow, such development, contemplated under the basic scenario, should contribute to restrain inflationary pressures.
On the other hand, the Committee notices that the significant monetary policy easing, implemented from January to July, will have cumulative effects over the economy, which will be evidenced with a time lag.
The Committee understands that decisions regarding the evolution of the basic interest rate have to take into account the magnitude of the total adjustment made from January to July, whose impacts on several economic indicators will be evident over time, in a context of slow recovery of production factors utilization.
The Copom also evaluates that a more cautious stance will contribute to mitigate the risk of abrupt reversals of monetary policy in the future and, therefore, to the consistent recovery of the economy over the next quarters.
The Copom also evaluates that the preservation of benign inflationary prospects will require the behavior of the financial system and the economy under a new level of interest rates to be closely monitored over time.
Taking into account, in one side, the monetary policy easing implemented since January and, on the other side, the idleness margin of production factors, among other factors, the Committee evaluates that such level of basic interest rate is consistent with a benign inflation scenario, contributing to assure the maintenance of inflation the targets path over the relevant horizon and to the non-inflationary recovery of economic activity.
Under the inflation targeting regime, the Copom guides its decisions according to projected inflation, the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the forward-looking dynamics for prices, and the balance of risks associated to the projections.
After a long period of expansion, domestic demand started to exert contractionist influence over economic activity, despite the persistence of incentive factors, such as income growth.
Additionally, it bears noticing that evidencing the credibility achieved by the Copom on the implementation of the regime, inflation expectations for 2009, 2010 and 2011 remain in line with targets path.
It is also noteworthy that global economic deceleration has generated downward pressures over wholesale industrial prices.
On the other hand, important monetary and fiscal stimuli were introduced into the economy over the last few months and should contribute to the activity recovery and, consequently, to the reduction of the idleness margin of production factors.
Those stimuli effects must be closely monitored over time and are important in the context where future monetary policy decisions, which should ensure the materialization of the convergence to targets path over relevant horizons, will be taken.
Core inflation measures calculated with the use of IPCA-15 disaggregation, accelerated in August.
After five consecutive months of increase, this index retreated in August due to the retreat of future expectations, which had favored its recent recovery in the previous months.
It is important to highlight that the manufacturing industry registered positive performance on hiring for the fourth consecutive month, with a 17.4 thousand net hire in July.
The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in July, reaching 370 days, down from 378 days in December.
The average tenure of corporate credit operations reached 270 days in July, down from 302 days in December, while the average tenure for credit operations to individuals totaled 497 days in July.
The contraction signs for the global economy are cooling, with some countries, particularly in Asia, recording economic growth in the second quarter already.
The inventories cycle adjustment in the main developed economies is in advanced stage, especially in the retail sector.
Industrial production has recorded positive results for four consecutive months in Japan and for three months in China.
The US economy recorded, in July, the first monthly advance in industrial production since October 2008, and production of the Euro Zone has been showing stability since last April.
The twelve-month consumer price indices through July confirmed the deflationary trend in the US, the Euro Area, Japan and China, and the deflationary behavior in the United Kingdom, Australia and, in general, in emerging economies.
The low rates of installed capacity occupation, the decline in prices to producers and the favorable basis effect in the energy prices are still determining this trajectory.
However, the maintenance of the current price per barrel of oil could put pressure on the behavior of these indicators from the last quarter of this year.
The financial market follows recovering, which has not prevented corrections in some assets.
The VIX index has remained fairly stable, whereas the indices for stock markets of major economies continued to appreciate in August, with the exception of China, whose index has behaved more volatile.
Moreover, the conditions for granting credit to consumers and corporate remain restrictive.
Similarly, the central banks of emerging economies - such as Mexico, Turkey, Russia and Chile - continued to deepen the cuts in their basic interest rates.
The prospect of interrupting the cycle of monetary easing and the benign inflation scenario contributed to the maintenance of shortterm rates.
In the intermediate section and along the curve, the upward movement of rates was influenced by the release of unemployment data below market expectations, the improvement of some indicators of the US economy and the rising interest rates on US treasuries.
Between July 20 and August 31, one- and three -month rates decreased by 11 bps and 6 bps, respectively, whereas sixmonth, one-, two- and three-year rates increased by 5 bps, 20 bps, 25 bps and 21 bps, respectively.
The BCB also borrowed money through 31 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day-tenure liquidity management operations.
