However, it was generally felt that not acting at the present meeting could trigger a further tightening of financial conditions, to the detriment of the economic recovery.
Both the start of quantitative tightening and expectations of a full roll-off had been absorbed smoothly by the market.
Most of the decline in non-energy industrial goods inflation could be attributed to the weakness in clothing and footwear inflation, which could be expected to be corrected to some extent after the pandemic.
It was highlighted that domestic demand had so far been rather resilient, underpinned by strong employment and wage growth, favourable lending conditions and support from a very accommodative monetary policy stance and a mildly expansionary fiscal stance.
Members agreed with Mr Lane’s proposal to confirm the reduction of the Eurosystem’s holdings of securities under the PEPP by €7.5 billion per month on average over the second half of the year, with the modalities for reducing the PEPP holdings to be broadly in line with those followed under the APP.
Structural reforms were seen as essential to enhance competition, lay the foundations for sustainable growth and provide a more favourable investment climate by improving the medium to long-term return on capital.
In foreign exchange markets, a persistent and broad strengthening of the euro since the December monetary policy meeting prevailed.
This assessment of the monetary policy stance and the line of communication reflected consideration of a number of key elements.
The view was expressed that fiscal initiatives to address non-performing loans and ensure an adequately capitalised banking sector should be encouraged, while monetary policy was playing its part in supporting favourable financing conditions and ample liquidity in the banking sector.
At the same time, negotiated wages had continued to increase, rising from 2.1% in the third quarter of 2018 to 2.2% in the fourth quarter, and further to 2.5% in January 2019.
In that context, caution was also expressed regarding measures of economic slack, which were surrounded by large uncertainties.
With regard to the economic analysis, the members of the Governing Council generally shared the assessment of the outlook and risks for economic activity in the euro area provided by Mr Praet in his introduction.
The impact on emerging market economies was evident first in terms of the pressure on their currencies, either prompting a downward trend in the case of floating currencies or creating downward pressure in the case of pegged currencies.
All in all, Mr Praet concluded that since the start of credit easing policies in June 2014 and their reinforcement through public sector asset purchases half a year later, the ECB’s monetary policy measures had led to a substantial easing of financial conditions and improved access to finance in the euro area, thereby providing sizeable support to inflation and economic activity.
It was also pointed out that the risk of deflation had declined further.
At the same time, there were indications that the euro area was moving away from reliance on external demand towards more domestic sources of expenditure, which should increase its resilience.
At the same time, while risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remained broadly balanced, it was acknowledged that risks related to global factors, including the threat of increased protectionism, had become more prominent and warranted monitoring with regard to their implications for the medium-term outlook for growth and prices.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the information that had become available since the Governing Council’s meeting on 7-8 September confirmed an ongoing moderate but steady economic recovery in line with previous expectations.
Since May 2021, oil prices had increased by 88% in US dollar terms but by 111% in euro terms.
Growth could be higher if inflation came down more quickly than expected and rising real incomes lifted spending more than anticipated, or if the world economy grew faster than expected.
Considering the tentative signals of a stabilisation in the euro area economy, the Governing Council would await further data to see if there were firmer grounds for optimism.
Nevertheless, it was stressed that, in order to produce an upward shift in market expectations as regards the future path of interest rates, strong communication was required that highlighted three elements, namely that interest rates would still have to increase significantly, that they would be raised into restrictive territory, and that they would remain there for longer than the market currently expected.
It would therefore be beneficial to explain that the analysis of underlying inflation pressures took a wide range of indicators into account and went well beyond core inflation.
Furthermore, the Governing Council could reflect the improved risk assessment in its forward guidance by dropping the easing bias on the key ECB interest rates and reiterate, in view of persistently subdued underlying inflation, that a substantial degree of accommodation was still needed for underlying inflation pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term.
This would counter inflationary pressures, while it could also exert a negative effect on economic activity.
At the same time, while the difficulty of relying on precise values of these rates was acknowledged, there was agreement that, looking ahead, the Governing Council needed to continue removing accommodation with further interest rate hikes.
So a significant tightening of financing conditions was embedded in the projections, which reflected the ECB’s monetary policy tightening.
Furthermore, statistical issues linked to the effects of weights, tax changes and imputations continued to imply some uncertainty about the direction of underlying inflation.
However, the scale of the upward revision to core inflation was muted by the appreciation of the euro.
Compared with the October monetary policy meeting, financing conditions were broadly unchanged and remained very favourable overall.
In particular, broad agreement prevailed that, ahead of its September meeting, the Governing Council should neither hint at further rate increases nor signal that it would pause in hiking rates or that it had reached the peak rate.
However, a remark was made that, in the absence of persistent positive contributions to price developments from food and energy components in the future, underlying inflation would need to be higher than its pre-crisis average if the ECB was to meet its inflation aim on a sustained basis.
Overall, the incoming data confirmed the previous baseline assessment of a pronounced near-term impact of the pandemic on the economy and a protracted weakness in inflation.
Data on new export orders pointed to a sharp fall of global trade in the second quarter of the year.
The measures had actually declined since mid-June, with market participants expecting higher interest rates and lower economic growth.
Given the current projections and the high degree of uncertainty, a larger, pre-emptive initial increment ran the risk of triggering excessive adjustments in market interest rates.
In nominal effective terms, however, the euro exchange rate had depreciated mildly, as the appreciation against the US dollar and other currencies had been more than offset by a weakening against the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen.
Annual inflation had eased slightly to 2.5% in June, with both goods price inflation and services price inflation unchanged, at 0.7% and 4.1% respectively.
Market-based measures of long-term inflation compensation had declined from their decade-high level recorded in April but had started to rise again lately and remained above 2%.
In consideration of all these arguments, the adjustment was therefore judged to be proportionate in the service of the Governing Council’s mandate.
During the first two weeks of the bond sell-off, yields had generally increased by less than those on German government bonds, but yield spreads had widened during the second half of May.
Growth was expected to recover only gradually through most of 2024.
Consumer confidence indicators had continued to improve, and were approaching or had exceeded pre-crisis peaks in a number of euro area countries.
In their discussion of the outlook for economic activity, members welcomed the positive news about the prospective roll-out of vaccines and thus a gradual resolution of the health crisis.
Trade in goods had expanded at the strongest pace in a decade in February 2017.
A rebalancing of the distribution of the implied “tax” between workers and employers would take some time, in part depending on productivity developments, bargaining power and the ability of firms to maintain profit margins.
Funding had become more expensive for banks, and average interest rates for business loans and mortgages had risen again in August, although rates on longer-term loans to non-financial corporations had declined.
Reference was also made to empirical evidence that the public sector played a leading role in private sector wage-setting in a number of euro area countries.
At the same time, non-performing loans remained a factor constraining credit expansion in some countries.
In this regard, it was reiterated that the sensitivity analysis conducted in the context of the projection exercise pointed mostly to upside risks to inflation, notably from energy and food prices.
At the same time, average longer-term inflation expectations had remained broadly unchanged, at 1.9%.
The swift and effective implementation of such reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, would not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but would also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate the benefits of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks.
This was the result of both the decline in energy prices and the economy’s greater resilience to the challenging international environment.
Concerns were nevertheless expressed that some of the downside risks to growth, as identified in the previous monetary policy meeting, in particular related to emerging market economies, had already partly materialised and were likely to affect negatively the outlook for euro area growth.
Survey-based measures of inflation now also indicated a small rise in longer-term inflation expectations, although to levels that were still some distance below the inflation target.
Yet, in contrast to previous episodes of heightened volatility in sovereign bond markets, there had so far been no visible differentiation between banks across euro area jurisdictions.
The Vice-President, standing in for Mr Cœuré, reviewed the latest financial market developments.
In that context, public loan guarantees were seen as a crucial element in maintaining credit flows to firms and households.
The latest Eurostat release showed that the rate of increase in compensation per employee had declined by 0.3 percentage points to stand at 5.2% in the third quarter, with the contribution of unit profits to the GDP deflator also falling substantially.
Accordingly, the Governing Council did not change its assessment of a broadening of the euro area’s economic recovery and of a gradual increase in inflation rates over the coming years, which was predicated on the full implementation of all monetary policy measures taken by the Governing Council.
It was thus seen as important to stress that the economic expansion had strengthened and that risks to the growth outlook were broadly balanced.
The dispersion of lending rates to borrowers domiciled in different jurisdictions had narrowed, remuneration of bank deposits had become much less diverse and, in most countries, NFCs were benefiting from more favourable conditions on loans.
The view was expressed that the longer the inflation spike lasted, the more it would become entrenched in longer-term inflation expectations.
Uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook stemmed particularly from the impact of China’s reopening, fiscal measures and the exchange rate on inflation.
Moreover, the slowdown in demand in China could contribute to greater global uncertainty and a possible loss of confidence, which could have a more substantial impact on global growth.
Goods price inflation and services price inflation had been 0.7% and 4.1% respectively in both May and June.
It was recalled that the dichotomy between manufacturing and services was in line with historical patterns whereby monetary policy affected services with a longer lag.
The Eurosystem cash collateral facility had been instrumental in mitigating pressures in the repo market.
Likewise, there was a risk that, in some countries and sectors, union bargaining might go beyond a one-off “catch-up” of real wages with respect to pre-pandemic levels and try to make up for the trend decline in the wage share incurred during past decades.
With US inflation having repeatedly surprised on the upside since the Federal Reserve’s pivot in December 2023, market pricing in the United States had also gradually shifted towards fewer and later rate cuts in 2024.
At the same time, it was considered necessary to retain sufficient flexibility and optionality for monetary policy in the period ahead, and the importance of data-dependency in determining the ECB’s policy stance was underlined.
At the same time, the prevailing high level of uncertainty was underlined.
Market-based indicators of longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area had recovered somewhat since the Governing Council’s last monetary policy meeting, but remained at subdued levels, with the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead standing at just above 1.3%.
Members deemed it important to continue deepening the analysis of potential growth and the output gap.
The participants in the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) also expected a marked deceleration in wage growth in 2025.
Labour market indicators continued to be heavily affected by government support programmes, which complicated the assessment of underlying developments.
The average interest rates on new loans to firms and new mortgages had been unchanged in April, at 5.2% and 3.8% respectively.
The improving external environment was expected to provide additional support to euro area economic activity.
HICP excluding energy and food had been revised down by 0.2 percentage points in each year of the projection horizon.
In the coming months headline inflation was expected to remain at levels close to 2%, mainly as a result of movements in the annual rate of change of energy prices.
For business investment, recent data indicated a rebound also in the second quarter of 2021, after a 0.4% quarter-on-quarter contraction in the first quarter.
New entrants tended to take jobs paying lower wages, while job movers typically took higher-quality jobs with significant wage increases.
The high levels of inflation had thus turned out to be less transitory than previously expected, while the latest ECB staff projections nonetheless still foresaw a rapid decline in inflation, nearly to target, over the projection horizon.
In terms of the exchange rate, the euro had depreciated against the US dollar (-2.0%) but remained broadly stable in nominal effective terms (-0.3%).
It was highlighted that borrowing conditions for firms and households had improved further since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting, which was seen as a sign of receding impairments in the credit channel of monetary policy, permitting the effective transmission of the policy measures taken by the Governing Council.
In particular, in the absence of further regulatory relief regarding the classification of loans as non-performing, a surge in corporate insolvencies resulting from the pandemic could lead to an increase in non-performing loans on bank balance sheets, especially as governments were likely to start withdrawing some of the support provided, such as debt moratoria or loan guarantees.
Still, monetary transmission via the bank lending channel was generally seen to have been stronger than previously anticipated, including by banks themselves, and to have led to a significant tightening of financing conditions.
It was pointed out that the share of firms citing labour shortages as a constraint on output remained high but had been falling, pointing to less labour market tightness.
It was stressed that the terms-of-trade shock had been operating like a tax and that its absorption in the domestic economy should proceed with some burden-sharing between labour and capital.
However, the strength of the rebound might also have reflected that countries had eased containment measures too much too soon.
This could, in part, be attributed to the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets, which was still incomplete, as evidenced by the high level of non-performing loans in some countries where a clear turnaround could not yet be discerned.
In line with the conclusions of the ECB’s strategy review, a discussion of the costs of owner-occupied housing was welcomed.
At the same time, it was underlined that, to assess the favourability of financing conditions, it was necessary to understand the underlying drivers of the rise in risk-free rates.
Moreover, since investors now expected higher yields in the United States, there may have been a general reluctance by private investors to take duration risk, which further added to the demand for short-term bonds.
Since the Governing Council’s meeting on 9-10 March, commodity prices had risen, with Brent crude oil prices up by 6.5% to around USD 42 per barrel and non-oil commodity prices up by 2.5% in US dollar terms, while the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro had appreciated by 0.4% vis-à-vis 38 major trading partners.
Adverse downside scenarios were thus judged to have become less likely.
Bank lending to firms had grown at an annual rate of 0.3% in April, down slightly on the previous month.
Especially when comparing with the inflation outlook contained in the September 2023 staff projections, the subsequent downside inflation surprises had diminished the need for nominal wages to catch up with past inflation.
In this context, it was observed that to date financial markets had remained fairly resilient and rebounded rather rapidly, also reflecting the swift and forceful monetary policy response so far.
By contrast, in the United States they had increased by more than 20 basis points.
Simultaneously, to keep the current 20% risk-sharing regime unchanged – in itself a key parameter of the programme – the ECB’s share of monthly PSPP purchases would need to be increased from 8% to 10%.
The latest round of the Commission’s household survey suggested that euro area households had revised their expectations on consumer prices 12-months ahead sharply downwards and their expectations on the economic situation upwards.
Against this background, it was recalled that the ECB also had secondary objectives.
Members considered the implications of the reopening of China’s economy for inflation developments in the euro area.
Indices of broad financial conditions covering movements in euro area government bond, stock and foreign exchange markets had tightened and euro area stock prices, in particular for financial sector equities, had declined sharply, in an environment of increased global uncertainty.
It was recalled that the ECB monitored a wide array of measures of underlying inflation and undertook a detailed analysis of all components of headline inflation, rather than looking exclusively at particular measures of core inflation excluding several volatile items.
At the same time, it was highlighted that recent supportive financial market developments largely reflected market expectations about the monetary policy decisions to be taken at the current meeting.
In addition, options markets had, by and large, priced out low inflation outcomes over the following five years.
All components of financial conditions indices had loosened over the course of 2019, namely short-term and long-term interest rates, exchange rates and equity prices.
By the June monetary policy meeting there would be more information about the course of the war and its wider ramifications.
The downward shift observed in the last few weeks could be explained by market participants expecting lower growth rates to feed into lower inflation rates, requiring less-pronounced interest rate increases.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that the latest data and information, including the new Eurosystem staff projections, pointed to a strong pace of economic expansion and a significant improvement in the growth outlook.
In terms of market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead currently stood at 1.24%, while in terms of survey-based measures, longer-term inflation expectations stood at 1.7% for the fourth quarter of 2019 in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).
While the possibility of second-round effects was considered to be limited in the presence of labour market slack, it was argued that price effects could be greater than currently estimated if labour force participation did not return to pre-crisis levels.
A high proportion of vaccinations had also strengthened investor confidence in the resilience of the euro area recovery.
Spillovers from sovereign bond purchases not only into corporate bond prices, but also into equity prices, could trigger the mispricing of risk and feed financial market exuberance with potential destabilising effects on financial markets.
The point was made that consideration should be given to the quality of public expenditure and to its impact on potential output.
Overall, members expressed increased confidence that inflation was on track to decline sustainably to the 2% inflation target in a timely manner.
Rising wages and falling energy prices would partly offset the loss of purchasing power that many households were experiencing as a result of high inflation.
Among the drivers of these perceived upside risks to the inflation outlook, food prices had increased sharply over recent weeks, in part owing to extreme weather events related to climate change and the El Niño phenomenon.
Financing costs in the euro area, measured by the interest rates on market debt instruments and bank loans, had remained restrictive as past policy rate increases continued to work their way through the transmission chain.
Incoming wage data and recent wage agreements indicated that wage growth might be picking up.
Similarly, the spreads of most euro area sovereign bond yields over equivalent German government bond yields had fallen since the start of the year.
It was therefore suggested that it was just a matter of time before wage growth caught up, in view of the large and persistent overshoot of the inflation target.
Such a downward revision to the inflation outlook was seen as potentially worrisome, especially when coupled with less robust evidence of a sustained turning point in underlying inflation, as it would imply a further extension of the protracted period of low inflation and a further postponement of the return of inflation to levels in line with the ECB’s medium-term inflation aim.
Moreover, while patience was still required for inflation to return to levels consistent with the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim, more solid and broad-based economic growth prospects supported increased confidence in a strengthened resilience of the inflation path to possible adverse developments.
Moreover, underlying inflation was weak and would likely be well below 1% in the second half of 2020.
On the other hand, it needed to be emphasised that the baseline scenario for growth and inflation continued to be predicated on a highly accommodative monetary policy stance for a prolonged period of time.
Whereas private consumption had been very strong in the second and third quarters of 2022 as a result of the reopening of the euro area economy, the significant drop in the fourth quarter of 2022 reflected low confidence and the earlier terms-of-trade shock adversely affecting spending decisions.
Real business investment continued its cyclical recovery broadly in line with GDP growth.
This came at a time when household spending capacity was directly affected by the drop in real incomes owing to higher inflation.
Rates on corporate loans had been moving sideways in nominal terms (and therefore upwards in real terms), dampening demand for external finance.
Additionally, supply bottlenecks might prove more protracted than assumed in the baseline scenario.
According to a purely mechanical update of the latest short-term inflation projections, in the near term inflation was expected to be higher than projected in December and would likely remain above 2% for the rest of the year.
At the same time, the tightness in the labour market continued to diminish gradually, with employers posting fewer job vacancies.
The unemployment rate had edged down to 6.4% in April, the lowest level since the start of the euro.
Moving to a model-based analysis of risks to the inflation outlook, two alternative approaches were used in the assessment.
It raised uncertainty about the entire future path of short-term interest rates, resulting in a higher term premium.
In this context, it was important to highlight that, even after a termination of the net asset purchases under the APP, monetary policy would continue to be very accommodative.
The labour market had continued to improve, with unemployment declining steadily and a recovery now taking place in the housing and construction sectors.
However, more recent indications pointed to a further decline in all three main revenue pillars, namely interest income, non-interest fee income and trading income.
The solution to the energy problem was seen as mainly of a structural nature.
Against this background, members generally agreed that, from the present point of view, the evidence available continued to indicate that convincing progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence of inflation towards the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim had yet to be ensured.
Compared with the September 2017 ECB staff projections, the outlook for real GDP growth had been revised up substantially over the projection horizon.
The average number of hours worked had also increased, although it was still somewhat below its pre-pandemic level.
The latest Eurosystem staff projections also pointed to a solid and broad-based economic expansion, at a somewhat faster pace than previously expected.
Demand for bank loans to non-financial corporations had also declined in the final quarter of 2022.
For example, the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead had been broadly stable around 1.7% since the Governing Council’s January monetary policy meeting, following an earlier upward trend.
The latest bank lending survey pointed to a further tightening of credit standards and another sharp drop in loan demand in the second quarter for both firms and households, since banks were becoming more concerned about the risks faced by their customers and less willing to bear these risks.
Over the medium term risks stemmed primarily from domestic factors, such as a persistent rise in inflation expectations above the ECB’s target or higher than anticipated wage rises.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation had decreased to 0.1% in May, down from 0.3% in April, mainly on account of lower energy price inflation.
First, the increase was due to a supply cut by Russia and Saudi Arabia, in an attempt to avoid a fall in revenues due to a possible weakening of global oil demand.
Commenting on this outlook, it was pointed out that higher headline inflation reflected the fact that energy prices were 9.2% higher in February 2017 than one year ago, but that base effects were expected to turn negative over time.
Expectations of inflation five years ahead in the SPF for the second quarter of 2018 were unchanged at 1.9%.
The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for both manufacturing and services at the global level continued to point to an ongoing recovery at the turn of the year.
It was recalled that the September 2018 ECB staff projections had incorporated a small acceleration in quarterly growth rates in 2019, compared with the profile for 2018, which could be revisited.
In particular, the automobile sector and industrial production were still declining in the euro area’s largest economy, which would affect other countries, in part via value chain linkages.
First, volatility in interest rate markets remained at historically high levels, reflecting very high uncertainty regarding inflation, as well as heightened data dependence of monetary policy.
Looking ahead, members voiced some nuances related to the appropriate pace of the gradual normalisation.
However, while the average of point forecasts was stable, the Survey of Professional Forecasters also provided a probability distribution around the point forecasts which remained tilted to the downside.
More generally it was noted that, because financial markets were anticipating the full easing cycle, this had already implied an additional and immediate easing of the monetary policy stance, which was reflected in looser financial conditions.
In view of the prevailing uncertainties and the large costs of bringing inflation down once it had become entrenched, it was argued that it was preferable to tighten monetary policy further than to not tighten it enough.
Moreover, broader measures of labour underutilisation, which took into consideration groups that are marginally attached to the labour market, such as discouraged workers, and the underemployed, pointed to a much higher degree of labour market slack than was evident from the unemployment statistics.
Headline inflation in the euro area had exceeded headline inflation in the United States owing to much higher energy and food inflation.
The transmission of higher wages to consumer price inflation was considered to remain a key issue for the medium-term outlook for inflation, with higher wage growth not yet having passed through to price inflation, as firms had absorbed increases by lowering profit margins.
With regard to structural reforms, continued progress was seen as important to strengthen potential growth and encourage private investment.
Members widely acknowledged that growth would likely be weaker than expected in the short term.
With regard to economic activity in the euro area, members concurred with Mr Lane that growth was likely to remain subdued in the coming months.
However, the turbulence in equity markets had not generated a more general sell-off of other risk assets.
Assessing the policy options, Mr Praet deemed that the information that had become available since the previous monetary policy meeting on 4-5 March did not give grounds to reconsider the monetary policy stance or any of the APP parameters.
Oil prices had decreased by 3.9% in the same period (remaining broadly in line with the technical assumptions for the June projections), amid heightened volatility in the oil market.
Banks had increasingly been passing on the decline in their funding costs to the economy through lower lending rates.
It also had to be acknowledged that the carry-over effect from slower growth in the second half of 2018 would in itself entail a lower projection for growth in 2019.
It was also widely felt that, at times of extraordinary statistical uncertainty around the baseline projections, the precise numbers foreseen for inflation at the end of the projection horizon mattered less than the assessment of risks, which were seen to be on the upside throughout the horizon, including over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon.
The March ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresaw a significant pick-up in euro area foreign demand, in line with previous exercises.
The fiscal multipliers were also smaller.
Namely, market sentiment had improved notably following the news of the successful development of vaccines and on account of expected monetary policy measures.
It was stressed that the Governing Council had to be ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moved towards its aim in a sustained manner.
At the same time, it was highlighted that real interest rates remained at very low levels across the entire maturity spectrum, which was seen as confirmation of the effectiveness of the ECB’s policy measures in underpinning very favourable financing conditions.
It anticipated that, subject to incoming data confirming the medium-term inflation outlook, net purchases would then end.
With regard to the second condition outlined by Mr Lane, the phrase “on a durable basis” was seen to provide flexibility by allowing for small oscillations around the target level.
Some insight into the reversal in the US-euro area interest rate differential could be derived from the breakdown of bond yields into the short-term rate expectations component and the term premia component.
Accordingly, it needed to be highlighted that progress towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim still required an ample degree of monetary stimulus, which supported the Governing Council’s recalibration at the present meeting of its policy instruments beyond the year-end.
As partly anticipated, a sizeable additional stimulus was foreseen for 2021 in response to new lockdown measures.
Brent crude oil prices had increased by 3.8% in US dollar terms since the December monetary policy meeting and non-oil commodity prices had risen by 2.5%, while the euro had depreciated by 0.5% in nominal effective terms vis-à-vis the currencies of 38 of the euro area’s major trading partners.
Against this background, members assessed that there were both upside and downside risks to inflation.
A concern was voiced that, with the current slowdown in economic activity, the ongoing transmission of past monetary policy actions could lead to a more pronounced deceleration in economic activity than was necessary to achieve price stability.
At the same time, it was argued that some indicators suggested longer-term inflation expectations remained at risk of becoming unanchored.
It was also pointed out that the momentum of services inflation was clearly on the rise, indicating that wages – a key component of services inflation – would become increasingly important in explaining underlying inflation, especially given the resilience in the labour market.
Turning to euro area activity, in the second quarter real GDP had increased by 0.3% quarter on quarter.
According to the June Eurosystem staff projections, HICP inflation was expected to rebound from 0.2% in 2016 to 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018, broadly in line with recent forecasts from other international institutions and the private sector, including the OECD forecasts for the euro area, which had just been released.
At the same time, it was underlined that the evidence that monetary policy transmission was working was to be welcomed and remained consistent with a soft landing.
By contrast, for services inflation the underlying measures and the momentum did not yet point to any visible decline.
Euro area sovereign credit spreads had remained resilient to the recent change in German government bond yields.
It was fully prepared to increase the size of the PEPP and adjust its composition, and potentially its other instruments, if, in the light of information that became available before its June meeting, it judged that the scale of the stimulus was falling short of what was needed.
The latest inflation numbers were therefore to be treated with caution, and it was too early to be fully confident that inflation would return to target.
Measures of underlying inflation had continued to move sideways, even if labour cost pressures had continued to strengthen and broaden as labour markets had tightened further.
Moreover, attention was drawn to complementary support provided on the prudential side aimed at easing conditions in the banking system.
Credit dynamics remained weak.
Brent crude oil prices had risen above USD 90 per barrel on fears of rising tensions in the Middle East.
On the other, the lack of sustained growth dynamics raised concerns about the durability of what appeared to be the most inclusive and vibrant labour market in the history of the euro area.
The most recent indicators suggested that GDP growth had broadly stagnated in the third quarter of the year.
It was also argued that at the current juncture the risk of policy inaction clearly outweighed the risk of action.
What mattered from a monetary policy perspective was the evolution of real rates, which had declined to record low levels in recent weeks.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that, while inflation was set to pick up over the coming years, supported by the firming recovery, there was as yet insufficient progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with the Governing Council’s inflation aim.
The decline in the annual growth rate of narrow money (M1) had been accelerated by a pronounced reshuffling between instruments within broad money (M3), with shifts from overnight deposits into other less liquid but better remunerated instruments, such as time deposits.
Financial conditions in the euro area had overall remained largely unchanged since the Governing Council’s June monetary policy meeting, but were tighter than before the crisis.
High rates of corporate loan growth continued to mirror elevated liquidity needs of firms to finance their ongoing expenditures, such as wage payments and working capital, and to further build liquidity buffers.
However, the Governing Council should continue to monitor carefully the bank-based transmission channel of monetary policy and the case for mitigating measures.
It was stressed that, during the transition period, the main reference index for monetary policy would remain the current HICP.
Against this background, bank credit was seen as particularly important for small and medium-sized enterprises, which lacked access to market-based funding.
Moreover, the argument was made that the financial markets’ reaction to the Governing Council’s October decision and communication had contributed to a loosening of financial conditions, which had reversed some of the tightening that had occurred in the wake of the September meeting.
Moreover, core inflation did not represent the household consumption basket and had historically not been a good leading indicator of future headline inflation in the euro area.
This global phenomenon was reflected in a substantial repricing in the US Treasury market.
While the energy and supply bottleneck shocks were expected to have less of an impact, some catch-up in wages to recover the loss in real wages, on the back of a strong labour market, implied that core inflation would remain above 2% over the projection horizon.
The September 2022 ECB staff macroeconomic projections featured a significant upward revision to inflation in the period to the third quarter of 2023.
These schemes made it convenient for firms to hold on to cheap and less productive labour.
Likewise, if the medium-term inflation outlook were to moderate, the pace would be slower.
Regarding financial and monetary conditions, the euro area yield curve had flattened substantially and was currently much lower than at the time of the December 2015 monetary policy meeting.
A question was raised regarding the extent to which euro area economic growth could accelerate further from the current pace on a sustained basis.
By contrast, gas spot prices had rebounded strongly, while futures prices had remained broadly unchanged at elevated levels since October.
Members also reiterated that monetary policy should continue to be based on the established elements of the reaction function.
Against this background, members assessed the data that had become available since the September monetary policy meeting in accordance with the three main elements of the “reaction function” that the Governing Council had communicated earlier in the year.
There was very broad agreement among members that the proposed policy package would benefit from strong credit easing components, namely with regard to the launch of new TLTROs to provide support for the bank lending channel.
A slowdown was also visible in the PMI data, although employment indices remained on the whole above the threshold indicating growth.
On the basis of these considerations, in the view of some members there appeared to be no urgent need for monetary policy action at the current meeting.
The annual growth in broad money as measured by M3 had risen to 1.3% in April, from 0.9% in March, as the euro area’s growing current account surplus and non-resident demand for euro-denominated securities gave rise to monetary inflows from outside the euro area.
On the other hand, euro area financial markets had been affected by the recent increase in global risk aversion and some concern was voiced that global shocks could again have different effects on the financial markets of individual euro area countries.
There were two elements to the effectiveness of the TPI.
In particular, it needed to be stressed that the underlying strength of the euro area economy, supported by high levels of capacity utilisation and a progressive tightening of labour markets, with the associated rise in wages, continued to support the Governing Council’s confidence that the convergence of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term would continue in the period ahead and would be maintained after a gradual winding-down of the net asset purchases.
At the same time, businesses had suffered from high energy costs and continued supply bottlenecks, although the latter had been easing gradually.
While the gross indebtedness of non-financial corporations (NFCs) in relation to their gross operating surplus had remained at a relatively high level, firms had increased their retained earnings and improved their access to external financing.
Persistence was seen as essential to bring inflation back to 2% in the medium term.
The Eurosystem nevertheless continued to smoothly execute the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), in line with the announced moderate frontloading of purchases.
The baseline scenario of a rebound in growth in the second half of the year remained broadly intact, while the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remained tilted to the downside.
There was ample evidence that the euro area economy would have fared much worse without the policy stimulus from asset purchases.
Nevertheless, monetary policy in the euro area was still expected to normalise at a measurably slower pace than in many other economies, as could be seen from the developments in foreign exchange markets.
Therefore, while there was wide agreement that there were no signs of a wage-price spiral, it was argued that current wage growth was clearly not consistent with a 2% inflation target, even when taking into account trend improvements in productivity.
The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead now stood at 1.32%, i.e.
According to market intelligence, real interest rates currently remained at levels that were supportive for growth and risk assets.
Since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting on 6-7 September 2017 a positive underlying tone had persisted in financial markets.
Growth would also benefit from a resilient labour market, with the unemployment rate declining further from historically low levels.
Hence, it was prudent to await Eurostat’s GDP release in the coming week before drawing any firm conclusions.
In this context, it was cautioned against declaring victory over inflation at the current stage, when inflation was still more than twice the ECB’s target.
The performance of the manufacturing sector was weaker and the sector was also exposed to global competition, so profits might continue to buffer unit labour costs.
Even though the outlook for the world economy had been upgraded slightly, there had been a downgrade in terms of the export prices of the euro area’s competitors, which was expected to fuel disinflationary pressures in the euro area, particularly in 2025.
Medium-term inflation expectations, as proxied by the one-year swap rate three years ahead, had stood at 1.99% the day before the Governing Council meeting – their highest level since early 2013.
While such volatility was not surprising at turning points in monetary policy, its magnitude had been amplified by the combination of shocks hitting the world economy: the war in Ukraine, the energy transition, global excess demand and China’s zero-COVID policy.
Market-based, longer-term inflation expectations had also declined, mainly in reaction to weak macroeconomic data releases, and measures of underlying inflation remained muted.
This represented a downward revision of 0.5 percentage points for 2022, which was mainly due to the impact of the Ukraine crisis on energy prices, confidence and trade.
Overall, members considered that the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook could still be assessed as broadly balanced, notwithstanding the uncertainties related to global factors, notably the threat of protectionism.
First, yield spreads of higher-yielding euro area sovereign bonds – with the exception of Italian government bonds – had declined in recent weeks, unlike in periods of broad risk aversion, when these yield spreads would tend to rise against German bonds.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that financial conditions had eased since the Governing Council’s March 2019 monetary policy meeting.
As regards fiscal policies, it was essential that all countries intensified their efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances, while remaining in compliance with the EU fiscal rules.
Members assessed the outlook for wages from different angles.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, the Governing Council decided to continue its purchases under the APP at the current monthly pace of €80 billion until the end of March 2017.
Third, although global stock markets had partly recovered the losses seen in late February and early March 2020 – the Euro Stoxx 50 index had risen by more than 20% since the PEPP announcement – there were signs that the significant remaining uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook continued to pose risks to current valuations.
This appeared to be in line with the state-contingent elements of the Governing Council’s forward guidance on both of these instruments and contributed to preserving the financial conditions necessary for sustained inflation convergence.
Inflation had risen to 2.9% in December as some of the past fiscal measures to cushion the impact of high energy prices dropped out of the annual inflation rate, although the rebound was weaker than expected.
In the other direction, the 2023 and 2024 inflation projections from the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters had increased.
A recession was becoming increasingly likely and would mitigate inflationary pressures.
Employment and hours worked had been increasing in the third quarter but remained below pre-crisis levels, with some variation across countries.
Headline inflation was now only expected to reach 1.6% in 2021, at the end of the projection horizon.
Doubts were expressed as to whether, at the current juncture, relaxations on the supply side would be sufficient, and it was argued that a reduction in inflation would need to be driven mostly by a lower contribution from the demand component.
In this context it was underlined that any conclusion on whether the conditions in the forward guidance on interest rates had been met was not predicated on the staff projections but was up to the judgement of the Governing Council based on its assessment of all relevant information, with the staff macroeconomic projections being only one element.
At the same time, some remarks were made suggesting that there were encouraging developments in the inflation outlook that should not be overlooked, notably on the basis of measures of underlying inflation.
The PELTROs would consist of seven additional refinancing operations commencing in May 2020 and maturing in a staggered sequence between July 2021 and September 2021 in line with the duration of the collateral easing measures.
As regards communication, there was wide agreement among members with the proposals put forward by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Turning to fiscal policy, members highlighted the need for compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union and reiterated that full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact over time and across countries remained crucial for confidence in the fiscal framework, which was increasingly being challenged.
Its previous appreciation was still adversely affecting euro area trade.
The point was made that declaring an end to the emergency might be considered premature given the current deterioration in the pandemic situation.
However, it was also pointed out that bank lending rates for firms and households had so far remained broadly insulated from the increases in market rates, and credit conditions did not currently signal lending constraints for the non-financial sector.
Deposit rates had also increased further, rising more strongly for firms than for households since May 2022.
The September projections foresaw HICP inflation at an average of 2.2 per cent in 2021, before returning to 1.7 per cent in 2022 and 1.5 per cent in 2023.
Rising construction costs were expected to put a break on growth in housing investment.
It was observed that this went hand in hand with a strong reliance on “just-in-time” delivery systems, raising the question of whether future systems would return to relying more on inventories and buffers.
In addition, a recovery of price pressures along the pricing chain, such as those due to producer prices, was likely to materialise.
High economic uncertainty was seen to weigh on consumption, with the level of precautionary savings in particular being dependent on developments in household confidence.
In this environment, monetary policy needed to remain highly expansionary.
However, it was also recalled that, before 2011, minimum reserves were remunerated at the MRO rate.
It was argued that the Governing Council should look through the current supply disruptions and keep a steady hand, while carefully monitoring any developments pointing to an unanchoring of inflation expectations.
If lower energy prices or other factors reduced the cost of living now, this should put downward pressure on wage claims next year.
Taking into account the views expressed by the Governing Council, the President concluded that it remained premature to judge whether recent developments would have a lasting impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability.
Annual consumer price inflation in the OECD area had remained unchanged in August, in terms of both headline inflation (0.6%) and inflation excluding food and energy (1.7%).
While there were as yet no indications of a hard landing in either the United States or the euro area, it was argued that the events of early August had shown that financial markets were highly sensitive to disappointing growth readings in major economies.
Underlying price pressures remained strong, inflation in non-energy components of the price index was rising and a tight labour market would continue to exert pressure on core inflation.
Also, credit dynamics still appeared to suggest a soft landing, given increasing evidence that loan growth had reached a trough.
With respect to a possible resurgence of fragmentation in euro area financial conditions, it was recalled that, in December, the Governing Council had included a general reference to flexibility in its communication, which had since been included in the regular monetary policy press releases.
This situation was also reflected in the forward rate curve, which suggested that the probability of a rate increase versus a pause at the September meeting had been relatively evenly split for some time, as had been the case with analysts’ expectations, such as those reported in the Survey of Monetary Analysts.
Second, it was argued that the persistence of low inflation in the euro area was part of a wider phenomenon of low global inflation and that a sustained rise in euro area prices would be difficult to achieve in the absence of a global pick-up in inflation.
In this context, the view was also expressed that the baseline projection for inflation in 2023 was too low.
Wage growth remained subdued.
Although most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently stood at around 2%, some indicators had edged up and warranted continued monitoring.
Overall, the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook were seen to remain tilted to the downside, although they were less pronounced.
In particular, inflation was projected to move along the trajectory already contained in the June 2018 Eurosystem staff projections and could be assessed as broadly in line with the ECB’s medium-term objective.
A first 10-basis point increase in the ECB’s deposit facility rate was currently priced in for the fourth quarter of 2019, while survey-based information suggested a somewhat earlier timing, which might in part reflect the presence of negative term premia in OIS rates.
An analysis of possibly more fundamental changes in the structure and functioning of financial intermediation was also seen as needed.
It was also noted that the risk of recession was low.
Members widely acknowledged the resilience of the labour market.
Caution was also expressed about looking only at nominal wage growth, as growth in unit labour costs was ultimately the more relevant indicator for inflation trends and showed only modest dynamics.
US Commodity Futures Trading Commission numbers suggested that the market remained positioned for an appreciation of the euro.
Commentators associated these developments with an increase in the uncertainty about the outcome of the 23 June referendum on UK membership of the European Union.
Inflation had edged down from 8.6% in January to 8.5% in February, while underlying price pressures remained strong.
The picture of a sustained global economic expansion was supported by the latest IMF projections for world real GDP growth.
As energy prices were falling and risks around the energy supply were receding, it was important to start rolling back these measures promptly and in a concerted manner.
Energy prices, which had increased by 31.7% in February, continued to be the dominant force behind the rise in inflation.
The monetary policy measures decided by the Governing Council in October 2017 and their communication appeared to have had a favourable market impact.
Second, spillovers from the United States to the euro area had been contained.
Tensions in global markets over the summer had led to a temporary tightening of financial conditions in the riskier market segments.
The role of government guarantee schemes for loans was also highlighted as underpinning loan growth, with some concern expressed about possible future “cliff effects” as such programmes expired.
Euro area goods exports had contracted in the second quarter as the stockbuilding in the United Kingdom, which had lifted euro area goods exports in the first quarter, had reversed.
Some spillover effects from the events in Greece had been observed in the euro area bond and equity markets, but, overall, contagion to other euro area countries had been limited.
The uncertainty about the duration of the pandemic and the economic consequences of the containment measures had resulted in turbulent financial market developments.
Conditions remained challenging in euro area money and repo markets, although there had been significant improvements lately.
This suggested that larger firms continued to see financing conditions as favourable, with very few considering them a reason for reducing investment.
This risk distribution suggested investors were concerned that the high uncertainty about the inflation outlook could mean the conditions of the ECB’s forward guidance might be met earlier than currently expected.
Annual real GDP growth was projected to fall by 8% in 2020 and to increase by 5% in 2021 and 3.2% in 2022.
Members concurred that the current and near-term increase in inflation was driven largely by temporary factors that would fade in the medium term.
At present, euro area firms’ cash coverage was nearly four times higher than at the height of the global financial crisis.
If, on the basis of incoming data, the FOMC were to raise interest rates at one of its forthcoming meetings, this would suggest that the US economy was experiencing a stronger recovery, which in turn could be expected to have a positive effect on “animal spirits” and confidence globally.
in the case of euro area countries with greater reliance on tourism).
In this context, it was acknowledged that models estimated on historical data naturally had their limits in the face of unusual shocks and possible turning points or regime shifts.
Moreover, new headwinds could emerge for goods inflation in a world that was more prone to frequent supply chain disruptions, geopolitical fragmentation, protectionism and climate change dynamics.
It was remarked that weakening the credibility of the fiscal framework also entailed a risk of a negative impact on the effectiveness of the expanded APP through heightened uncertainty adversely affecting expectations and risk premia.
Volatility in equity markets had spiked both in the United States and in the euro area at the end of March and in early April, and was now back to low levels, suggesting that investors’ risk appetite had improved.
This amount might also change over time, reflecting changes in market interest rates relative to the DFR.
Bank funding costs had risen in the past few months, which had increasingly fed into higher bank lending rates, in particular for households.
This included keeping in place all elements of the Governing Council’s forward guidance pertaining to the ECB’s key interest rates and the pace and horizon of APP purchases, as well as the implicit sequencing of policy instruments embedded in the forward guidance, and the indication that the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP would be reinvested for as long as necessary.
Only the part of the overall bond repayments that exceeded the month’s cap would be reinvested.
Overall, however, it was important to highlight that the conditions remained in place for inflation to move sustainably towards the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim.
Price pressures in the early stages of the pricing chain had still not been transmitted to the later stages and faced headwinds from the recent euro appreciation.
According to national accounts data for the second quarter, employment growth in the manufacturing sector had declined from 0.4%, in quarter-on-quarter terms, in the first quarter of 2019, to 0.2% in the second quarter, whereas employment growth in market services had remained broadly unchanged at 0.3%.
In their discussion, members argued that, on the one hand, the reopening of the Chinese economy should lead to fewer bottlenecks in global supply chains and thus support global activity.
Turning to money and credit, annual growth in broad money (M3) had remained robust at 5.0% in January, after 4.7% in December, supported by the low interest rates, as well as the impact of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and the asset purchase programme (APP).
However, if there were significant hysteresis effects, labour market slack may be less than suggested on the basis of these broader measures.
In this context, scope was seen for fiscal policy to further support the recovery by rebalancing the composition of expenditure towards more public investment and other growth-friendly measures geared to enhancing the quality of public finances, notwithstanding the fact that the degree of fiscal space was very limited for most euro area countries, taking into account the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and current fiscal positions.
At the time of the meeting, the euro was still down against the US dollar by more than 6% compared with a year ago and was trading close to its 2019 average.
Data on investment growth were generally considered to remain weak.
Having been able to keep inflation expectations anchored, despite the long period in which inflation had been above target, was seen as a major achievement.
In particular, the preamble limited the validity and scope of the new forward guidance to a situation in which robust convergence was not yet assured.
In addition, in the latest SPF, the expected five-year-ahead inflation rate was unchanged at 1.9%.
Global inflation remained low in March.
In their assessment of the overall monetary policy stance, members broadly agreed that the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it warranted keeping a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation in place and extending the APP beyond March 2017.
Looking further ahead, in the absence of new disruptions, energy costs were expected to stabilise and supply bottlenecks to ease.
In addition, it was noted that the baseline did not contain some trade measures that had been announced since the finalisation of the projection exercise.
However, it was also cautioned that the recent underestimation of inflation had to be interpreted in the context of the previous prolonged period of overestimation and the continued shortfall of longer-term inflation expectations from the target.
With regard to price developments, members concurred with the assessment by Mr Lane that the latest data were a reflection of the bumpy profile of headline inflation expected in 2024.
In this context, it was remarked, however, that it was difficult to distinguish whether observed spreads were driven by an increase in credit risk or a lack of liquidity.
The overall quarterly profile of measures of underlying inflation remained in line with the picture of gradually diminishing price pressures.
Ms Schnabel reviewed the financial market developments since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 3-4 June 2020.
At the same time, it was cautioned that credit risks and the probability of default of non-financial corporations were increasing as the crisis endured.
It was therefore likely that the recent slowdown reflected a combination of both structural and cyclical factors.
Consumers continued to be confident and their spending remained strong.
Underlying inflation was expected to pick up towards the end of the year and to increase further in the medium term, supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion and rising wage growth.
Survey indicators suggested a moderation in non-construction investment in the second half of the year.
However, this was not the case for the indicator of domestic inflation, which remained strong and was likely to reflect more persistent pressures on services prices, which had a high wage content.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion, upon a proposal by the President, the Governing Council took the following monetary policy decisions: The Governing Council was fully prepared to increase the size of the PEPP and adjust its composition, by as much as necessary and for as long as needed.
With regard to economic activity in the euro area, members concurred with the assessment presented by Mr Lane and acknowledged the weaker than expected growth outcome in the second quarter.
An upside risk to growth and to the labour market was seen as emanating from fiscal policy, as several governments had decided on, or were currently discussing, additional measures that were not incorporated in the current projections.
Average longer-term inflation expectations, which referred to 2022, had been revised up slightly, to 1.9%.
For goods inflation, staff analysis showed that energy prices and bottlenecks accounted for about 0.8 percentage points and 1 percentage point of the increase respectively.
The size of the proposed envelope was calculated to make a significant contribution to offsetting the pandemic-related downward shift in the projected inflation path.
Measures of underlying inflation were at elevated levels.
Measures of systemic stress, volatility and market liquidity had returned to close to their levels before the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB).
The lifting of pandemic restrictions was supporting consumer spending, although higher energy prices might reduce purchasing power in the months to come.
Lower energy prices, the easing of supply bottlenecks and fiscal policy support for firms and households had continued to shore up the economy.
Sovereign spreads in emerging markets had also increased measurably over the past few weeks, by around 160 basis points.
The higher volatility went hand in hand with a deterioration in market liquidity.
This was more than the cuts embedded in market pricing, but one cut less than survey participants had expected before the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting.
In that period the ECB had granted exceptionally favourable conditions to credit institutions that borrowed via these operations, with the aim of sustaining the supply of bank loans to the real economy at a time when banks were likely to pull back and disengage from credit intermediation.
By contrast, the services sector remained resilient, still benefiting from the stimulus provided to contact-intensive services by the reopening of the economy.
Questions were raised as to how realistic it was to assume that containment measures would be reduced as early as the second quarter and it was pointed out that, depending on the further evolution of the pandemic, weakness in activity might continue well into the second quarter and beyond.
Spillovers from the United States and the reappraisal of euro area monetary policy had been key drivers of euro area risk-free yields.
The risks surrounding the outlook for activity were assessed to have remained broadly balanced, with upside risks in the near term.
Although a better economic outlook in the United States also entailed positive demand effects for the euro area, it was observed that the optimism prevailing on financial markets, reflected in “reflation trades”, seemed not to be shared by businesses and households, which had generally maintained a cautious stance.
The overriding theme in euro area and global financial markets had been the continued rise in longer-term risk-free interest rates and sovereign bond yields.
One important factor behind the rally in global risk assets was related to positive global macroeconomic surprises – as reflected in the Citigroup Economic Surprise Index for advanced economies, which stood at an all-time high.
More generally, a significant part of the current weakness in manufacturing was likely to be of a structural nature, which would have different implications for the evolution of inflation, particularly as previous downward revisions to potential output growth might prove insufficient.
Housing investment was affected by a jump in input costs.
A faster deceleration in global growth would also pose a risk to the euro area outlook.
Finally, the Governing Council would continue to provide ample liquidity through its refinancing operations.
While policy inaction carried the risk of disappointing market expectations, in part financial conditions also reflected expectations of policy tightening in the United States and care needed to be taken to avoid circularity between monetary policy actions and expectations by the market.
For the second option the two parameter changes would be sufficient and could offer more room for manoeuvre, while minimising departures from the capital key.
Turning to the monetary and financial analysis, members widely concurred with the assessment provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
At the same time, it was argued that keeping a mild scenario was warranted, as the unlocking of the economy could give rise to more positive outcomes in the short term than envisaged in the baseline.
For the partial reinvestments until the end of 2024, operational modalities similar to those used during the partial reinvestments of the APP could be applied.
At the same time, the point was made that wage indexation mechanisms had become significantly less important since the financial crisis in a number of countries.
For the euro area, real GDP had risen by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Reference was made to the latest forward-looking survey indicators for economic activity, which had posted strong declines and were signalling a contraction.
This tightening was mainly driven by heightened risk perceptions among banks, in a context of continued uncertainty about the economic recovery and concerns about borrower creditworthiness.
In other countries, the backward-looking component was much weaker, which would inevitably lead to wage differentials across countries.
It was also observed that the moderate recovery in consumer confidence was still from low levels and that the saving ratio was increasing.
According to a dividend discount model, the increase in euro area non-financial equity prices was mainly driven by declines in the equity risk premium on the back of a perceived improvement in global risk sentiment.
The Governing Council also decided to extend the reinvestment of principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP until at least the end of 2023.
On the nominal side, following a series of unprecedented energy price shocks, headline inflation was now expected to average 5.1% and core inflation 2.6% in 2022.
Looking ahead, the outlook for headline inflation was expected to be more subdued than previously anticipated.
In this context, it was stressed that the strengthening of Economic and Monetary Union remained a priority.
When looking at the whole projection horizon and cumulating the impact of the energy price shock on core inflation from the last quarter of 2021, ECB staff analysis showed that around 3 percentage points of the cumulative increase in core inflation had been driven by the indirect effects of energy.
The argument was made, however, that if inflation expectations started to shift upwards in response to the prolonged period of high inflation, monetary policy would be transmitted less forcefully.
It was underlined that the projections were based on exceptionally supportive financing conditions, which to a large extent reflected the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy.
Excluding food and energy, HICP inflation had decreased slightly, from 1.2% in August to 1.1% in September.
For food inflation the momentum had fallen to 6%, which was still very high, while among the core inflation items it had declined significantly for goods but not for services.
This concealed an upgrade to the outlook for advanced economies relative to that for emerging market economies, given the more rapid progress with vaccination programmes in the former and some new concerns about the pandemic in the latter.
There was general agreement among members on the need to respond to an unwarranted tightening of the monetary policy stance or a material change in the medium-term outlook for price stability.
It was recalled that labour markets had improved further, with around seven million jobs created in the euro area since the start of the recovery.
In this context, it was remarked that all expansionary monetary policy instruments contributed to a low interest rate environment.
Yet, underlying price pressures continued to lack a convincing upward trend and remained an ongoing source of concern.
Data for the second quarter would also be available – including GDP growth, compensation per employee, profit margins and productivity – alongside two more HICP releases, as well as monetary indicators and more timely soft indicators for activity and consumer confidence.
This would facilitate a better assessment of the momentum and sustainability of the recovery and the prospects for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
This approach, combined with forceful communication, could allow the Governing Council to reduce the pace of purchases while having an equivalent effect on financing conditions.
This adjustment took place from very low yield levels.
It was widely underlined that fiscal support was critical, should arrive as early as possible and should not be withdrawn too soon.
With regard to the implementation of the APP, members welcomed findings indicating the effectiveness of the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP) in easing market financing conditions and, hence, supporting the transmission of monetary policy.
At the same time, the Governing Council had to remain cautious given the very early stages of the economic recovery and the high degree of uncertainty, particularly regarding the outer years of the projection horizon, which now extended up to 2017.
The annual rate of change in producer prices for consumer food had continued to decline since mid-2014.
At the same time, some caution was voiced, as the more recent developments in the euro exchange rate and in financial conditions in part reflected changing perceptions about monetary and fiscal policies, domestically and globally, as well as rising risks of protectionism and heightened market sensitivity to communication, rather than further improvements in domestic economic fundamentals.
Overall, financial conditions remained supportive of the economic expansion, although the repricing in some financial market segments, in particular in foreign exchange markets and the bond markets, had led to some deterioration since the previous meeting.
The recovery in domestic and global demand was supporting production and business investment, although various shortages and cost pressures were clouding the outlook for the coming quarters.
The increase in interest rates was expected to lead to higher financing costs for governments.
Second, there was a need to signal that any adjustments to the key ECB interest rates would take place ”some time after the end of the Governing Council’s net purchases under the APP”.
Over the coming weeks more data would become available, which would provide improved visibility about how the various forces at play would influence the medium-term inflation outlook.
This was seen as essential around turning points and in periods of possible “regime shifts”.
Members also agreed with the proposal to continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions falling due in the PEPP portfolio.
Measures of underlying inflation remained subdued and had yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Overall, the Governing Council assessed that there were still significant upside risks to the inflation outlook.
It was important for communication to emphasise that the incoming data confirmed that the euro area economy was proceeding along a solid and broad-based growth path and underlined that risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook could still be assessed as broadly balanced, but uncertainties related to global factors remained prominent.
In this context, it was recalled that macroprudential policies were the first line of defence for addressing risks and side effects, as they could be tailored to the issues identified.
This caution would help avoid derailing a strong labour market, which had been a source of income stability in Europe throughout the pandemic.
The Indeed job postings suggested that this trend would continue in the second quarter.
It was therefore seen as important to confirm the Governing Council’s commitment to the monthly asset purchases of €80 billion, which were intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council saw a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim.
If the same was now true in the opposite direction, it would be very difficult to re-anchor expectations once these had moved away from the target.
Weakening global activity would also weigh on global trade and euro area foreign demand, despite improvements in global supply chain pressures.
It was underlined that the Governing Council’s mandate was price stability and that institutional independence had been granted to allow central banks to focus squarely on price stability.
In the short term, on the basis of current oil futures prices, headline inflation was expected to remain in negative territory for a number of months, before rising later in the year, linked to strong upward base effects and the assumed oil price increases embedded in the futures curve.
In this context, it was argued that the current fiscal stance was out of line with the cyclical position of the economy.
It was underlined that households’ inflation expectations differed from those of financial market participants and professional forecasters, but it would be welcome if this translated into higher inflation expectations more broadly.
Annual average HICP inflation for 2014 was 0.4%.
There was thus broad agreement among members that a strong policy response was required, which was best achieved by a comprehensive package of measures that exploited the synergies and complementarities between its different components.
However, the fall in energy prices, combined with the recent appreciation of the euro and continued tightening of credit conditions, was expected to gradually dampen core inflation compared with the December projections.
Mr Lane reviewed the global environment and the recent economic and monetary developments in the euro area.
As regards developments in inflation expectations, members noted that longer-term market and survey-based measures appeared to be reasonably well anchored.
In the light of the prevailing uncertainties, it was also seen as important to reiterate that the Governing Council was monitoring economic and financial market developments very closely and that it was determined to preserve the very substantial degree of monetary accommodation that was necessary to secure a return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
This also was seen as an integral part of the Governing Council’s meeting-by-meeting orientation and offered the necessary flexibility.
Wage developments had been subdued overall.
Retaining the existing flexibility in PEPP reinvestments was seen as a prudent approach to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related to the pandemic, which still persisted in the current market environment.
At the same time, it was perceived that the reaction of financial markets in the euro area had been more contained than could have been expected, both in the initial responses and in the partial reversals that took place afterwards.
Second, risk-free rates and sovereign yields were leading indicators for financing conditions at the later stages of transmission.
At the same time, it was cautioned that while economic performance had been better than expected, the economy was not yet “out of the woods”.
However, it was still uncertain whether the funds provided by the ECB’s lending operations would reach those sectors of the euro area economy where liquidity was most urgently needed, such as small and medium-sized enterprises.
Accordingly, members widely agreed that, while the growth outlook had become more favourable, the overall picture of the outlook for price stability had not fundamentally changed.
Broad agreement was expressed among members to maintain the forward guidance on interest rates unchanged, as proposed by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Progress in structural reforms was also considered important for the banking sector.
While bank earnings had been lower in the first quarter of 2016 than in the first quarter of 2015 (when banks had benefited from valuation gains associated with the launch of the expanded APP), net interest income had still been holding up relatively well.
However, on the basis of ECB staff analysis and the work carried out by Eurosystem committees, the first option was considered to be less effective in the current environment.
To maintain the symmetry of its inflation target, the Governing Council recognised the importance of taking into account the implications of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation had stood at 2.0% in June, up from 1.9% in May.
Labour markets had shown further gradual improvement.
The borrowing costs of households for house purchase remained substantially below their level at the start of the pandemic, as did borrowing costs for consumer lending.
Going beyond the proposed 10 basis point cut would, in the view of some members, raise issues about increasing side effects over time.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion among the members, upon a proposal by the President, the Governing Council confirmed the decisions taken at its monetary policy meeting last December and as set out in the dedicated press release published after the meeting.
Several factors had contributed to this situation.
In addition to some positive developments in recent survey data, the Citigroup surprise index was trending upwards and had been close to achieving positive values in recent weeks, while according to various models estimates of the probability of recession had declined significantly.
However, for 2023, the projected inflation rate was 4%, which was significantly below the 5.5% inflation rate included in the September staff projections.
Longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area remained broadly unchanged from the 26-27 April Governing Council meeting, with the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead having declined by 3 basis points to 1.58%.
As emphasised in previous Governing Council communication, it needed to be reiterated that, given prevailing uncertainties, the Governing Council would continue to monitor closely the evolution of the outlook for price stability and, if warranted to achieve its objective, would act by using all the instruments available within its mandate.
However, if energy costs were to decline or demand were to weaken over the medium term, it would lower pressures on prices.
Therefore, there was broad agreement that the Governing Council should communicate that, on the basis of this updated assessment, it would recalibrate its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that financing conditions remained favourable to support the economic recovery, counteracting the negative impact of the pandemic on the projected inflation path and thereby fostering the convergence of inflation towards the Governing Council’s aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.
In all cases, the singleness of monetary policy was preserved, as reflected in the full control the Governing Council would always maintain over all its monetary policy instruments, including the design features of the expanded asset purchase programme, and with the ECB always coordinating the purchases.
Better job prospects, increasing confidence and continued government support were reinforcing spending.
Overall, it was generally considered that a recession in the euro area remained unlikely.
However, growth could be higher than projected if the strong labour market and receding uncertainty meant people and businesses became more confident and spent more.
There were four main reasons behind this.
While longer-term survey-based inflation expectations in the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2019 had been unchanged at 1.8%, the market-based measure of the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead had declined further since the Governing Council’s March 2019 monetary policy meeting, to stand at 1.4%.
In total, between two and three rate cuts were now priced in by the end of the year, up from two cuts immediately after the June meeting.
Geopolitical uncertainties continued to prevail.
The point was made that in the public perception repeated underestimations of inflation were likely to be more problematic than overestimations, as the general public was typically less concerned if actual inflation turned out lower than expected.
With regard to fiscal policies, the euro area fiscal stance, as measured by the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance, was expected to be mildly expansionary in 2016 and turn broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018.
As regards monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had remained at values close to zero for the past few months at very short maturities, while it had declined further at longer maturities.
Based on leading indicators, no immediate recovery was in sight.
The Eurosystem had participated in four primary market issuances and also in some retained deals.
HICP weights were expected to change substantially in 2021 as a result of the changes in consumption patterns during the pandemic, adding to the already elevated uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook.
The extent of the contraction and the recovery would depend crucially on the duration and the effectiveness of the containment measures, the success of policies to mitigate the adverse impact on incomes and employment, and the extent to which supply capacity and domestic demand were affected more permanently.
The overall cost of financing for euro area firms had remained very favourable by historical standards.
As regards long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, both survey and market-based measures had moved up slightly.
With spending in decline and incomes still supported by government short-term work schemes, the saving ratio was expected to rise again in the fourth quarter.
Moreover, it was deemed essential that the Governing Council reaffirm its commitment to achieve its stated inflation aim.
It did not necessarily imply “lower for longer” interest rates if it ultimately succeeded in anchoring inflation expectations at the target, as intended.
In the United States, markets now assessed the chance of a rate hike at the Federal Reserve’s meeting in May 2022 as well over one in two.
Turning to financial conditions, long-term risk-free rates were broadly unchanged from the level prevailing at the time of the March meeting.
While global economic growth was expected to pick up gradually, risks were assessed to remain on the downside, in part related to geopolitical developments.
Nevertheless, uncertainty around the future path of policy rates had increased, also in the euro area, which had contributed to the rise in market volatility.
Regarding monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had remained at values close to zero for the past few months at very short maturities, while it had declined further at longer maturities.
At the same time, domestic inflation was stubbornly high and longer-run inflation projections still seemed to be above the Governing Council’s target.
Reference was made to the very useful large set of sensitivity analyses carried out by ECB staff in the context of the latest projections.
Such a risk was considered as increasingly likely to materialise since HICP inflation was projected to stand above, and mostly far above, 2% for more than three years.
With regard to the euro area economy, members widely noted that the medium-term outlook discussed during the previous Governing Council meeting and entailed in the June 2024 Eurosystem staff projections had not changed overall.
The emergence of the second wave of the pandemic could lead to more widespread business closures in a number of sectors, for example retail trade.
The incoming information was sending a range of signals.
Concerning the composition of the APP, there was broad agreement that all its constituent programmes should remain active during the reinvestment phase.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the euro area economy had gained further momentum since the end of 2014, with increasing signs that the economic recovery would broaden and strengthen gradually – consistent with what had been expected in the March 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area.