The annual growth rates of loans to NFCs and of loans to households had increased further in the third quarter of 2017.
With regard to the execution of the APP, market liquidity had remained broadly steady, although some deterioration had been reported in certain market segments, such as agency bonds and covered bonds.
Reference was made in the discussion to a number of factors, including the impact of trade tensions between the United States and China, the threat posed by a trade dispute between the European Union and the United States, and the risks surrounding a disorderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union.
Moreover, the Governing Council stood ready to adjust all of its measures, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moved towards its aim in a sustained manner.
Nonetheless there were signs of a stabilisation in the outlook for global GDP.
The April 2016 bank lending survey for the euro area pointed to improving loan supply conditions for enterprises and improving loan demand across all loan categories.
It was noted that, while recent data were broadly in line with the baseline scenario and the forces underlying the baseline – such as solid wage growth and rising cost pressures – were still seen as intact, the uncertainty around the projected duration of the economic slowdown remained high, also affecting the medium-term inflation outlook.
At the same time, it would stand ready to provide liquidity support if needed to ensure a smooth monetary policy transmission.
It was noted that the growth of MFI loans to the private sector had strengthened further, continuing the upward trend observed since the beginning of 2014.
By July, and even more so by September, new information would become available that would allow the Governing Council to update its assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary transmission.
External financing flows to euro area NFCs had strengthened overall in the fourth quarter of 2016, driven by robust developments in bank lending and market-based financing in October and November.
Based on the developments in inflation expectations alone, the nominal ten-year OIS yields would be 65 basis points above the level prevailing at the time of the monetary policy meeting on 9-10 December 2020, at which the Governing Council had pledged to preserve favourable financing conditions.
It was noted that survey data covering several months, which had become available since the Governing Council’s meeting in early March, suggested that euro area growth in 2017 could be stronger than had been expected at the start of the year, while the labour market had also continued to improve, providing support for consumer spending.
It was highlighted that asset purchases were an essential tool with which monetary policy could affect macroeconomic developments and, ultimately, inflation outcomes, via a number of transmission channels.
Long-term risk-free rates and GDP-weighted sovereign bond yields had increased somewhat further since the March Governing Council monetary policy meeting and stood above their pre-pandemic levels.
However, it was also argued that firms had built up sizeable precautionary buffers and the recent slowdown in credit should not be interpreted as the start of a financial amplification cycle.
Some reassurance regarding the outlook for underlying inflation was drawn from recent developments in wage growth.
Economic agents had apparently learned to adapt to such restrictions, for instance by adjusting their consumption patterns, and the economy had demonstrated a strong capacity to bounce back rather quickly.
This suggested that a large part of the pass-through of past interest rate increases was still in the pipeline.
From a counterpart perspective, this was mirrored in further monetary inflows from outside the euro area, which reflected a recovery in foreign investor demand for euro area assets.
Moving on to monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had steepened since mid-April, notably at medium to longer horizons.
In particular, these comprised the implications of the incoming economic and financial data for the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission.
Extra-euro area exports of goods had been stable as the negative contribution from Asia was offset by the positive contribution from the United States, while intra-euro area trade had proved weaker, especially in intermediate goods.
Turning to the euro area, real GDP growth in the second quarter of 2019 had been confirmed at 0.2% in Eurostat’s third release.
Members expressed broad agreement with Mr Lane’s proposal to reconfirm the very accommodative monetary policy stance and to leave the ECB’s monetary policy configuration unchanged, including the proposal to continue net purchases under the PEPP over the next quarter at a significantly higher pace than during the first months of the year.
The normalisation of the inventory cycle was expected to contribute to a strengthening in trade growth and a normalisation of trade elasticities in the period ahead.
Moreover, the concern was raised that, if the Governing Council deviated from its earlier guidance and surprised markets with a larger than expected increase, this would add to the prevailing market uncertainties.
Risks to the medium-term inflation outlook were seen to be clearly tilted to the upside.
Selling price expectations in the retail sector had likewise been improving in almost all the large euro area economies.
An economic contraction owing to the Russia-Ukraine war could lead to a weaker labour market, as observed in the 1980s.
At the same time, core inflation was expected to decline over the projection horizon owing to the fading impact of the pandemic, the easing of bottlenecks and the indirect contribution of the current surge in energy prices falling away.
A general question remained on the scale of pent-up demand and the extent to which excess savings could also be used for consumption rather than housing or other purposes, such as repaying debt.
Moreover, the higher purchase pace would ensure that the Eurosystem showed a more robust presence in the market during times of heightened volatility, not least in the market for corporate bonds.
The low volatility regime posed risks of abrupt and unpredictable price movements.
In particular, reference was made to the past sequence of over-predictions in the inflation projections, which was seen as a downside risk to the baseline.
Regarding the consequences of further negative supply shocks, specifically related to energy, the view was expressed that such a scenario was unlikely to play out in the same way as the large commodity price shocks of 2021-22, which had coincided, amid persistent supply bottlenecks, with the release of pent-up demand and the post-pandemic reopening.
On the other hand, it was maintained that the current environment differed from the 1970s in important respects, such as improved central bank transparency, weaker aggregate demand conditions, a lower degree of unionisation and a lower prevalence of wage-indexation clauses.
Risks to the growth outlook could now be considered to be broadly balanced, supporting confidence that the economic expansion was on a stronger footing.
In view of the high uncertainty and the risk that further supply shocks could materialise, the Governing Council’s data-dependent approach was also reaffirmed.
Reference was made to evidence from some countries which indicated that the share of firms that had lowered prices was increasing now that input costs were falling and this share – for the first time in the current inflation cycle – had exceeded the share of firms that were raising prices, indicating that the disinflation process was progressing.
Looking more closely at the factors behind the lower rate of underlying inflation, the decline was viewed as being related to significant calendar effects in several countries, reflecting the deceleration in volatile travel-related components, in particular package holidays, associated with the timing of the Easter holidays.
However, it was also reported that contacts with businesses pointed to a perception of higher inflation in a context of spikes in commodity prices, supply bottlenecks and rising production costs.
With regard to the eligibility of agency issuers for the PSPP, the Governing Council decided on a list of additional eligible agencies located in the euro area, which would apply from 16 April 2015 for purchases under the PSPP.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that the continued solid and broad-based expansion of the euro area economy, amid supportive financing conditions, had clearly reinforced confidence that inflation would eventually head to levels consistent with the ECB’s medium-term inflation aim.
Attention was drawn to the increase in consumer inflation expectations in March.
In particular, it was recalled that developments in narrow money had typically been a good leading indicator of turning points in economic activity.
The recent Eurogroup statement on the euro area fiscal stance was consistent with this assessment.
Overall, it was widely felt that the recalibration of instruments decided on in December remained appropriate and well-balanced, while all instruments needed to remain on the table, with due consideration of benefits and possible unintended side effects.
In some large euro area economies, recent data had surprised on the upside.
This tightening was significantly less pronounced than the tightening seen at the time of the financial and sovereign debt crises between 2008 and 2012, which was a sign that the ECB’s measures (together with the announcement in many countries of public credit guarantees and other support for firms and households) had so far largely protected bank-based credit flows.
Although employment had risen by 0.4% in the second quarter and survey indicators of employment perceptions still suggested further growth in the third quarter of 2022, high-frequency indicators signalled that job vacancies had started to plateau in July, possibly leading to a peak in the second half of the year.
Part of the exchange rate appreciation could be related to more positive sentiment towards the euro area, resulting from improvements in the euro area economy.
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation had decreased to 1.2% in May, from 1.7% in April, mainly due to lower energy and services price inflation.
Energy price inflation had remained the main driver of overall inflation, with an increasing contribution from gas and electricity prices.
However, it was also underlined that this was by no means a justification for the Governing Council not to fulfil its price stability mandate and support monetary policy transmission.
Summing up, Mr Lane remarked that the spread of the coronavirus was a major shock to the world and the euro area economies, with severe near-term implications for aggregate expenditure levels and supply chains.
Manufacturing was expected to perform strongly, even though supply bottlenecks were holding back production in the near term.
It was considered important to ensure that the protracted period of lower inflation in the short run did not lead to lower medium and long-term inflation expectations.
It was argued that some of the stronger tightening of credit standards reported in the survey, beyond the level that had been expected by banks in the previous survey round, was likely to be attributable to the recent tensions in the global banking system.
Eurostat’s second release had put euro area real GDP growth in the third quarter of 2018 at 0.2% in quarter-on-quarter terms, down from 0.4% in each of the previous two quarters.
Moreover, the demand for hospitality services was expected to strengthen further over the coming months, which should give an additional boost to services and core inflation.
Recent private sector forecasts continued to predict real GDP growth of around 3% in 2022, with predictions for growth in 2023 largely unchanged from before the war.
Changes in the expected future path of short-term interest rates might have helped to offset this upward pressure on bond yields over previous weeks, as market participants had been backtracking on their interest rate expectations both in the United States and in the euro area.
It was recalled that the Governing Council had liquidity instruments at hand to address potential liquidity strains in the banking sector and spillovers from international developments, which allowed it to look through the recent volatility in financial market variables to set interest rates in accordance with its price stability objective.
Bank lending conditions for firms and households remained very favourable, even if overall financial conditions had tightened marginally since the Governing Council’s April monetary policy meeting, largely on account of the re-escalation of trade tensions.
At the same time, it was cautioned that in terms of the flow of information over the summer, it would be unusually difficult to extract signals about the medium-term prospects for the economy and the inflation path, as the scale of the initial bounceback in activity was not necessarily a good guide to the speed and robustness of the recovery.
Labour markets remained resilient on the back of strong fiscal support but some indicators pointed to vulnerabilities further ahead.
In particular, a possible downward drift in inflation expectations could prove difficult to reverse and a lack of policy action at the current meeting could instil doubts about the Governing Council’s determination to implement the APP until a sustainable adjustment in the path of inflation was achieved.
However, it was recalled that wages were a lagging indicator, and some doubts were expressed as to whether the still comforting picture provided by the experimental ECB wage tracker would hold up.
Overall, economic activity could be expected to return to its pre-crisis level in the first quarter of next year.
The extension of the slower growth momentum had, in part, already been anticipated in the March 2019 ECB staff projections, but it was also acknowledged that some recent data had turned out even weaker than expected.
With regard to the economic analysis, members expressed broad agreement with the assessment of the economic situation in the euro area and the risks to the outlook provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
Members concurred that euro area banks had demonstrated their resilience, had high capital ratios and had become significantly more profitable over the past year.
Clear signs of a recovery in consumption had emerged since May, but spending remained far below pre-lockdown levels.
Both private consumption and total investment rose by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the last quarter of the year, with investment driven by construction.
In this context, it had to be emphasised that the measures put in place were appropriate in view of the current outlook but were also designed to react flexibly and equally to either potentially less favourable developments or upside surprises.
Against this background, there was no need to change the monetary policy stance decided at the last monetary policy meeting, while it was important to focus on the implementation of policy measures.
Pipeline pressures could take a long time to be transmitted to headline inflation, but one of the key uncertainties was that there could currently be a faster pass-through because of the scale of the increases in pipeline pressures.
The discussion would then benefit from a more comprehensive picture of the economic situation and of the medium-term price outlook, including a deeper analysis of potential second-round effects.
At the same time, Mr Lane underlined that the high level of uncertainty and the still elevated price pressures evident in the domestic inflation, services inflation and wage growth indicators meant that a restrictive monetary stance would still need to be maintained, following a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction.
However, it was pointed out that momentum for several inflation components had rebounded somewhat recently and remained well above the medium-term inflation target.
On balance, it was argued that lower oil prices should, in any case, allow the Governing Council to have more confidence in the economic recovery, while it was less clear whether the oil price decline would mainly affect the balance of risks to the outlook for growth or whether it would translate into an effective upward revision to euro area growth.
Measures of underlying inflation remained low by historical standards, although they had shown a marked improvement since the trough in 2016.
Finally, members generally agreed that monetary policy transmission was unfolding according to expectations.
Moreover, it was underlined that inflation remained below the Governing Council’s aim over the projection horizon, notwithstanding ample policy support.
So far there was no evidence of substantial second-round effects.
The point was also made that the June projections did not take into account the Commission’s recovery fund proposal or recently announced national fiscal measures, which could entail an upside risk to the economic outlook contained in the staff projections.
High corporate savings, reflecting strong retained earnings and contributing to the large positive net lending position of NFCs, was a major factor behind the widening savings-investment imbalance for the euro area as a whole, as mirrored in the increasing current account surplus.
The proposed extension of the calendar-based leg of the Governing Council’s forward guidance was generally seen as underpinning the monetary accommodation needed to support inflation converging towards the Governing Council’s aim.
Looking at the evolution of longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area, signals of upside risks were observed both in market-based indicators and in surveys.
By contrast, food price inflation had increased to 14.1% (from 13.8% in December).
Equity markets appeared buoyant, especially in the United States.
A 50 basis point increase was judged to constitute an appropriate pace at which monetary policy could be tightened in a manner that was still expeditious, while recognising the uncertainties surrounding the state of the economy and the inflation outlook.
Reference was made to producer price inflation, which had rebounded somewhat despite the recent decline in energy prices, as well as to the GDP deflator, which indicated somewhat higher underlying inflation and suggested upward potential for future HICP inflation if the two measures converged over the medium term, as had typically been the case in the past.
However, the July bank lending survey indicated a drop in demand for housing loans in the second quarter and in the following months.
Overall, sovereign bond yields had continued to decline in most euro area countries and the euro had depreciated against most currencies.
The dynamics of loans to firms had remained strong in May, driven by firms’ operational financing needs, in an environment of compressed cash flows – but with substantial variation across countries.
If only supply shocks were considered when estimating potential output, possibly resulting from the positive impact of past structural reforms, there could be more spare capacity in the economy than was currently implied by traditional measures.
Thanks to falling energy prices, the terms of trade had started to improve at the end of last year and this had led to an improvement in the goods trade balance.
As a consequence, the cost of bank borrowing both for NFCs and for households for house purchase had remained broadly stable at historically low levels in November.
The overall magnitude and duration of the shock remained highly uncertain.
The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead stood at 1.7%.
By the time of the September meeting, a new round of staff projections would be available to the Governing Council.
The fall in nominal yields had not been accompanied by a similar decline in real yields, given that market-implied inflation rates had also declined.
Annual growth in compensation per employee had stood at 1.2% in the first quarter of 2017, down from 1.4% in the final quarter of 2016.
Therefore, preserving a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation beyond March 2017 was seen as necessary to secure the sustained return of inflation towards levels consistent with the Governing Council’s inflation aim.
Money markets had continued to function smoothly, in spite of the increase in uncertainty as a result of the UK referendum.
However, the point was made that some moderation in growth was naturally to be expected, in line with the experience of other reopening economies.
The first was a change in investors’ assessment of the economic impact of the Omicron variant.
At the same time, it was urgently felt that the crucial role played by other policy areas needed to be underlined, so as to avoid overburdening monetary policy and to ensure that other policy areas contributed to a more satisfactory economic outcome in the euro area.
However, companies could adapt more quickly to the challenging international environment and, together with the fading-out of the energy shock, this could support higher growth than currently expected.
Banks’ profits had recovered to levels seen before the pandemic, despite continued pressure on net interest margins.
As regards communication, members widely agreed on the need to emphasise that, in view of the prevailing outlook for price stability and the surrounding risks, the extension of the APP was warranted to fulfil the Governing Council’s price stability objective.
However, this was very different from a scenario in which the euro area entered a prolonged period of negative growth.
Regarding the monetary analysis, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
Members generally agreed that the rise in longer-term interest rates in the euro area had tightened financing conditions by more than anticipated.
In such an environment, it was felt important for monetary policy to counter strongly any emergence of second-round effects in price and wage setting.
Turning to inflation expectations, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), the centre of the distribution of long-term inflation expectations had remained around 2% since inflation had peaked in the fourth quarter of 2022.
They took note that sudden liquidity needs of non-bank financial institutions might amplify market volatility.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in May 2019, after 1.7% in April, mainly reflecting lower energy and services price inflation.
The view was widely held that a change in the TLTRO III conditions would reinforce the transmission of changes in the policy rates to bank funding costs and bank lending conditions for households and firms, which to date did not fully reflect the intended monetary policy tightening.
This was seen to be consistent with the Governing Council’s data-driven approach to monetary policy and fully in line with the decisions taken at the Governing Council’s June monetary policy meeting.
Uncertainties related to global factors remained prominent.
The decline in the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead was also noted.
Survey indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for output and business expectations in the construction sector, had recovered slightly in recent months but still clearly pointed to contracting activity both currently and in the near future.
Inflation could be higher than anticipated over the next few months if the surge in energy prices intensified, especially if geopolitical tensions were to escalate further, if oil supply remained persistently sluggish, or if the bottlenecks in production and international commerce were to extend through the end of the year.
There was broad agreement that monetary policy had to remain highly accommodative for an extended period of time in the face of a protracted weakness in the economy and subdued inflation developments.
With regard to interest rates, taking into account the foregoing discussion and on a proposal from the President, the Governing Council decided that the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility would remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and ‑0.40% respectively.
Annual HICP inflation excluding food and energy had declined slightly, to 1.1% in September 2017, following 1.2% in August and July.
Surveys pointed to steady and broad-based global growth momentum at the start of 2018.
However, the decoupling of inflation expectations from oil price developments and the fact that market-based inflation expectations had not picked up from their low levels despite the increase in oil prices remained a matter of concern.
There was broad agreement about the important role of investment and a resumption of risk-taking in the real economy for a sustained recovery, as well as about the connection between a pick-up in investment and an improvement in profit margins.
As government bond spreads had remained resilient, the nominal euro area ten-year GDP-weighted sovereign bond yield had declined further since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 9-10 June 2021 and was currently again in negative territory.
Finally, it was pointed out that the cumulative increase in prices between 2021 and 2024 would be around 20%.
Moreover, the Governing Council would commit to an ambitious action plan, as outlined in the dedicated press release.
The annual growth rate of M1 also remained solid, despite a further decline in May to 9.1%, down from 9.7% in April.
Over the past year both headline and core inflation had fallen by several percentage points, and even services inflation had declined over the past six months.
Real disposable income growth in the euro area as a whole had picked up strongly in the first quarter of 2015, to 2.2%, year on year, and had been broad-based across the largest euro area economies.
Overall, each of the three elements suggested that the key ECB interest rates were at levels that were making a substantial contribution to the ongoing disinflation process.
Relative to the outlook in September 2023, the projected timely return of inflation to target had been reconfirmed in the December, March and June staff projections.
Wage agreements in the euro area’s largest economy accounted for the bulk of the latest tracker information, as agreements had been reached in the wholesale, retail, chemical and construction sectors, which tended to have long contract durations and therefore a more pronounced catch-up component during this phase.
Moreover, past cuts in the rate had not only led to lower short-term interest rates, but had compressed interest rates across the spectrum of the yield curve also at the longer end.
Following a slowdown in the pace of economic expansion in early 2015, the latest surveys suggested that the global economy had returned to a modest and uneven recovery path in the second quarter.
Moreover, policy rates were seen as likely to remain in restrictive territory for some time, while the effects of the present restrictive policy stance would continue to be felt even after the start of the easing phase.
According to the latest ECB staff projections this was expected to be the case, although by that time inflation would have exceeded the target for more than four years in a row.
In the financial sector, continued progress was needed in addressing non-performing loans and ensuring adequate capital positions.
Wage dynamics appeared to have gained momentum since the turn of 2017-18, with annual growth in compensation per employee reaching 2.9% in the third quarter of 2018.
However, the view was also expressed that near-term risks were now balanced, with reference made to recent rebounds in survey-based indicators and some hard data.
Since the Governing Council’s last monetary policy meeting on 11-12 September 2019, the prospect of a breakthrough in the trade negotiations between the United States and China, as well as declining fears of a “no-deal” Brexit, had helped to underpin global market sentiment.
It was considered noteworthy that volatility had been especially pronounced in markets that were traditionally considered low-risk, such as the money markets and the sovereign bond markets, with higher volatility in these markets since the beginning of the year than in the equity market.
It was also considered to be a positive sign that the probability of deflation had decreased further.
Second, it could determine an intended period for asset purchases, which could start in March 2015 with an end-date of, for example, the end of 2016.
Starting with the global outlook, Mr Lane noted that global economic activity was still subdued but there were some signs of improvement.
It was also remarked that the Governing Council’s assessment had been evolving over a number of monetary policy meetings.
However, it was also argued that a more moderate increase in the pace would better reflect the assessment of more balanced risks to the outlook, also in the light of previous decisions when a similar pace had been chosen but economic conditions had been worse.
Brent crude oil prices had risen markedly, to levels around USD 50 per barrel, since the April meeting.
With regard to risks for the global economy, there was agreement among members that the impact of the outcome of the UK referendum on global financial markets had been contained following an initial bout of volatility, in part owing to perceptions of possible policy reactions and to the robust regulatory and supervisory frameworks in place.
Members widely shared the assessment and policy considerations put forward by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Either investors were sanguine about the long-term repercussions of the crisis and expected a V-shaped recovery with no protracted effects on growth, or they were finding it difficult to price in the impact on growth and earnings from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Members shared the assessment that information available since the early June Governing Council meeting indicated that, while further employment gains and increasing wages continued to underpin the resilience of the economy, softening global growth dynamics and weak international trade were still weighing on the euro area outlook.
However, more recently the focus of investors had gradually shifted back towards a tighter monetary policy stance as inflation outcomes had continued to be higher than expected.
It was suggested that, with wage growth having begun to moderate as expected, the focus should shift to productivity developments.
As regards wage and price-setting, members agreed that wage pressures had strengthened on the back of robust labour markets and employees aiming to recoup some of the purchasing power lost owing to high inflation.
Sovereign bond yields in the euro area had already approached rather low levels, limiting the scope for further yield compression and, consequently, the potential funding cost relief to be passed on to final borrowers’ financing conditions.
HICP inflation had increased from 3.0% in August to 3.4% in September.
Labour costs had also confirmed continued moderate domestic price pressures.
It was expected that domestic demand would continue to be the main factor driving growth in the euro area, while exports showed signs of less dynamism.
marginally lower than in the survey for the third quarter, while expectations five years ahead remained unchanged at 1.8%.
Overall, the risks surrounding the outlook for economic growth were assessed to have remained broadly balanced, with downside risks related to the threat of trade protectionism having become more prominent.
Against the background of recent market concerns over parts of some euro area countries’ banking sectors which might have implications for their lending capacity in the period ahead, a remark was made that in large measure these concerns had been triggered by misperceptions about ongoing supervisory activities regarding bank practices for management of non-performing loans and the banking sector’s need to adapt to the new regulatory environment.
While the pull-back in euro area growth in the first half of the year could largely be attributed to weaker external demand, after exceptionally strong external trade in 2017, the point was made that the moderation in annual rates of growth over the projection horizon reflected convergence towards growth in line with potential.
Employment had increased by 0.3% quarter on quarter in the fourth quarter of 2016 and the unemployment rate continued to decline, easing to 9.5% in February 2017 after 9.6% in January.
Euro area risk-free interest rates and sovereign yields had fallen in both nominal and real terms since the June monetary policy meeting, with the euro area GDP-weighted ten-year bond yield falling back into negative territory.
Extra-euro area exports were expected to remain subdued on account of weakening foreign demand growth.
Oil prices had reached 12-year lows and were still declining, with the Brent crude oil price standing at USD 27.9 per barrel at the close of 20 January 2016.
However, firms’ expectations had remained contained for retail trade, while they continued to be above historical averages for contact-intensive services.
Global corporate bond markets had experienced some broad-based repricing.
It was also noted that the overall economic outlook for the euro area was more concerning and the projected recovery was fragile.
The endorsement by the European Council of the Eurogroup agreement on the three safety nets for workers, businesses and sovereigns, amounting to a package worth €540 billion, was welcomed.
In the context of weaker Chinese domestic demand, it was argued that Chinese exports would put additional negative pressure on international prices.
Member States were called upon to ensure a timely ratification of the Own Resources Decision, to finalise their recovery and resilience plans promptly and to deploy the funds for productive public spending, accompanied by productivity-enhancing structural policies.
The EURO STOXX50 index had gone up by 2% since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting on 23-24 October 2019 and the S&P 500 by almost 5%, hitting a new all-time high.
Developments in household bank deposits as an up-to-date, high-frequency proxy for savings showed that households continued to save less than during the height of the pandemic.
The point was made that this risk was elevated and was likely to rise non-linearly if inflation remained too high over an extended period of time, as suggested in the projections.
This was also seen to be consistent with the anticipation that a gradual easing of financial conditions would support economic activity, including much-needed investment to boost labour productivity and total factor productivity.
This earlier convergence to the target also helped to hedge monetary policy against the risk of reacting to forecast errors, which tended to be larger at longer horizons.
The annual growth rate of loans to NFCs remained stable at 3.9% in July, only somewhat below its September 2018 peak of 4.3%.
Compared with December expectations, risks to the growth outlook had become more balanced.
It needed to be stressed that reinvestments would be conducted for an extended period of time after the end of the net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary.
It was observed that expectations of substantial US fiscal support had led to a steepening of the US Treasury yield curve, which had only affected yields in the euro area to a limited extent, as a significant “decoupling” of yields could be observed.
According to the latest ECB Survey of Professsional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2021, headline inflation expectations had been revised up for 2021, while medium and longer-term expectations were by and large stable.
However, it was also argued that as long as the prospects for higher and more persistent policy rates were not priced into the term structure of market interest rates, that policy path would not be reflected in financing conditions.
This assessment was broadly reflected in the June 2017 Eurosystem staff projections, which saw annual HICP inflation at 1.5% in 2017, 1.3% in 2018 and 1.6% in 2019, implying a downward revision from the March ECB staff projections across the projection horizon.
In China, real GDP growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter from its pandemic-induced slump.
Turning to financial and monetary developments, bank funding costs continued to reflect the transmission of monetary policy.
In contrast to oil prices, gas prices had declined by 33% since the December 2021 Governing Council meeting.
Overnight index swap (OIS) markets were currently pricing in a steeper and more frontloaded rate-cutting cycle than had been anticipated at the time of the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting.
Regarding the resilience criterion, it was widely noted that inflation convergence was becoming increasingly self-sustaining and its reliance on the contribution of the net asset purchases was gradually waning, although it continued to depend on an ample degree of monetary accommodation overall.
Headline inflation had fallen in August to levels previously seen in the summer of 2021 before the inflation surge, and there were signs of easing pressures in the labour market, with wage growth and unit labour costs both slowing.
Finally, prospects of higher interest rates in the United States had caused sizeable shifts in foreign exchange markets, with investors having increased their US dollar net long positions since about June 2021 to levels similar in magnitude to those seen at the heights of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Implementation of the asset purchase programme had proceeded smoothly, notwithstanding market reports of emerging scarcity in some market segments.
In the case of restaurants, the price increases had been much smoother than for accommodation, and inflation in that particular sector had just started to stabilise.
Regarding slack in the euro area economy, a range of estimates and indicators suggested a large degree of uncertainty while in general pointing to significant levels of slack.
At the same time, it was remarked that recent movements in the euro exchange rate seemed to relate more to relative monetary policy shocks, including communication, and less to improvements in the macroeconomic outlook for the euro area.
However, a declining vacancy rate was seen as reflecting weakening labour demand, although it remained above its pre-pandemic peak.
Moreover, although there was tentative evidence suggesting that wage growth was close to a peak, further evidence was required to be sure it was turning.
All in all, members agreed that the economic recovery was taking shape in line with the Governing Council’s earlier expectations and with the June Eurosystem staff projections.
One possible implication was that it might be necessary to acknowledge the longer time horizon over which monetary policy could be expected to deliver on its ultimate objective in the current environment, which did not necessarily speak in favour of additional measures at the current juncture.
At the same time, recent survey data, such as production expectations and business confidence, signalled the start of a recovery in the third quarter of 2020, as projected in the June 2020 projections exercise.
The latest ECB staff projections saw euro area real GDP as growing at a slightly stronger pace in 2017 and 2018 than had been expected in December.
Developments in equity markets had been mainly dominated by the negotiations with Greece.
Third, there would be more public spending to support Ukraine and the refugees.
The Governing Council’s commitment to preserving favourable financing conditions for all sectors of the economy over the pandemic period remained essential to reduce uncertainty and bolster confidence.
In 2016 and 2017 inflation was expected to rise further, owing to a gradual decline in economic slack and positive external price pressures, reflecting the lagged effect of the exchange rate and the upward sloping oil price futures curve.
The latest PMI survey data had pointed to a further slowing of the growth momentum, in particular in more cyclically sensitive industries, such as capital and intermediate goods.
With regard to the dimension of optionality, different positions were put forward as to whether an open-ended state-contingent formulation remained appropriate or whether the announcement of an end date was preferable.
Finally, members agreed with Mr Lane’s proposal to suspend the two-tier system for the remuneration of excess reserves by setting the multiplier to zero, since the two-tier system was no longer considered necessary in view of the positive value that the deposit facility rate would reach as a consequence of the decision to raise the three policy rates by 75 basis points.
Nonetheless, as on previous occasions, the observation was made that despite the recovery in credit to the private sector, credit dynamics remained modest overall.
Euro area equity prices had declined slightly since the July monetary policy meeting.
The risks to inflation remained twofold.
Recent monetary policy decisions by the Governing Council had improved broad financing conditions, which should support the outlook for consumption and investment.
Further ahead, the economic expansion and the associated significant absorption of economic slack were expected to contribute to a gradual convergence of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Overall, the signals provided by money and credit developments remained positive, as broad money (M3) growth and credit to the private sector were at their highest levels since 2009.
It was added that month-on-month figures showed that core inflation had again been on the rise for the last couple of months, which called for continued caution on the inflation outlook.
The argument was made that the export weakness could over time be expected to spill over to domestic demand and to the services sector of the economy, and there were already some indications of the slowdown in exports affecting labour market developments.
Although the recovery of the euro area economy was holding up well and financing conditions remained favourable overall, the external environment was characterised by heightened uncertainty about the growth prospects of emerging market economies, volatility in the financial and commodity markets and geopolitical risks.
At the same time, progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence of inflation remained conditional on a substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
In several other countries, such downward adjustments might be limited by nominal rigidities, implying that wage developments would not fully reflect the past decline in oil prices.
At the same time, it was argued that lockdowns in China had led to declines in the country’s imports of liquified natural gas, with dampening effects on gas prices.
Overall, wage pressures remained low and quite heterogenous across countries.
In addition, the firming and broadening of the economic expansion across countries and sectors should make the euro area economy more robust to any negative shocks.
This followed ECB communication that had countered the aggressive market pricing of a rate-cutting cycle starting as early as March 2024.
However, it was highlighted that in response to the increase in cases of infection further measures had been taken, or had been announced, in many euro area countries, which had led to tighter restrictions than had been anticipated in the December projections.
Members agreed that, although the monetary policy stance was being left unchanged, communication was of particular importance at present.
While fiscal policy was expected to be expansionary in 2021 and 2022, members considered that the prospects for 2023 were more uncertain.
At the same time, it was observed that broader measures of the degree of slack remained elevated.
However, in March 2022 household expectations regarding unemployment had increased visibly, albeit much less than at the start of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
With regard to the economic analysis, there was broad agreement among the members with the assessment of the outlook and risks for economic activity in the euro area, as provided by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Looking ahead, it was noted that Eurosystem staff had revised down their economic growth projection for 2023.
Some comfort was drawn from these recent developments, as they suggested that the recent weakness in headline and core inflation had not had a negative impact on expectations.
In the United States, marked-based inflation expectations had also declined more recently.
On the basis of this assessment, Mr Praet proposed, at this stage, to keep monetary policy unchanged and to reconfirm all elements of the ECB’s forward guidance, including the sequencing.
The recent strengthening of the euro constituted a noteworthy change in the external environment and would likely imply somewhat lower inflationary pressures for the euro area in the period ahead, even though the lagged effects of the euro’s pronounced past depreciation would still be working their way through the economy.
One of the reasons why domestic inflation had started to stabilise recently, in spite of the continued rapid increase in wages, might be that firms were moderating their markups.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures in place since June 2014 continued to support favourable borrowing conditions for firms and households, access to financing – notably for small and medium-sized enterprises – and, hence, credit flows across the euro area.
In response to the discovery of Omicron, stock markets worldwide had suffered marked losses.
In a historical context, valuations of euro area equities did not appear overly stretched.
In any case, macroprudential policy remained the first line of defence in preserving financial stability and addressing medium-term vulnerabilities.
Nominal wage growth had stabilised at a low level, with compensation per employee standing at 1.3% in both the third and fourth quarters of 2015.
Mr Lane also recalled that the wage tracker contained both old and new contracts, renegotiated at different points in time.
While activity in sectors such as hospitality and tourism was not likely to recover soon, in other sectors, such as IT or online commerce, there had even been a positive demand shock.
With the tendency of the projections to strongly converge to target in the last year of the horizon, the projection for that year was seen as having limited information content.
Commenting further on the global risks discussed during the IMF annual meetings in Washington, reference was made to: a possibly stronger slowdown in emerging market economies, including China; the potential return of financial market turmoil; the risk that persistently slow growth would lead to weaker potential growth via hysteresis effects; and geopolitical risks at both the regional and the global level.
It was also noted that the difference between the low levels of market-based measures and the higher levels of survey-based measures could be explained by a negative risk premium, but it was also argued that the negative risk premium might itself be of concern if it reflected hedging against outcomes of very low inflation or deflation and therefore provided no grounds for complacency.
So this survey was closely aligned with the view that inflation would come down to close to target in 2024 and stay there.
Commenting on measures of underlying inflation, members agreed that there were not yet convincing signs of a sustained convergence towards levels compatible with the ECB’s inflation aim.
Regarding inflation expectations, the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2015 indicated that the expected five-year-ahead inflation rate stood at 1.84%, after 1.77% in the previous survey.
This further confirmed that profits had started to mitigate the inflationary effects of wage increases.
Primary issuance in the asset-backed securities (ABS) market had also picked up, although not on the same scale as the CSPP market.
Preserving favourable financing conditions for an extended period of time helped to support inflation developments via multiple channels.
Nevertheless, Mr Lane noted that long-term risk-free interest rates and sovereign yields had declined on the back of lower term premia and revised policy expectations, thereby supporting risk assets.
With respect to the medium term views differed, with risks, however, generally seen as remaining to the upside.
The current inflation dynamics most likely did not yet reflect recent monetary policy tightening.
This was supported by survey-based evidence on the distribution of inflation expectations.
Incoming economic data, surveys and high-frequency indicators pointed to continued economic weakness in the first quarter of 2021 driven by the persistence of the pandemic and the associated containment measures.
At the same time, it was remarked that the sluggish reaction of underlying inflation in the wake of the financial crisis was not confined to the euro area but appeared to be a global phenomenon.
At the same time, the current distribution of inflation expectations was still skewed to the upside.
Members unanimously supported the new formulation of the ECB’s price stability objective.
The risks to the growth outlook remained broadly balanced over the medium term.
Modelling the conditions for the new operations on the design of TLTRO-II was seen as a way to ensure their pass-through to the real economy and limit the use of funds for carry trades in government bonds.
It was noted that the outcome for real GDP in the first quarter of 2023 implied a technical recession and was weaker than the figure embedded in the June staff projections, while not implying that the economy was facing a material contraction.
This would increase the Governing Council’s optionality and flexibility without implying that lift-off would automatically follow shortly after the end of net purchases.
But, in a low interest rate environment in which the policy rates were more likely to encounter and remain constrained at the lower bound, the Governing Council would continue to employ other instruments when needed.
It was argued that such wage growth needed to reflect a persistent shift in the growth rate rather than a one-off shift in the level.
Neither had there been severe strains in money markets or liquidity shortages in the euro area banking system.
In this respect, attention was drawn to the correlation between movements in oil prices and market-based measures of inflation compensation.
It was also recalled that the ECB’s strategy review in 2021 had confirmed that it targeted headline, rather than core inflation, as the relevant yardstick for monetary policy.
It was also argued that there could be larger spillovers from weaker external demand to domestic demand.
In the light of heightened uncertainty, it was nonetheless seen as wise to keep some two-sided optionality and a data-dependent approach, as it was too early to tell how events would unfold in the following months.
Following the pandemic, the economy was going through a period of intensified job churning, so it was natural that labour productivity and wage growth were accelerating.
At the same time, it was pointed out that the current level of headline inflation understated the challenges that monetary policy was still facing, which called for caution.
However, none of these explanations was fully borne out by financial market data.
It was recalled that economic activity in the euro area had still not recovered to the level seen in 2008, and that investment was still far below its pre-crisis level.
Supply bottlenecks continued to restrain global activity and trade.
This would, in particular, support the recovery in the services sector, which had been the sector most affected by the crisis.
Financial markets had been driven by two opposing forces.
Such a path was seen as open to challenge in the light of various factors in energy markets pointing to more lasting upward pressures.
Raising policy rates to sufficiently restrictive levels and keeping them there would, over time, reduce inflation by dampening demand and would also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations.
Real GDP had grown by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2021 (according to Eurostat’s flash estimate) following a growth rate of 2.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter.
On the one hand, it was argued that the experience gained in the 1970s, when different inflation outcomes across jurisdictions could be traced back to different central bank reaction functions, suggested that central banks that acted earlier achieved better inflation outcomes.
Net demand for housing loans and consumer credit had increased for the first time since mid-2022.
Overall, credit conditions continued to be assessed as being favourable and supporting the economic expansion, thereby contributing to the return of inflation to the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim.
While labour cost pressures had remained resilient amid tighter labour markets, the weaker growth momentum was delaying their pass-through to inflation.
Growth could be higher if inflation came down more quickly than expected, if rising real incomes meant that spending increased by more than anticipated, or if the world economy grew more strongly than expected.
This would allow the NGEU programme to contribute to a faster, stronger and more uniform recovery and would increase economic resilience as well as the growth potential of Member States’ economies.
On the other hand, the view was taken that structural weakness could be amplified by high interest rates.
In the light of the confirmation of the medium-term inflation outlook, members agreed that the June 2018 monetary policy decisions remained appropriate and called for a reaffirmation of the prevailing policy posture.
Credit conditions for households and firms remained accommodative.
However, the rate at which jobs were being created was seen as potentially slowing, with unemployment rising over the coming quarters.
Starting with the United States, expectations of monetary policy tightening had declined and, by 20 January, the market was pricing in only one rate hike in 2016.
This related in particular to capital gains from banks’ sales of securities to the Eurosystem and lower provisions for loan impairment, with the overall macroeconomic environment having improved in part as a consequence of the accommodative monetary policy stance.
Attention was drawn to the widening of sovereign spreads over recent months.
He started by noting that the economic shock from the Russian invasion of Ukraine came in the context of otherwise solid foundations for a strong recovery in the euro area this year.
Alternative scenarios for the economic and financial impact of the war, which would be published together with the projections, foresaw that economic activity could be dampened significantly by a steeper rise in energy and commodity prices and a more severe drag on trade and sentiment.
Moreover, it was noted that – in contrast to consumption – investment remained very weak and had again disappointed recently, with the December projections showing a downward revision.
This technical assumption had been one of the main reasons for forecast errors in the past.
Commenting in more detail on the outlook and risks for the external environment, members agreed that global economic activity was improving, with the upswing showing further signs of synchronisation.
Yield curves in the US and German bond markets had flattened quite materially, by around 40 basis points and 30 basis points respectively, since about mid-March.
This included, in particular, its preparedness to adjust the purchase programme in terms of size and/or duration should the outlook become less favourable, or should financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
Investors continued to consider a scenario where inflation remained above target over the longer term significantly more probable than a scenario where it dropped below 2%.
It was argued that market participants seemed to question the credibility of the Governing Council’s forward guidance, as they expected a first interest rate increase at a date that was difficult to reconcile with the conditions set by the Governing Council for such an increase.
Moreover, high economic uncertainty was triggering a shift towards money holdings for precautionary reasons.
Since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting in July, risk-free interest rates had declined, partly in anticipation of additional monetary policy stimulus but also in response to a worsening macroeconomic outlook.
Overall, members judged that the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook over the medium term had become more balanced, although downside risks remained in the near term.
As a result, structural reforms might be seen as increasing inflationary pressures through their positive impact on the output gap in the short run, rather than reducing them.
Conversely, a shorter horizon would provide a stronger signal to banks that they needed to be prepared to secure funding on private markets and avoid becoming overly reliant on central bank funding.
Reviewing the demand components of GDP, the recovery in private consumption had been very strong until the third quarter of 2021, i.e.
It would also maintain the current degree of control over the monetary policy stance and ensure the full pass-through of the interest rate decisions to money markets.
In the United States, the effect of receding uncertainty surrounding Brexit and trade had been partially offset by changes in near-term monetary policy expectations in response to weaker economic data.
The ongoing recovery in domestic and global demand was boosting optimism among businesses.
If, by contrast, inflation declined sharply throughout 2022 from its current high rates, this would provide reassurance on the inflation outlook.
Similar developments had been seen at the start of the tightening cycle, when survey results had lagged the forward curves in the euro area and the United States for several months.
The question was posed as to whether the strong rebound in the economy, in part also as a result of monetary policy measures, was fully consistent with the underlying financial market assumptions, since expectations of a pronounced recovery in growth appeared not to square easily with interest rates and monetary conditions remaining very accommodative far into the future.
The stronger inflation dynamic in the revised projections meant that the estimated range for the terminal rate that would ensure a return of inflation to target in a timely manner had risen markedly.
In the mild scenario produced by ECB staff, the downward impact on inflation in 2020 was assumed to be around 0.2 percentage points, while the impact in a severe scenario was expected to be between 0.4 and 0.8 percentage points.
In this context, international coordination was seen as particularly important.
In the same vein, the latest results of the survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), covering the period from April to September 2016, showed that small and medium-sized enterprises had continued to signal an improvement in the availability of external sources of finance and in the willingness of banks to provide credit at lower interest rates.
Risks to the inflation outlook were on the upside and had intensified, especially for the short term.
As regards fiscal policies, members reiterated that government support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy.
The Purchasing Managers’ Index for manufacturing export orders had fallen into contractionary territory in March owing to the war in Ukraine and lockdowns in China.
This entailed the expectation that policy rates would remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019 and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure that the evolution of inflation remained aligned with the Governing Council’s current expectations of a sustained adjustment path.
At the same time, it was also argued that downside risks related to the euro area domestic economy and political risks had diminished markedly.
Turning to the euro area, in the first quarter of 2021 the economy had experienced a consumption-led drop in GDP growth.
The services sector was growing more strongly, owing to the reopening of the economy.
This reflected the carry-over from the recent weaker data outturns for 2023 and the still-subdued level of survey indicators.
It was also recalled that, while flexibility in the implementation of the PEPP was essential to successfully ease market conditions in times of stress, the capital key provided the benchmark for the allocation of purchases.
In this context it was pointed out that, in some countries, real estate transactions had already started to pick up again, presumably owing to reduced uncertainty about the future interest rate path.
Accordingly, it was necessary to reiterate that significant monetary policy stimulus was still needed for a continued and durable convergence of inflation.
But it was also noted that the latest developments cautioned against simply extrapolating the very large impact that had been included in the September projections.
Second, the conflict in the Middle East had resulted in rising freight costs and a lengthening of delivery times owing to the recent attacks on freight ships in the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
The point was made that, during recessions, the decline in employment was typically achieved through a reduction in hiring, not through increased firing.
Fourth, the outlook for price stability could still usefully be assessed on the basis of the future path of economic activity and the output gap, as well as the relationship between activity and prices, as measured by the Phillips curve.
Reinvestment was considered important for as long as necessary to maintain ample liquidity, thereby ensuring orderly money market conditions, and an appropriate monetary policy stance.
Covered bonds had thus benefitted from the flight to quality and this had possibly deterred some investors from reducing their covered bond positions in favour of other assets with better relative value.
On the upside, existing pipeline pressures could still send retail prices higher in the near term.
Turning to the euro area, members generally agreed that the assessment of the growth situation had improved, with the latest data providing confirmation that the cyclical recovery of the euro area economy was progressing broadly in line with the baseline in the March 2017 ECB staff projections and possibly more favourably in the first half of the year.
In the short run, however, inflation was expected to pick up again in the coming months, mainly owing to energy-related base effects.
Although different views were expressed about these scenarios, it was generally considered that, of the three scenarios presented, the “mild” scenario was probably already too optimistic.
Following an uptick in April, energy inflation had resumed the downward trend seen since last autumn.
At the same time, HICP inflation remained subdued and was set to persist at low levels for the coming months before gradually picking up, initially due to base effects but later supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery.
A “blackout period”, i.e.
Moreover, cutting interest rates by 25 basis points offered greater protection against downside shocks than keeping them at their current levels.
Moreover, the potential financial stability implications of the current monetary policy environment were seen to merit close monitoring.
Turning to the euro area, the more restrictive and extended lockdowns were weighing on the short-term growth outlook.
Any adjustment to the portfolio allocation across jurisdictions would be gradual and would be calibrated as appropriate to safeguard orderly market conditions.
Overall, based on the June staff projections, real GDP was expected to exceed its pre-pandemic level in the first quarter of 2022, one quarter earlier than envisaged in the March staff projections.
The EONIA forward curve had also flattened considerably in recent weeks, although this likely mirrored the decline in term premia related to the increased risk from the spreading of the Delta variant and did not necessarily reflect a genuine change in interest rate expectations.
The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, would not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but would also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate the benefits of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks.
Turning, in conclusion, to a more structural issue, Mr Cœuré referred to the year-end developments on the repo and the forex swap market.
Upside risks to inflation included the heightened geopolitical tensions, which could raise energy prices in the near term, and extreme weather events, which could drive up food prices.
Attention was also drawn to the evolution of inflation expectations, which had declined since the last meeting according to both the survey-based measures from the latest round of the SPF and market-based measures, as reported in the introductions by Mr Cœuré and Mr Praet.
The euro area net lending position, as a percentage of nominal GDP, had continued to increase over the last year and a half, despite the strong recovery in domestic demand.
While the war would likely dent economic growth in the short term, annual growth was projected to remain positive even in the severe scenario, pointing to “slowflation” rather than stagflation.
Even if activity and sentiment in the manufacturing sector were slowly improving, firms continued to face structural headwinds that were unrelated to the ECB’s monetary policy and needed to be tackled first and foremost by governments via structural reforms.
In stock markets, the EURO STOXX 50 index had further extended its gains, gradually approaching pre-pandemic levels.
Borrowing conditions for firms and households had remained very supportive.
Bank lending rates remained on a declining trend amid monthly volatility.
Looking ahead, additional information, including more hard data releases, new staff projections and news on fiscal measures, would become available by September.
Complementing earlier positive evidence from the bank lending survey on the general improvements in credit market conditions, the recent survey on enterprises’ access to finance (SAFE) had provided indications that the more favourable credit environment not only applied to large firms but was also trickling down to SMEs.
Looking further ahead, members widely shared the view that the more protracted “soft patch” suggested by the latest data remained consistent with the baseline scenario of a return to more solid growth in the second half of the current year.
Some sectors faced growing difficulties in sourcing inputs, which was disrupting production.
Market financing and bank borrowing costs for firms and households had remained very favourable and supportive of euro area credit flows, and credit conditions had loosened further.
At the same time, the view was also expressed that inflation risks had become balanced, as most analyses suggested that inflation was broadly evolving as projected, or that they had even moved to the downside.
As a consequence, the output gap was closing, albeit only gradually, as was to be expected after a balance sheet recession.
In the foreign exchange market, the euro had risen against most major currencies, including the US dollar, in part supported by expectations of a postponement of a first rise in official interest rates in the United States since 2006.
Looking ahead, in the September 2016 macroeconomic projections ECB staff foresaw annual HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, 1.2% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018.
In particular, even a fundamentally sound sovereign could be brought to the brink of default owing to a self-fulfilling dynamic involving market participants demanding higher risk premia based on a fear that the market might become illiquid.
A 25 basis point rate hike was fully priced in by the end of the year.
Real GDP had risen by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2015, following a rise of 0.5% in the previous quarter.
The ECB’s Corporate Telephone Survey showed that large companies expected margins to deteriorate in 2023 from elevated 2021-22 levels.
The appreciation of the US dollar during this time had been broad-based.
In exchanging views about recent wage developments, members noted that there had been a pick-up in wage growth.
Yet, despite the strengthening of the economic expansion, inflation remained subdued.
Meanwhile the growth in loans to households continued to weaken in annual terms.
Moreover, adequate policy action and measures needed to be put in place to address weak profitability and the remaining structural weaknesses in the euro area banking sector.
Concern was expressed that the sharp market repricing threatened to loosen financial conditions excessively, which could derail the disinflationary process.
The next projections in June would allow a more comprehensive analysis of the main risks and their implications for price stability.
These had fallen by 0.9% and 3.6% respectively.
The staff projections for inflation had been revised up, especially for the near term.
The forward curve had shifted outwards visibly after the strategy announcement, but had retraced its path more recently.
The behaviour of consumers in response to an easing of lockdown measures continued to be surrounded by uncertainty.
Moreover, although it was now clear that the United Kingdom would be leaving the EU at the end of January 2020, their future trade relationship still had to be agreed and there could be more divergence in this relationship than previously expected.
A further weakening of demand would also contribute to lower price pressures than currently anticipated, especially over the medium term.
Moreover, their relative shares would be maintained at the levels prevailing at the end of the net purchase phase.
Only towards the end of the projection horizon was output projected to return to its pre-pandemic level.
Developments in euro area corporate bond markets had mirrored those in equity markets, with spreads of investment-grade financial corporate bonds and non-financial corporate bonds in the euro area, excluding France, having narrowed overall.
This was illustrated by the fact that the latest projections now foresaw growth in global trade excluding the euro area of below 1% in 2020, compared with an increase of over 2% in the September 2019 ECB staff projections.
The balance of risks to the economic outlook was seen as remaining on the downside, with risks related mainly to the global environment, political uncertainties and continued balance sheet weaknesses in some sectors.
Accordingly, an adequately calibrated package of measures was seen as needed to secure the return of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
It was also very important to look at the labour market, where the December projections were returning to the pre-pandemic path.
A remark was made that a gap appeared to be emerging between favourable economic conditions and a policy stance that remained in a crisis configuration.
It was considered worrisome that, despite the stabilisation in oil prices, market-based inflation expectations had not picked up from their low levels.
In the September 2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, euro area real GDP growth had been revised up for 2017, to 2.2%, while remaining unchanged at 1.8% for 2018 and at 1.7% for 2019, compared with the June 2017 Eurosystem staff projections.
Annual consumer price inflation in the OECD area had remained stable in April, while inflation excluding food and energy had slowed marginally to 1.9%.
In contrast, growth had been revised down by 1.2 percentage points for 2023 and by 0.2 percentage points for 2024, owing mainly to the impact of energy supply disruptions, higher inflation and declining confidence.
At the same time, the steady absorption of economic slack gave grounds for increased confidence that price pressures would gradually take hold.
Regarding fiscal policies, an ambitious and coordinated fiscal stance was seen as remaining critical, in view of the sharp contraction in the euro area economy.
However, implied volatility had remained contained from a longer-term perspective and had retreated swiftly to previous lows.
Similarly, it was argued that the improved economic environment with vanishing tail risks, in principle, suggested also revisiting the easing bias with respect to the APP purchases, whereby the Governing Council signalled its readiness to increase the pace and/or duration of the asset purchases if necessary.
The ratio of net operating surplus to value added had increased further in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Turning to the euro area economy, various indicators for the manufacturing sector showed a sharp slowdown, with the PMI new export orders index falling below the 50 threshold in June.
Manufacturing was once again the principal drag on overall output, despite the continued easing in supply bottlenecks that had particularly benefited car production and sales.
It was recalled that, according to the March 2021 ECB staff projections, inflation was projected to be only 1.4% in 2023.
In the same vein, the April 2015 bank lending survey pointed to improving loan supply and demand conditions.
It therefore needed to be carefully monitored whether inflation would settle sustainably at the target in a timely manner.
Second, investors did not foresee a scenario in which inflation would return to below-target levels.
Their ongoing pass-through supported the economic upturn, which was steadily firming and broadening across sectors.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion among the members, on a proposal from the President, the Governing Council decided that the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility would remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.40%, respectively.
Moreover, the improvement in the Citigroup surprise indicator was mainly related to confidence indicators, while the real economy remained weak and the improvement in hard data had been negligible.
It was remarked that monetary transmission through the banking sector had been effective, partly because the balance sheets of banks had been stronger at the start of the pandemic than before the financial crisis of 2008.
The Governing Council held its biannual structured exchange on the links between monetary policy and financial stability.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the euro area economic recovery was expected to continue at a somewhat slower pace than previously anticipated, largely reflecting the slowdown in emerging market economies.
At the same time, it was pointed out that in some small euro area countries stronger domestic demand had mainly led to higher import growth.
In the United States, fears of a recession had, at least temporarily, weighed on natural gas prices, and on commodity prices more generally.
It was acknowledged that the uncertainty about the impact of the pandemic crisis on potential output made real-time estimates of output gaps even more uncertain than in normal times.
While amending the TLTRO III conditions might have side effects, the abrupt and unforeseeable change in circumstances justified a change in the policy stance if this was in the service of the ECB’s primary objective.
The increase in long-term bond yields had been more muted in the euro area than in other advanced economies.
More recently the bilateral exchange rate had seen a more pronounced drop.
For 2023, growth had been revised up, reflecting the expected fading of supply bottlenecks, the continued global recovery and an unwinding of accumulated savings.
Doubts about the enforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact were seen to increase uncertainty and to risk weakening further the credibility of the fiscal framework over time.
Bank lending rates for non-financial corporations and households had continued their declining trend, despite some monthly volatility, thereby supporting credit demand.
While the war and the associated amplified energy supply shock created an acute dilemma for monetary policy, there was value in keeping a steady hand and waiting before deciding on further adjustments to the monetary policy stance.
This assessment was broadly reflected in the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, which had not seen any major revisions, and could be viewed as confirmation of the outlook for growth that had been embedded in the March 2015 ECB staff projections.
It had decelerated slightly for goods inflation, but was still very high.
The June 2018 Eurosystem staff projections for euro area real GDP growth were broadly aligned with, or slightly below, available forecasts from other international institutions.
The situation therefore had to be monitored closely and everything possible should be done in all policy domains to ensure that permanent damage was contained.
This had resulted in a market forward curve that embedded an earlier and stronger easing of the monetary policy stance than incorporated in the staff projections.
Downside risks related mainly to remaining uncertainties and vulnerabilities in the external environment.
It was pointed out that, while output growth in some countries had exceeded expectations, the level of GDP in other countries was still very low relative to pre-crisis levels.
It was underlined that the projected increase in HICP inflation excluding food and energy, from the current level of 0.9% to 1.8% in 2019, was based on a strong pick-up in wage growth.
In particular, the global PMI for new export orders had remained above its historical average.
At the same time, some nuances were expressed about individual elements of the policy package.
Over the same period, the euro had strengthened both against the US dollar and, to a lesser extent, in nominal effective terms against the currencies of the euro area’s 38 major trading partners.
Most measures of underlying inflation had risen over recent months, but the persistence of the rise in these indicators remained uncertain owing to the indirect effects of higher energy prices and the role of temporary pandemic factors.
By its December monetary policy meeting the Governing Council would have new data on GDP growth for the third quarter, the October and November inflation figures, fresh monetary data and a new round of projections.
All in all, it would be plausible to expect productivity growth to rebound in the near future, which would contain unit labour costs and inflation.
Significant slack in the economy, weak wage growth and the past appreciation of the euro meant that underlying price pressures would likely remain subdued for some time.
As regards the volume of the programme, a pace of combined monthly asset purchases in the order of €50 billion lasting from March 2015 to end-2016, which had been mentioned by Mr Praet, was widely regarded as a sizeable complement to the existing purchase programmes.
Food price inflation had come down from its peak of 15.5% in March but had still been almost 10% in August.
It was argued that core inflation continued to be sticky and that the previous quick progress on headline inflation was increasingly fading as energy base effects vanished or even reversed.
Net exports – supported by improved price competitiveness and lower energy prices – were also expected to contribute to the recovery, even though they had contributed negatively to economic growth during the first quarter of 2015.
This suggested that the sharp rise in US real rates earlier this year may have largely reflected increased uncertainty around the outlook for monetary policy, and that this uncertainty may have diminished in recent weeks.
In December the Governing Council would have the benefit of the latest incoming data, the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections extending through to 2019 and the results of the work of the Eurosystem committees on the options to ensure the smooth implementation of the APP until March 2017, or beyond, if necessary.
On the other hand, concern was expressed that such dichotomies could not last forever and that sooner or later there might be spillovers or contagion from the weakening in manufacturing.
Although risk-free rates and GDP-weighted sovereign bond yields had increased, it was observed that this had occurred mostly on account of higher expected inflation and a better outlook for the global economy.
This was also visible when looking at the significant impact of the global reappraisal of the inflation and interest rate outlook on broader financial markets.
The projected annual growth rate of global activity excluding the euro area stood at 2.9% in 2019, its lowest level since 2008-09.
Finally, spreading bond purchases over a longer horizon was also seen as having important implications for policy rate expectations via the sequencing embodied in the Governing Council’s forward guidance, which so far had provided a useful anchor for market expectations of future policy rates.
Economic activity and demand were likely to remain muted in the early part of 2022 as pandemic containment measures were affecting activity in consumer services, and high energy costs were constraining consumption and investment.
As wage developments in the euro area were accelerating, second-round effects through higher wages appeared to be starting to materialise.
It was argued that this would still need to be factored into the outlook and would imply a faster closing of the output gap.
The euro area labour market remained strong, with employment growing by 0.4% quarter on quarter in the first quarter of 2018 and the unemployment rate declining to 8.5% in April.
In the light of these developments and the new sources of uncertainty, there was no need to act at the present meeting, but it was very important that the Governing Council found the right balance between, on the one hand, not drawing premature conclusions on the lasting impact of the latest economic and financial developments and, on the other hand, recognising that downward risks had clearly increased.
At the same time, a wealth of research over the past years had helped to synthesise the experiences under the previous strategy and to mould it into the new one, which from now on would guide the Governing Council’s decisions, ensuring consistency in the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy.
At the same time, the labour market had continued to perform well in the third quarter, with the unemployment rate remaining at the historically low level of 6.6% in August.
If the outlook became less favourable, or if financial conditions became inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, the Governing Council stood ready to increase the programme in terms of size and/or duration.
It was underlined that the proposed extension of the PEPP was consistent with the Governing Council’s communication that net asset purchases would continue until the coronavirus crisis phase was over.
The market’s reassessment of the outlook for inflation in the euro area and the United States had led to the one-year inflation-linked swap (ILS) rates one year ahead declining broadly in tandem on both sides of the Atlantic.
At the same time, it was recalled that market-based inflation measures contained an inflation risk premium, which had turned positive.
The credit supply channel remained active.
In particular measures of momentum (i.e.
This implied inflation above 2% for an extended period of time and raised the question of whether the deviations from the inflation target could still be described as “moderate” and “transitory”.
Global financial conditions had loosened further, driven by higher equity prices and declining spreads.
The pass-through of the strong pick-up in intermediate goods producer prices to non-food consumer goods producer prices still appeared to be weak.
Since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 9-10 April 2019, US trade negotiations with both China and Mexico had progressively deteriorated, negatively impacting global equity markets and pushing equity risk premia higher.
It was evident that the war and the associated uncertainty were weighing heavily on business and consumer confidence.
It was emphasised that the continued increases in market-based inflation compensation measures, including the measure for five years forward five years ahead standing at above 2.5%, were mainly due to risk premia.
This was widely seen as validating the Governing Council’s March decision to significantly increase the pace of net asset purchases under the PEPP, effectively insulating euro area financing conditions from global spillovers and preventing a premature tightening.
Longer-term inflation expectations, five years ahead, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) stood at 1.8% in the first quarter of 2019.
These prices reflected a number of economic and geopolitical factors affecting the balance of demand and supply, as well as types of shock that could not have been foreseen.
Overall, it was nevertheless felt that it remained reasonable to expect a gradual economic recovery to take hold, thanks to a recovery in people’s real incomes from rising wages and a strong labour market, and this would underpin consumer spending.
For example, the transmission of market rates to time deposits and bank lending rates had been relatively limited and weaker than in the past in the fourth largest euro area economy, but more rapid than usual for lending rates in the largest economy.
This formulation would also keep an element of the focus on current developments by retaining the reference to underlying inflation.
The latter confirmed that the moderate recovery in the euro area economy was ongoing, with only small downward revisions to the outlook for 2017 and 2018, which were related to external, rather than domestic, factors.
A sizeable expansion in the monthly volume of purchases was seen as substantially strengthening the effectiveness of the asset purchases, mainly by reinforcing the portfolio rebalancing channel.
The impact of oil prices on inflation expectations should, in principle, be transitory and of limited relevance over medium-term and longer-term horizons.
Employment had increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2016, with positive growth across all major sectors and large euro area countries.
It was argued that attaching more weight to observable data would improve policy decisions, in particular when uncertainty was high.
Although measures of underlying inflation had generally remained muted, there were indications of a mild increase in line with previous expectations.
The balance of risks remained tilted to the downside, despite the downward revision to the growth projections, largely on account of persistent sources of uncertainty relating to the international environment.
There were many other reasons why monetary policy was still working its way through the economy, with research suggesting that there could be years of lagged effects before the full impact dissipated completely.
Moreover, while recent market volatility had not materially changed the assessment of the economic outlook, continued elevated uncertainty called for alertness and a readiness to respond, if necessary.
Global growth remained subdued.
A very broad consensus supported the 25 basis point rate increase proposed by Mr Lane, while a preference was also initially expressed for raising the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points in view of the risk of high inflation becoming more persistent.
Services inflation had dropped fairly quickly from its peak in mid-2023 to 4% in November 2023, but since then it had hovered around that level.
The decision by the Bank of Japan on 29 January 2016 to adopt a negative deposit rate structure had reverberated through global financial markets, contributing to a sharp decline in global bank shares.
Euro area real GDP had contracted by 11.8%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2020.
The new strategy acknowledged the advantages of having two specialised areas of analyses on the economy, but also recognised the value of integrating the analysis, in a world in which there were multiple feedback channels from the monetary and financial spheres to the broader economy, and vice versa.
In euro area bond markets, model-based analysis also suggested that the inflation risk premium had increased significantly since the start of the year, albeit from very depressed levels, implying that the compensation that investors currently required for this risk still remained small by historical standards.
The change in market expectations regarding US monetary policy had supported risk sentiment globally.