However, it was generally felt that not acting at the present meeting could trigger a further tightening of financial conditions, to the detriment of the economic recovery.
Both the start of quantitative tightening and expectations of a full roll-off had been absorbed smoothly by the market.
Most of the decline in non-energy industrial goods inflation could be attributed to the weakness in clothing and footwear inflation, which could be expected to be corrected to some extent after the pandemic.
It was highlighted that domestic demand had so far been rather resilient, underpinned by strong employment and wage growth, favourable lending conditions and support from a very accommodative monetary policy stance and a mildly expansionary fiscal stance.
Members agreed with Mr Lane’s proposal to confirm the reduction of the Eurosystem’s holdings of securities under the PEPP by €7.5 billion per month on average over the second half of the year, with the modalities for reducing the PEPP holdings to be broadly in line with those followed under the APP.
Structural reforms were seen as essential to enhance competition, lay the foundations for sustainable growth and provide a more favourable investment climate by improving the medium to long-term return on capital.
In foreign exchange markets, a persistent and broad strengthening of the euro since the December monetary policy meeting prevailed.
This assessment of the monetary policy stance and the line of communication reflected consideration of a number of key elements.
The view was expressed that fiscal initiatives to address non-performing loans and ensure an adequately capitalised banking sector should be encouraged, while monetary policy was playing its part in supporting favourable financing conditions and ample liquidity in the banking sector.
At the same time, negotiated wages had continued to increase, rising from 2.1% in the third quarter of 2018 to 2.2% in the fourth quarter, and further to 2.5% in January 2019.
In that context, caution was also expressed regarding measures of economic slack, which were surrounded by large uncertainties.
With regard to the economic analysis, the members of the Governing Council generally shared the assessment of the outlook and risks for economic activity in the euro area provided by Mr Praet in his introduction.
The impact on emerging market economies was evident first in terms of the pressure on their currencies, either prompting a downward trend in the case of floating currencies or creating downward pressure in the case of pegged currencies.
All in all, Mr Praet concluded that since the start of credit easing policies in June 2014 and their reinforcement through public sector asset purchases half a year later, the ECB’s monetary policy measures had led to a substantial easing of financial conditions and improved access to finance in the euro area, thereby providing sizeable support to inflation and economic activity.
It was also pointed out that the risk of deflation had declined further.
At the same time, there were indications that the euro area was moving away from reliance on external demand towards more domestic sources of expenditure, which should increase its resilience.
At the same time, while risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remained broadly balanced, it was acknowledged that risks related to global factors, including the threat of increased protectionism, had become more prominent and warranted monitoring with regard to their implications for the medium-term outlook for growth and prices.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the information that had become available since the Governing Council’s meeting on 7-8 September confirmed an ongoing moderate but steady economic recovery in line with previous expectations.
Since May 2021, oil prices had increased by 88% in US dollar terms but by 111% in euro terms.
Growth could be higher if inflation came down more quickly than expected and rising real incomes lifted spending more than anticipated, or if the world economy grew faster than expected.
Considering the tentative signals of a stabilisation in the euro area economy, the Governing Council would await further data to see if there were firmer grounds for optimism.
Nevertheless, it was stressed that, in order to produce an upward shift in market expectations as regards the future path of interest rates, strong communication was required that highlighted three elements, namely that interest rates would still have to increase significantly, that they would be raised into restrictive territory, and that they would remain there for longer than the market currently expected.
It would therefore be beneficial to explain that the analysis of underlying inflation pressures took a wide range of indicators into account and went well beyond core inflation.
Furthermore, the Governing Council could reflect the improved risk assessment in its forward guidance by dropping the easing bias on the key ECB interest rates and reiterate, in view of persistently subdued underlying inflation, that a substantial degree of accommodation was still needed for underlying inflation pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term.
This would counter inflationary pressures, while it could also exert a negative effect on economic activity.
At the same time, while the difficulty of relying on precise values of these rates was acknowledged, there was agreement that, looking ahead, the Governing Council needed to continue removing accommodation with further interest rate hikes.
So a significant tightening of financing conditions was embedded in the projections, which reflected the ECB’s monetary policy tightening.
Furthermore, statistical issues linked to the effects of weights, tax changes and imputations continued to imply some uncertainty about the direction of underlying inflation.
However, the scale of the upward revision to core inflation was muted by the appreciation of the euro.
Compared with the October monetary policy meeting, financing conditions were broadly unchanged and remained very favourable overall.
In particular, broad agreement prevailed that, ahead of its September meeting, the Governing Council should neither hint at further rate increases nor signal that it would pause in hiking rates or that it had reached the peak rate.
However, a remark was made that, in the absence of persistent positive contributions to price developments from food and energy components in the future, underlying inflation would need to be higher than its pre-crisis average if the ECB was to meet its inflation aim on a sustained basis.
Overall, the incoming data confirmed the previous baseline assessment of a pronounced near-term impact of the pandemic on the economy and a protracted weakness in inflation.
Data on new export orders pointed to a sharp fall of global trade in the second quarter of the year.
The measures had actually declined since mid-June, with market participants expecting higher interest rates and lower economic growth.
Given the current projections and the high degree of uncertainty, a larger, pre-emptive initial increment ran the risk of triggering excessive adjustments in market interest rates.
In nominal effective terms, however, the euro exchange rate had depreciated mildly, as the appreciation against the US dollar and other currencies had been more than offset by a weakening against the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen.
Annual inflation had eased slightly to 2.5% in June, with both goods price inflation and services price inflation unchanged, at 0.7% and 4.1% respectively.
Market-based measures of long-term inflation compensation had declined from their decade-high level recorded in April but had started to rise again lately and remained above 2%.
In consideration of all these arguments, the adjustment was therefore judged to be proportionate in the service of the Governing Council’s mandate.
During the first two weeks of the bond sell-off, yields had generally increased by less than those on German government bonds, but yield spreads had widened during the second half of May.
Growth was expected to recover only gradually through most of 2024.
Consumer confidence indicators had continued to improve, and were approaching or had exceeded pre-crisis peaks in a number of euro area countries.
In their discussion of the outlook for economic activity, members welcomed the positive news about the prospective roll-out of vaccines and thus a gradual resolution of the health crisis.
Trade in goods had expanded at the strongest pace in a decade in February 2017.
A rebalancing of the distribution of the implied “tax” between workers and employers would take some time, in part depending on productivity developments, bargaining power and the ability of firms to maintain profit margins.
Funding had become more expensive for banks, and average interest rates for business loans and mortgages had risen again in August, although rates on longer-term loans to non-financial corporations had declined.
Reference was also made to empirical evidence that the public sector played a leading role in private sector wage-setting in a number of euro area countries.
At the same time, non-performing loans remained a factor constraining credit expansion in some countries.
In this regard, it was reiterated that the sensitivity analysis conducted in the context of the projection exercise pointed mostly to upside risks to inflation, notably from energy and food prices.
At the same time, average longer-term inflation expectations had remained broadly unchanged, at 1.9%.
The swift and effective implementation of such reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, would not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but would also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate the benefits of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks.
This was the result of both the decline in energy prices and the economy’s greater resilience to the challenging international environment.
Concerns were nevertheless expressed that some of the downside risks to growth, as identified in the previous monetary policy meeting, in particular related to emerging market economies, had already partly materialised and were likely to affect negatively the outlook for euro area growth.
Survey-based measures of inflation now also indicated a small rise in longer-term inflation expectations, although to levels that were still some distance below the inflation target.
Yet, in contrast to previous episodes of heightened volatility in sovereign bond markets, there had so far been no visible differentiation between banks across euro area jurisdictions.
The Vice-President, standing in for Mr Cœuré, reviewed the latest financial market developments.
In that context, public loan guarantees were seen as a crucial element in maintaining credit flows to firms and households.
The latest Eurostat release showed that the rate of increase in compensation per employee had declined by 0.3 percentage points to stand at 5.2% in the third quarter, with the contribution of unit profits to the GDP deflator also falling substantially.
Accordingly, the Governing Council did not change its assessment of a broadening of the euro area’s economic recovery and of a gradual increase in inflation rates over the coming years, which was predicated on the full implementation of all monetary policy measures taken by the Governing Council.
It was thus seen as important to stress that the economic expansion had strengthened and that risks to the growth outlook were broadly balanced.
The dispersion of lending rates to borrowers domiciled in different jurisdictions had narrowed, remuneration of bank deposits had become much less diverse and, in most countries, NFCs were benefiting from more favourable conditions on loans.
The view was expressed that the longer the inflation spike lasted, the more it would become entrenched in longer-term inflation expectations.
Uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook stemmed particularly from the impact of China’s reopening, fiscal measures and the exchange rate on inflation.
Moreover, the slowdown in demand in China could contribute to greater global uncertainty and a possible loss of confidence, which could have a more substantial impact on global growth.
Goods price inflation and services price inflation had been 0.7% and 4.1% respectively in both May and June.
It was recalled that the dichotomy between manufacturing and services was in line with historical patterns whereby monetary policy affected services with a longer lag.
The Eurosystem cash collateral facility had been instrumental in mitigating pressures in the repo market.
Likewise, there was a risk that, in some countries and sectors, union bargaining might go beyond a one-off “catch-up” of real wages with respect to pre-pandemic levels and try to make up for the trend decline in the wage share incurred during past decades.
With US inflation having repeatedly surprised on the upside since the Federal Reserve’s pivot in December 2023, market pricing in the United States had also gradually shifted towards fewer and later rate cuts in 2024.
At the same time, it was considered necessary to retain sufficient flexibility and optionality for monetary policy in the period ahead, and the importance of data-dependency in determining the ECB’s policy stance was underlined.
At the same time, the prevailing high level of uncertainty was underlined.
Market-based indicators of longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area had recovered somewhat since the Governing Council’s last monetary policy meeting, but remained at subdued levels, with the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead standing at just above 1.3%.
Members deemed it important to continue deepening the analysis of potential growth and the output gap.
The participants in the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) also expected a marked deceleration in wage growth in 2025.
Labour market indicators continued to be heavily affected by government support programmes, which complicated the assessment of underlying developments.
The average interest rates on new loans to firms and new mortgages had been unchanged in April, at 5.2% and 3.8% respectively.
The improving external environment was expected to provide additional support to euro area economic activity.
HICP excluding energy and food had been revised down by 0.2 percentage points in each year of the projection horizon.
In the coming months headline inflation was expected to remain at levels close to 2%, mainly as a result of movements in the annual rate of change of energy prices.
For business investment, recent data indicated a rebound also in the second quarter of 2021, after a 0.4% quarter-on-quarter contraction in the first quarter.
New entrants tended to take jobs paying lower wages, while job movers typically took higher-quality jobs with significant wage increases.
The high levels of inflation had thus turned out to be less transitory than previously expected, while the latest ECB staff projections nonetheless still foresaw a rapid decline in inflation, nearly to target, over the projection horizon.
In terms of the exchange rate, the euro had depreciated against the US dollar (-2.0%) but remained broadly stable in nominal effective terms (-0.3%).
It was highlighted that borrowing conditions for firms and households had improved further since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting, which was seen as a sign of receding impairments in the credit channel of monetary policy, permitting the effective transmission of the policy measures taken by the Governing Council.
In particular, in the absence of further regulatory relief regarding the classification of loans as non-performing, a surge in corporate insolvencies resulting from the pandemic could lead to an increase in non-performing loans on bank balance sheets, especially as governments were likely to start withdrawing some of the support provided, such as debt moratoria or loan guarantees.
Still, monetary transmission via the bank lending channel was generally seen to have been stronger than previously anticipated, including by banks themselves, and to have led to a significant tightening of financing conditions.
It was pointed out that the share of firms citing labour shortages as a constraint on output remained high but had been falling, pointing to less labour market tightness.
It was stressed that the terms-of-trade shock had been operating like a tax and that its absorption in the domestic economy should proceed with some burden-sharing between labour and capital.
However, the strength of the rebound might also have reflected that countries had eased containment measures too much too soon.
This could, in part, be attributed to the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets, which was still incomplete, as evidenced by the high level of non-performing loans in some countries where a clear turnaround could not yet be discerned.
In line with the conclusions of the ECB’s strategy review, a discussion of the costs of owner-occupied housing was welcomed.
At the same time, it was underlined that, to assess the favourability of financing conditions, it was necessary to understand the underlying drivers of the rise in risk-free rates.
Moreover, since investors now expected higher yields in the United States, there may have been a general reluctance by private investors to take duration risk, which further added to the demand for short-term bonds.
Since the Governing Council’s meeting on 9-10 March, commodity prices had risen, with Brent crude oil prices up by 6.5% to around USD 42 per barrel and non-oil commodity prices up by 2.5% in US dollar terms, while the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro had appreciated by 0.4% vis-à-vis 38 major trading partners.
Adverse downside scenarios were thus judged to have become less likely.
Bank lending to firms had grown at an annual rate of 0.3% in April, down slightly on the previous month.
Especially when comparing with the inflation outlook contained in the September 2023 staff projections, the subsequent downside inflation surprises had diminished the need for nominal wages to catch up with past inflation.
In this context, it was observed that to date financial markets had remained fairly resilient and rebounded rather rapidly, also reflecting the swift and forceful monetary policy response so far.
By contrast, in the United States they had increased by more than 20 basis points.
Simultaneously, to keep the current 20% risk-sharing regime unchanged – in itself a key parameter of the programme – the ECB’s share of monthly PSPP purchases would need to be increased from 8% to 10%.
The latest round of the Commission’s household survey suggested that euro area households had revised their expectations on consumer prices 12-months ahead sharply downwards and their expectations on the economic situation upwards.
Against this background, it was recalled that the ECB also had secondary objectives.
Members considered the implications of the reopening of China’s economy for inflation developments in the euro area.
Indices of broad financial conditions covering movements in euro area government bond, stock and foreign exchange markets had tightened and euro area stock prices, in particular for financial sector equities, had declined sharply, in an environment of increased global uncertainty.
It was recalled that the ECB monitored a wide array of measures of underlying inflation and undertook a detailed analysis of all components of headline inflation, rather than looking exclusively at particular measures of core inflation excluding several volatile items.
At the same time, it was highlighted that recent supportive financial market developments largely reflected market expectations about the monetary policy decisions to be taken at the current meeting.
In addition, options markets had, by and large, priced out low inflation outcomes over the following five years.
All components of financial conditions indices had loosened over the course of 2019, namely short-term and long-term interest rates, exchange rates and equity prices.
By the June monetary policy meeting there would be more information about the course of the war and its wider ramifications.
The downward shift observed in the last few weeks could be explained by market participants expecting lower growth rates to feed into lower inflation rates, requiring less-pronounced interest rate increases.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that the latest data and information, including the new Eurosystem staff projections, pointed to a strong pace of economic expansion and a significant improvement in the growth outlook.
In terms of market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead currently stood at 1.24%, while in terms of survey-based measures, longer-term inflation expectations stood at 1.7% for the fourth quarter of 2019 in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).
While the possibility of second-round effects was considered to be limited in the presence of labour market slack, it was argued that price effects could be greater than currently estimated if labour force participation did not return to pre-crisis levels.
A high proportion of vaccinations had also strengthened investor confidence in the resilience of the euro area recovery.
Spillovers from sovereign bond purchases not only into corporate bond prices, but also into equity prices, could trigger the mispricing of risk and feed financial market exuberance with potential destabilising effects on financial markets.
The point was made that consideration should be given to the quality of public expenditure and to its impact on potential output.
Overall, members expressed increased confidence that inflation was on track to decline sustainably to the 2% inflation target in a timely manner.
Rising wages and falling energy prices would partly offset the loss of purchasing power that many households were experiencing as a result of high inflation.
Among the drivers of these perceived upside risks to the inflation outlook, food prices had increased sharply over recent weeks, in part owing to extreme weather events related to climate change and the El Niño phenomenon.
Financing costs in the euro area, measured by the interest rates on market debt instruments and bank loans, had remained restrictive as past policy rate increases continued to work their way through the transmission chain.
Incoming wage data and recent wage agreements indicated that wage growth might be picking up.
Similarly, the spreads of most euro area sovereign bond yields over equivalent German government bond yields had fallen since the start of the year.
It was therefore suggested that it was just a matter of time before wage growth caught up, in view of the large and persistent overshoot of the inflation target.
Such a downward revision to the inflation outlook was seen as potentially worrisome, especially when coupled with less robust evidence of a sustained turning point in underlying inflation, as it would imply a further extension of the protracted period of low inflation and a further postponement of the return of inflation to levels in line with the ECB’s medium-term inflation aim.
Moreover, while patience was still required for inflation to return to levels consistent with the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim, more solid and broad-based economic growth prospects supported increased confidence in a strengthened resilience of the inflation path to possible adverse developments.
Moreover, underlying inflation was weak and would likely be well below 1% in the second half of 2020.
On the other hand, it needed to be emphasised that the baseline scenario for growth and inflation continued to be predicated on a highly accommodative monetary policy stance for a prolonged period of time.
Whereas private consumption had been very strong in the second and third quarters of 2022 as a result of the reopening of the euro area economy, the significant drop in the fourth quarter of 2022 reflected low confidence and the earlier terms-of-trade shock adversely affecting spending decisions.
Real business investment continued its cyclical recovery broadly in line with GDP growth.
This came at a time when household spending capacity was directly affected by the drop in real incomes owing to higher inflation.
Rates on corporate loans had been moving sideways in nominal terms (and therefore upwards in real terms), dampening demand for external finance.
Additionally, supply bottlenecks might prove more protracted than assumed in the baseline scenario.
According to a purely mechanical update of the latest short-term inflation projections, in the near term inflation was expected to be higher than projected in December and would likely remain above 2% for the rest of the year.
At the same time, the tightness in the labour market continued to diminish gradually, with employers posting fewer job vacancies.
The unemployment rate had edged down to 6.4% in April, the lowest level since the start of the euro.
Moving to a model-based analysis of risks to the inflation outlook, two alternative approaches were used in the assessment.
It raised uncertainty about the entire future path of short-term interest rates, resulting in a higher term premium.
In this context, it was important to highlight that, even after a termination of the net asset purchases under the APP, monetary policy would continue to be very accommodative.
The labour market had continued to improve, with unemployment declining steadily and a recovery now taking place in the housing and construction sectors.
However, more recent indications pointed to a further decline in all three main revenue pillars, namely interest income, non-interest fee income and trading income.
The solution to the energy problem was seen as mainly of a structural nature.
Against this background, members generally agreed that, from the present point of view, the evidence available continued to indicate that convincing progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence of inflation towards the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim had yet to be ensured.
Compared with the September 2017 ECB staff projections, the outlook for real GDP growth had been revised up substantially over the projection horizon.
The average number of hours worked had also increased, although it was still somewhat below its pre-pandemic level.
The latest Eurosystem staff projections also pointed to a solid and broad-based economic expansion, at a somewhat faster pace than previously expected.
Demand for bank loans to non-financial corporations had also declined in the final quarter of 2022.
For example, the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead had been broadly stable around 1.7% since the Governing Council’s January monetary policy meeting, following an earlier upward trend.
The latest bank lending survey pointed to a further tightening of credit standards and another sharp drop in loan demand in the second quarter for both firms and households, since banks were becoming more concerned about the risks faced by their customers and less willing to bear these risks.
Over the medium term risks stemmed primarily from domestic factors, such as a persistent rise in inflation expectations above the ECB’s target or higher than anticipated wage rises.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation had decreased to 0.1% in May, down from 0.3% in April, mainly on account of lower energy price inflation.
First, the increase was due to a supply cut by Russia and Saudi Arabia, in an attempt to avoid a fall in revenues due to a possible weakening of global oil demand.
Commenting on this outlook, it was pointed out that higher headline inflation reflected the fact that energy prices were 9.2% higher in February 2017 than one year ago, but that base effects were expected to turn negative over time.
Expectations of inflation five years ahead in the SPF for the second quarter of 2018 were unchanged at 1.9%.
The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for both manufacturing and services at the global level continued to point to an ongoing recovery at the turn of the year.
It was recalled that the September 2018 ECB staff projections had incorporated a small acceleration in quarterly growth rates in 2019, compared with the profile for 2018, which could be revisited.
In particular, the automobile sector and industrial production were still declining in the euro area’s largest economy, which would affect other countries, in part via value chain linkages.
First, volatility in interest rate markets remained at historically high levels, reflecting very high uncertainty regarding inflation, as well as heightened data dependence of monetary policy.
Looking ahead, members voiced some nuances related to the appropriate pace of the gradual normalisation.
However, while the average of point forecasts was stable, the Survey of Professional Forecasters also provided a probability distribution around the point forecasts which remained tilted to the downside.
More generally it was noted that, because financial markets were anticipating the full easing cycle, this had already implied an additional and immediate easing of the monetary policy stance, which was reflected in looser financial conditions.
In view of the prevailing uncertainties and the large costs of bringing inflation down once it had become entrenched, it was argued that it was preferable to tighten monetary policy further than to not tighten it enough.
Moreover, broader measures of labour underutilisation, which took into consideration groups that are marginally attached to the labour market, such as discouraged workers, and the underemployed, pointed to a much higher degree of labour market slack than was evident from the unemployment statistics.
Headline inflation in the euro area had exceeded headline inflation in the United States owing to much higher energy and food inflation.
The transmission of higher wages to consumer price inflation was considered to remain a key issue for the medium-term outlook for inflation, with higher wage growth not yet having passed through to price inflation, as firms had absorbed increases by lowering profit margins.
With regard to structural reforms, continued progress was seen as important to strengthen potential growth and encourage private investment.
Members widely acknowledged that growth would likely be weaker than expected in the short term.
With regard to economic activity in the euro area, members concurred with Mr Lane that growth was likely to remain subdued in the coming months.
However, the turbulence in equity markets had not generated a more general sell-off of other risk assets.
Assessing the policy options, Mr Praet deemed that the information that had become available since the previous monetary policy meeting on 4-5 March did not give grounds to reconsider the monetary policy stance or any of the APP parameters.
Oil prices had decreased by 3.9% in the same period (remaining broadly in line with the technical assumptions for the June projections), amid heightened volatility in the oil market.
Banks had increasingly been passing on the decline in their funding costs to the economy through lower lending rates.
It also had to be acknowledged that the carry-over effect from slower growth in the second half of 2018 would in itself entail a lower projection for growth in 2019.
It was also widely felt that, at times of extraordinary statistical uncertainty around the baseline projections, the precise numbers foreseen for inflation at the end of the projection horizon mattered less than the assessment of risks, which were seen to be on the upside throughout the horizon, including over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon.
The March ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresaw a significant pick-up in euro area foreign demand, in line with previous exercises.
The fiscal multipliers were also smaller.
Namely, market sentiment had improved notably following the news of the successful development of vaccines and on account of expected monetary policy measures.
It was stressed that the Governing Council had to be ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moved towards its aim in a sustained manner.
At the same time, it was highlighted that real interest rates remained at very low levels across the entire maturity spectrum, which was seen as confirmation of the effectiveness of the ECB’s policy measures in underpinning very favourable financing conditions.
It anticipated that, subject to incoming data confirming the medium-term inflation outlook, net purchases would then end.
With regard to the second condition outlined by Mr Lane, the phrase “on a durable basis” was seen to provide flexibility by allowing for small oscillations around the target level.
Some insight into the reversal in the US-euro area interest rate differential could be derived from the breakdown of bond yields into the short-term rate expectations component and the term premia component.
Accordingly, it needed to be highlighted that progress towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim still required an ample degree of monetary stimulus, which supported the Governing Council’s recalibration at the present meeting of its policy instruments beyond the year-end.
As partly anticipated, a sizeable additional stimulus was foreseen for 2021 in response to new lockdown measures.
Brent crude oil prices had increased by 3.8% in US dollar terms since the December monetary policy meeting and non-oil commodity prices had risen by 2.5%, while the euro had depreciated by 0.5% in nominal effective terms vis-à-vis the currencies of 38 of the euro area’s major trading partners.
Against this background, members assessed that there were both upside and downside risks to inflation.
A concern was voiced that, with the current slowdown in economic activity, the ongoing transmission of past monetary policy actions could lead to a more pronounced deceleration in economic activity than was necessary to achieve price stability.
At the same time, it was argued that some indicators suggested longer-term inflation expectations remained at risk of becoming unanchored.
It was also pointed out that the momentum of services inflation was clearly on the rise, indicating that wages – a key component of services inflation – would become increasingly important in explaining underlying inflation, especially given the resilience in the labour market.
Turning to euro area activity, in the second quarter real GDP had increased by 0.3% quarter on quarter.
According to the June Eurosystem staff projections, HICP inflation was expected to rebound from 0.2% in 2016 to 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018, broadly in line with recent forecasts from other international institutions and the private sector, including the OECD forecasts for the euro area, which had just been released.
At the same time, it was underlined that the evidence that monetary policy transmission was working was to be welcomed and remained consistent with a soft landing.
By contrast, for services inflation the underlying measures and the momentum did not yet point to any visible decline.
Euro area sovereign credit spreads had remained resilient to the recent change in German government bond yields.
It was fully prepared to increase the size of the PEPP and adjust its composition, and potentially its other instruments, if, in the light of information that became available before its June meeting, it judged that the scale of the stimulus was falling short of what was needed.
The latest inflation numbers were therefore to be treated with caution, and it was too early to be fully confident that inflation would return to target.
Measures of underlying inflation had continued to move sideways, even if labour cost pressures had continued to strengthen and broaden as labour markets had tightened further.
Moreover, attention was drawn to complementary support provided on the prudential side aimed at easing conditions in the banking system.
Credit dynamics remained weak.
Brent crude oil prices had risen above USD 90 per barrel on fears of rising tensions in the Middle East.
On the other, the lack of sustained growth dynamics raised concerns about the durability of what appeared to be the most inclusive and vibrant labour market in the history of the euro area.
The most recent indicators suggested that GDP growth had broadly stagnated in the third quarter of the year.
It was also argued that at the current juncture the risk of policy inaction clearly outweighed the risk of action.
What mattered from a monetary policy perspective was the evolution of real rates, which had declined to record low levels in recent weeks.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that, while inflation was set to pick up over the coming years, supported by the firming recovery, there was as yet insufficient progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with the Governing Council’s inflation aim.
The decline in the annual growth rate of narrow money (M1) had been accelerated by a pronounced reshuffling between instruments within broad money (M3), with shifts from overnight deposits into other less liquid but better remunerated instruments, such as time deposits.
Financial conditions in the euro area had overall remained largely unchanged since the Governing Council’s June monetary policy meeting, but were tighter than before the crisis.
High rates of corporate loan growth continued to mirror elevated liquidity needs of firms to finance their ongoing expenditures, such as wage payments and working capital, and to further build liquidity buffers.
However, the Governing Council should continue to monitor carefully the bank-based transmission channel of monetary policy and the case for mitigating measures.
It was stressed that, during the transition period, the main reference index for monetary policy would remain the current HICP.
Against this background, bank credit was seen as particularly important for small and medium-sized enterprises, which lacked access to market-based funding.
Moreover, the argument was made that the financial markets’ reaction to the Governing Council’s October decision and communication had contributed to a loosening of financial conditions, which had reversed some of the tightening that had occurred in the wake of the September meeting.
Moreover, core inflation did not represent the household consumption basket and had historically not been a good leading indicator of future headline inflation in the euro area.
This global phenomenon was reflected in a substantial repricing in the US Treasury market.
While the energy and supply bottleneck shocks were expected to have less of an impact, some catch-up in wages to recover the loss in real wages, on the back of a strong labour market, implied that core inflation would remain above 2% over the projection horizon.
The September 2022 ECB staff macroeconomic projections featured a significant upward revision to inflation in the period to the third quarter of 2023.
These schemes made it convenient for firms to hold on to cheap and less productive labour.
Likewise, if the medium-term inflation outlook were to moderate, the pace would be slower.
Regarding financial and monetary conditions, the euro area yield curve had flattened substantially and was currently much lower than at the time of the December 2015 monetary policy meeting.
A question was raised regarding the extent to which euro area economic growth could accelerate further from the current pace on a sustained basis.
By contrast, gas spot prices had rebounded strongly, while futures prices had remained broadly unchanged at elevated levels since October.
Members also reiterated that monetary policy should continue to be based on the established elements of the reaction function.
Against this background, members assessed the data that had become available since the September monetary policy meeting in accordance with the three main elements of the “reaction function” that the Governing Council had communicated earlier in the year.
There was very broad agreement among members that the proposed policy package would benefit from strong credit easing components, namely with regard to the launch of new TLTROs to provide support for the bank lending channel.
A slowdown was also visible in the PMI data, although employment indices remained on the whole above the threshold indicating growth.
On the basis of these considerations, in the view of some members there appeared to be no urgent need for monetary policy action at the current meeting.
The annual growth in broad money as measured by M3 had risen to 1.3% in April, from 0.9% in March, as the euro area’s growing current account surplus and non-resident demand for euro-denominated securities gave rise to monetary inflows from outside the euro area.
On the other hand, euro area financial markets had been affected by the recent increase in global risk aversion and some concern was voiced that global shocks could again have different effects on the financial markets of individual euro area countries.
There were two elements to the effectiveness of the TPI.
In particular, it needed to be stressed that the underlying strength of the euro area economy, supported by high levels of capacity utilisation and a progressive tightening of labour markets, with the associated rise in wages, continued to support the Governing Council’s confidence that the convergence of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term would continue in the period ahead and would be maintained after a gradual winding-down of the net asset purchases.
At the same time, businesses had suffered from high energy costs and continued supply bottlenecks, although the latter had been easing gradually.
While the gross indebtedness of non-financial corporations (NFCs) in relation to their gross operating surplus had remained at a relatively high level, firms had increased their retained earnings and improved their access to external financing.
Persistence was seen as essential to bring inflation back to 2% in the medium term.
The Eurosystem nevertheless continued to smoothly execute the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), in line with the announced moderate frontloading of purchases.
The baseline scenario of a rebound in growth in the second half of the year remained broadly intact, while the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remained tilted to the downside.
There was ample evidence that the euro area economy would have fared much worse without the policy stimulus from asset purchases.
Nevertheless, monetary policy in the euro area was still expected to normalise at a measurably slower pace than in many other economies, as could be seen from the developments in foreign exchange markets.
Therefore, while there was wide agreement that there were no signs of a wage-price spiral, it was argued that current wage growth was clearly not consistent with a 2% inflation target, even when taking into account trend improvements in productivity.
The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead now stood at 1.32%, i.e.
According to market intelligence, real interest rates currently remained at levels that were supportive for growth and risk assets.
Since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting on 6-7 September 2017 a positive underlying tone had persisted in financial markets.
Growth would also benefit from a resilient labour market, with the unemployment rate declining further from historically low levels.
Hence, it was prudent to await Eurostat’s GDP release in the coming week before drawing any firm conclusions.
In this context, it was cautioned against declaring victory over inflation at the current stage, when inflation was still more than twice the ECB’s target.
The performance of the manufacturing sector was weaker and the sector was also exposed to global competition, so profits might continue to buffer unit labour costs.
Even though the outlook for the world economy had been upgraded slightly, there had been a downgrade in terms of the export prices of the euro area’s competitors, which was expected to fuel disinflationary pressures in the euro area, particularly in 2025.
Medium-term inflation expectations, as proxied by the one-year swap rate three years ahead, had stood at 1.99% the day before the Governing Council meeting – their highest level since early 2013.
While such volatility was not surprising at turning points in monetary policy, its magnitude had been amplified by the combination of shocks hitting the world economy: the war in Ukraine, the energy transition, global excess demand and China’s zero-COVID policy.
Market-based, longer-term inflation expectations had also declined, mainly in reaction to weak macroeconomic data releases, and measures of underlying inflation remained muted.
This represented a downward revision of 0.5 percentage points for 2022, which was mainly due to the impact of the Ukraine crisis on energy prices, confidence and trade.
Overall, members considered that the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook could still be assessed as broadly balanced, notwithstanding the uncertainties related to global factors, notably the threat of protectionism.
First, yield spreads of higher-yielding euro area sovereign bonds – with the exception of Italian government bonds – had declined in recent weeks, unlike in periods of broad risk aversion, when these yield spreads would tend to rise against German bonds.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that financial conditions had eased since the Governing Council’s March 2019 monetary policy meeting.
As regards fiscal policies, it was essential that all countries intensified their efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances, while remaining in compliance with the EU fiscal rules.
Members assessed the outlook for wages from different angles.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, the Governing Council decided to continue its purchases under the APP at the current monthly pace of €80 billion until the end of March 2017.
Third, although global stock markets had partly recovered the losses seen in late February and early March 2020 – the Euro Stoxx 50 index had risen by more than 20% since the PEPP announcement – there were signs that the significant remaining uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook continued to pose risks to current valuations.
This appeared to be in line with the state-contingent elements of the Governing Council’s forward guidance on both of these instruments and contributed to preserving the financial conditions necessary for sustained inflation convergence.
Inflation had risen to 2.9% in December as some of the past fiscal measures to cushion the impact of high energy prices dropped out of the annual inflation rate, although the rebound was weaker than expected.
In the other direction, the 2023 and 2024 inflation projections from the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters had increased.
A recession was becoming increasingly likely and would mitigate inflationary pressures.
Employment and hours worked had been increasing in the third quarter but remained below pre-crisis levels, with some variation across countries.
Headline inflation was now only expected to reach 1.6% in 2021, at the end of the projection horizon.
Doubts were expressed as to whether, at the current juncture, relaxations on the supply side would be sufficient, and it was argued that a reduction in inflation would need to be driven mostly by a lower contribution from the demand component.
In this context it was underlined that any conclusion on whether the conditions in the forward guidance on interest rates had been met was not predicated on the staff projections but was up to the judgement of the Governing Council based on its assessment of all relevant information, with the staff macroeconomic projections being only one element.
At the same time, some remarks were made suggesting that there were encouraging developments in the inflation outlook that should not be overlooked, notably on the basis of measures of underlying inflation.
The PELTROs would consist of seven additional refinancing operations commencing in May 2020 and maturing in a staggered sequence between July 2021 and September 2021 in line with the duration of the collateral easing measures.
As regards communication, there was wide agreement among members with the proposals put forward by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Turning to fiscal policy, members highlighted the need for compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union and reiterated that full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact over time and across countries remained crucial for confidence in the fiscal framework, which was increasingly being challenged.
Its previous appreciation was still adversely affecting euro area trade.
The point was made that declaring an end to the emergency might be considered premature given the current deterioration in the pandemic situation.
However, it was also pointed out that bank lending rates for firms and households had so far remained broadly insulated from the increases in market rates, and credit conditions did not currently signal lending constraints for the non-financial sector.
Deposit rates had also increased further, rising more strongly for firms than for households since May 2022.
The September projections foresaw HICP inflation at an average of 2.2 per cent in 2021, before returning to 1.7 per cent in 2022 and 1.5 per cent in 2023.
Rising construction costs were expected to put a break on growth in housing investment.
It was observed that this went hand in hand with a strong reliance on “just-in-time” delivery systems, raising the question of whether future systems would return to relying more on inventories and buffers.
In addition, a recovery of price pressures along the pricing chain, such as those due to producer prices, was likely to materialise.
High economic uncertainty was seen to weigh on consumption, with the level of precautionary savings in particular being dependent on developments in household confidence.
In this environment, monetary policy needed to remain highly expansionary.
However, it was also recalled that, before 2011, minimum reserves were remunerated at the MRO rate.
It was argued that the Governing Council should look through the current supply disruptions and keep a steady hand, while carefully monitoring any developments pointing to an unanchoring of inflation expectations.
If lower energy prices or other factors reduced the cost of living now, this should put downward pressure on wage claims next year.
Taking into account the views expressed by the Governing Council, the President concluded that it remained premature to judge whether recent developments would have a lasting impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability.
Annual consumer price inflation in the OECD area had remained unchanged in August, in terms of both headline inflation (0.6%) and inflation excluding food and energy (1.7%).
While there were as yet no indications of a hard landing in either the United States or the euro area, it was argued that the events of early August had shown that financial markets were highly sensitive to disappointing growth readings in major economies.
Underlying price pressures remained strong, inflation in non-energy components of the price index was rising and a tight labour market would continue to exert pressure on core inflation.
Also, credit dynamics still appeared to suggest a soft landing, given increasing evidence that loan growth had reached a trough.
With respect to a possible resurgence of fragmentation in euro area financial conditions, it was recalled that, in December, the Governing Council had included a general reference to flexibility in its communication, which had since been included in the regular monetary policy press releases.
This situation was also reflected in the forward rate curve, which suggested that the probability of a rate increase versus a pause at the September meeting had been relatively evenly split for some time, as had been the case with analysts’ expectations, such as those reported in the Survey of Monetary Analysts.
Second, it was argued that the persistence of low inflation in the euro area was part of a wider phenomenon of low global inflation and that a sustained rise in euro area prices would be difficult to achieve in the absence of a global pick-up in inflation.
In this context, the view was also expressed that the baseline projection for inflation in 2023 was too low.
Wage growth remained subdued.
Although most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently stood at around 2%, some indicators had edged up and warranted continued monitoring.
Overall, the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook were seen to remain tilted to the downside, although they were less pronounced.
In particular, inflation was projected to move along the trajectory already contained in the June 2018 Eurosystem staff projections and could be assessed as broadly in line with the ECB’s medium-term objective.
A first 10-basis point increase in the ECB’s deposit facility rate was currently priced in for the fourth quarter of 2019, while survey-based information suggested a somewhat earlier timing, which might in part reflect the presence of negative term premia in OIS rates.
An analysis of possibly more fundamental changes in the structure and functioning of financial intermediation was also seen as needed.
It was also noted that the risk of recession was low.
Members widely acknowledged the resilience of the labour market.
Caution was also expressed about looking only at nominal wage growth, as growth in unit labour costs was ultimately the more relevant indicator for inflation trends and showed only modest dynamics.
US Commodity Futures Trading Commission numbers suggested that the market remained positioned for an appreciation of the euro.
Commentators associated these developments with an increase in the uncertainty about the outcome of the 23 June referendum on UK membership of the European Union.
Inflation had edged down from 8.6% in January to 8.5% in February, while underlying price pressures remained strong.
The picture of a sustained global economic expansion was supported by the latest IMF projections for world real GDP growth.
As energy prices were falling and risks around the energy supply were receding, it was important to start rolling back these measures promptly and in a concerted manner.
Energy prices, which had increased by 31.7% in February, continued to be the dominant force behind the rise in inflation.
The monetary policy measures decided by the Governing Council in October 2017 and their communication appeared to have had a favourable market impact.
Second, spillovers from the United States to the euro area had been contained.
Tensions in global markets over the summer had led to a temporary tightening of financial conditions in the riskier market segments.
The role of government guarantee schemes for loans was also highlighted as underpinning loan growth, with some concern expressed about possible future “cliff effects” as such programmes expired.
Euro area goods exports had contracted in the second quarter as the stockbuilding in the United Kingdom, which had lifted euro area goods exports in the first quarter, had reversed.
Some spillover effects from the events in Greece had been observed in the euro area bond and equity markets, but, overall, contagion to other euro area countries had been limited.
The uncertainty about the duration of the pandemic and the economic consequences of the containment measures had resulted in turbulent financial market developments.
Conditions remained challenging in euro area money and repo markets, although there had been significant improvements lately.
This suggested that larger firms continued to see financing conditions as favourable, with very few considering them a reason for reducing investment.
This risk distribution suggested investors were concerned that the high uncertainty about the inflation outlook could mean the conditions of the ECB’s forward guidance might be met earlier than currently expected.
Annual real GDP growth was projected to fall by 8% in 2020 and to increase by 5% in 2021 and 3.2% in 2022.
Members concurred that the current and near-term increase in inflation was driven largely by temporary factors that would fade in the medium term.
At present, euro area firms’ cash coverage was nearly four times higher than at the height of the global financial crisis.
If, on the basis of incoming data, the FOMC were to raise interest rates at one of its forthcoming meetings, this would suggest that the US economy was experiencing a stronger recovery, which in turn could be expected to have a positive effect on “animal spirits” and confidence globally.
in the case of euro area countries with greater reliance on tourism).
In this context, it was acknowledged that models estimated on historical data naturally had their limits in the face of unusual shocks and possible turning points or regime shifts.
Moreover, new headwinds could emerge for goods inflation in a world that was more prone to frequent supply chain disruptions, geopolitical fragmentation, protectionism and climate change dynamics.
It was remarked that weakening the credibility of the fiscal framework also entailed a risk of a negative impact on the effectiveness of the expanded APP through heightened uncertainty adversely affecting expectations and risk premia.
Volatility in equity markets had spiked both in the United States and in the euro area at the end of March and in early April, and was now back to low levels, suggesting that investors’ risk appetite had improved.
This amount might also change over time, reflecting changes in market interest rates relative to the DFR.
Bank funding costs had risen in the past few months, which had increasingly fed into higher bank lending rates, in particular for households.
This included keeping in place all elements of the Governing Council’s forward guidance pertaining to the ECB’s key interest rates and the pace and horizon of APP purchases, as well as the implicit sequencing of policy instruments embedded in the forward guidance, and the indication that the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP would be reinvested for as long as necessary.
Only the part of the overall bond repayments that exceeded the month’s cap would be reinvested.
Overall, however, it was important to highlight that the conditions remained in place for inflation to move sustainably towards the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim.
Price pressures in the early stages of the pricing chain had still not been transmitted to the later stages and faced headwinds from the recent euro appreciation.
According to national accounts data for the second quarter, employment growth in the manufacturing sector had declined from 0.4%, in quarter-on-quarter terms, in the first quarter of 2019, to 0.2% in the second quarter, whereas employment growth in market services had remained broadly unchanged at 0.3%.
In their discussion, members argued that, on the one hand, the reopening of the Chinese economy should lead to fewer bottlenecks in global supply chains and thus support global activity.
Turning to money and credit, annual growth in broad money (M3) had remained robust at 5.0% in January, after 4.7% in December, supported by the low interest rates, as well as the impact of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and the asset purchase programme (APP).
However, if there were significant hysteresis effects, labour market slack may be less than suggested on the basis of these broader measures.
In this context, scope was seen for fiscal policy to further support the recovery by rebalancing the composition of expenditure towards more public investment and other growth-friendly measures geared to enhancing the quality of public finances, notwithstanding the fact that the degree of fiscal space was very limited for most euro area countries, taking into account the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and current fiscal positions.
At the time of the meeting, the euro was still down against the US dollar by more than 6% compared with a year ago and was trading close to its 2019 average.
Data on investment growth were generally considered to remain weak.
Having been able to keep inflation expectations anchored, despite the long period in which inflation had been above target, was seen as a major achievement.
In particular, the preamble limited the validity and scope of the new forward guidance to a situation in which robust convergence was not yet assured.
In addition, in the latest SPF, the expected five-year-ahead inflation rate was unchanged at 1.9%.
Global inflation remained low in March.
In their assessment of the overall monetary policy stance, members broadly agreed that the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it warranted keeping a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation in place and extending the APP beyond March 2017.
Looking further ahead, in the absence of new disruptions, energy costs were expected to stabilise and supply bottlenecks to ease.
In addition, it was noted that the baseline did not contain some trade measures that had been announced since the finalisation of the projection exercise.
However, it was also cautioned that the recent underestimation of inflation had to be interpreted in the context of the previous prolonged period of overestimation and the continued shortfall of longer-term inflation expectations from the target.
With regard to price developments, members concurred with the assessment by Mr Lane that the latest data were a reflection of the bumpy profile of headline inflation expected in 2024.
In this context, it was remarked, however, that it was difficult to distinguish whether observed spreads were driven by an increase in credit risk or a lack of liquidity.
The overall quarterly profile of measures of underlying inflation remained in line with the picture of gradually diminishing price pressures.
Ms Schnabel reviewed the financial market developments since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 3-4 June 2020.
At the same time, it was cautioned that credit risks and the probability of default of non-financial corporations were increasing as the crisis endured.
It was therefore likely that the recent slowdown reflected a combination of both structural and cyclical factors.
Consumers continued to be confident and their spending remained strong.
Underlying inflation was expected to pick up towards the end of the year and to increase further in the medium term, supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion and rising wage growth.
Survey indicators suggested a moderation in non-construction investment in the second half of the year.
However, this was not the case for the indicator of domestic inflation, which remained strong and was likely to reflect more persistent pressures on services prices, which had a high wage content.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion, upon a proposal by the President, the Governing Council took the following monetary policy decisions: The Governing Council was fully prepared to increase the size of the PEPP and adjust its composition, by as much as necessary and for as long as needed.
With regard to economic activity in the euro area, members concurred with the assessment presented by Mr Lane and acknowledged the weaker than expected growth outcome in the second quarter.
An upside risk to growth and to the labour market was seen as emanating from fiscal policy, as several governments had decided on, or were currently discussing, additional measures that were not incorporated in the current projections.
Average longer-term inflation expectations, which referred to 2022, had been revised up slightly, to 1.9%.
For goods inflation, staff analysis showed that energy prices and bottlenecks accounted for about 0.8 percentage points and 1 percentage point of the increase respectively.
The size of the proposed envelope was calculated to make a significant contribution to offsetting the pandemic-related downward shift in the projected inflation path.
Measures of underlying inflation were at elevated levels.
Measures of systemic stress, volatility and market liquidity had returned to close to their levels before the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB).
The lifting of pandemic restrictions was supporting consumer spending, although higher energy prices might reduce purchasing power in the months to come.
Lower energy prices, the easing of supply bottlenecks and fiscal policy support for firms and households had continued to shore up the economy.
Sovereign spreads in emerging markets had also increased measurably over the past few weeks, by around 160 basis points.
The higher volatility went hand in hand with a deterioration in market liquidity.
This was more than the cuts embedded in market pricing, but one cut less than survey participants had expected before the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting.
In that period the ECB had granted exceptionally favourable conditions to credit institutions that borrowed via these operations, with the aim of sustaining the supply of bank loans to the real economy at a time when banks were likely to pull back and disengage from credit intermediation.
By contrast, the services sector remained resilient, still benefiting from the stimulus provided to contact-intensive services by the reopening of the economy.
Questions were raised as to how realistic it was to assume that containment measures would be reduced as early as the second quarter and it was pointed out that, depending on the further evolution of the pandemic, weakness in activity might continue well into the second quarter and beyond.
Spillovers from the United States and the reappraisal of euro area monetary policy had been key drivers of euro area risk-free yields.
The risks surrounding the outlook for activity were assessed to have remained broadly balanced, with upside risks in the near term.
Although a better economic outlook in the United States also entailed positive demand effects for the euro area, it was observed that the optimism prevailing on financial markets, reflected in “reflation trades”, seemed not to be shared by businesses and households, which had generally maintained a cautious stance.
The overriding theme in euro area and global financial markets had been the continued rise in longer-term risk-free interest rates and sovereign bond yields.
One important factor behind the rally in global risk assets was related to positive global macroeconomic surprises – as reflected in the Citigroup Economic Surprise Index for advanced economies, which stood at an all-time high.
More generally, a significant part of the current weakness in manufacturing was likely to be of a structural nature, which would have different implications for the evolution of inflation, particularly as previous downward revisions to potential output growth might prove insufficient.
Housing investment was affected by a jump in input costs.
A faster deceleration in global growth would also pose a risk to the euro area outlook.
Finally, the Governing Council would continue to provide ample liquidity through its refinancing operations.
While policy inaction carried the risk of disappointing market expectations, in part financial conditions also reflected expectations of policy tightening in the United States and care needed to be taken to avoid circularity between monetary policy actions and expectations by the market.
For the second option the two parameter changes would be sufficient and could offer more room for manoeuvre, while minimising departures from the capital key.
Turning to the monetary and financial analysis, members widely concurred with the assessment provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
At the same time, it was argued that keeping a mild scenario was warranted, as the unlocking of the economy could give rise to more positive outcomes in the short term than envisaged in the baseline.
For the partial reinvestments until the end of 2024, operational modalities similar to those used during the partial reinvestments of the APP could be applied.
At the same time, the point was made that wage indexation mechanisms had become significantly less important since the financial crisis in a number of countries.
For the euro area, real GDP had risen by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Reference was made to the latest forward-looking survey indicators for economic activity, which had posted strong declines and were signalling a contraction.
This tightening was mainly driven by heightened risk perceptions among banks, in a context of continued uncertainty about the economic recovery and concerns about borrower creditworthiness.
In other countries, the backward-looking component was much weaker, which would inevitably lead to wage differentials across countries.
It was also observed that the moderate recovery in consumer confidence was still from low levels and that the saving ratio was increasing.
According to a dividend discount model, the increase in euro area non-financial equity prices was mainly driven by declines in the equity risk premium on the back of a perceived improvement in global risk sentiment.
The Governing Council also decided to extend the reinvestment of principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP until at least the end of 2023.
On the nominal side, following a series of unprecedented energy price shocks, headline inflation was now expected to average 5.1% and core inflation 2.6% in 2022.
Looking ahead, the outlook for headline inflation was expected to be more subdued than previously anticipated.
In this context, it was stressed that the strengthening of Economic and Monetary Union remained a priority.
When looking at the whole projection horizon and cumulating the impact of the energy price shock on core inflation from the last quarter of 2021, ECB staff analysis showed that around 3 percentage points of the cumulative increase in core inflation had been driven by the indirect effects of energy.
The argument was made, however, that if inflation expectations started to shift upwards in response to the prolonged period of high inflation, monetary policy would be transmitted less forcefully.
It was underlined that the projections were based on exceptionally supportive financing conditions, which to a large extent reflected the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy.
Excluding food and energy, HICP inflation had decreased slightly, from 1.2% in August to 1.1% in September.
For food inflation the momentum had fallen to 6%, which was still very high, while among the core inflation items it had declined significantly for goods but not for services.
This concealed an upgrade to the outlook for advanced economies relative to that for emerging market economies, given the more rapid progress with vaccination programmes in the former and some new concerns about the pandemic in the latter.
There was general agreement among members on the need to respond to an unwarranted tightening of the monetary policy stance or a material change in the medium-term outlook for price stability.
It was recalled that labour markets had improved further, with around seven million jobs created in the euro area since the start of the recovery.
In this context, it was remarked that all expansionary monetary policy instruments contributed to a low interest rate environment.
Yet, underlying price pressures continued to lack a convincing upward trend and remained an ongoing source of concern.
Data for the second quarter would also be available – including GDP growth, compensation per employee, profit margins and productivity – alongside two more HICP releases, as well as monetary indicators and more timely soft indicators for activity and consumer confidence.
This would facilitate a better assessment of the momentum and sustainability of the recovery and the prospects for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
This approach, combined with forceful communication, could allow the Governing Council to reduce the pace of purchases while having an equivalent effect on financing conditions.
This adjustment took place from very low yield levels.
It was widely underlined that fiscal support was critical, should arrive as early as possible and should not be withdrawn too soon.
With regard to the implementation of the APP, members welcomed findings indicating the effectiveness of the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP) in easing market financing conditions and, hence, supporting the transmission of monetary policy.
At the same time, the Governing Council had to remain cautious given the very early stages of the economic recovery and the high degree of uncertainty, particularly regarding the outer years of the projection horizon, which now extended up to 2017.
The annual rate of change in producer prices for consumer food had continued to decline since mid-2014.
At the same time, some caution was voiced, as the more recent developments in the euro exchange rate and in financial conditions in part reflected changing perceptions about monetary and fiscal policies, domestically and globally, as well as rising risks of protectionism and heightened market sensitivity to communication, rather than further improvements in domestic economic fundamentals.
Overall, financial conditions remained supportive of the economic expansion, although the repricing in some financial market segments, in particular in foreign exchange markets and the bond markets, had led to some deterioration since the previous meeting.
The recovery in domestic and global demand was supporting production and business investment, although various shortages and cost pressures were clouding the outlook for the coming quarters.
The increase in interest rates was expected to lead to higher financing costs for governments.
Second, there was a need to signal that any adjustments to the key ECB interest rates would take place ”some time after the end of the Governing Council’s net purchases under the APP”.
Over the coming weeks more data would become available, which would provide improved visibility about how the various forces at play would influence the medium-term inflation outlook.
This was seen as essential around turning points and in periods of possible “regime shifts”.
Members also agreed with the proposal to continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions falling due in the PEPP portfolio.
Measures of underlying inflation remained subdued and had yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Overall, the Governing Council assessed that there were still significant upside risks to the inflation outlook.
It was important for communication to emphasise that the incoming data confirmed that the euro area economy was proceeding along a solid and broad-based growth path and underlined that risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook could still be assessed as broadly balanced, but uncertainties related to global factors remained prominent.
In this context, it was recalled that macroprudential policies were the first line of defence for addressing risks and side effects, as they could be tailored to the issues identified.
This caution would help avoid derailing a strong labour market, which had been a source of income stability in Europe throughout the pandemic.
The Indeed job postings suggested that this trend would continue in the second quarter.
It was therefore seen as important to confirm the Governing Council’s commitment to the monthly asset purchases of €80 billion, which were intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council saw a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim.
If the same was now true in the opposite direction, it would be very difficult to re-anchor expectations once these had moved away from the target.
Weakening global activity would also weigh on global trade and euro area foreign demand, despite improvements in global supply chain pressures.
It was underlined that the Governing Council’s mandate was price stability and that institutional independence had been granted to allow central banks to focus squarely on price stability.
In the short term, on the basis of current oil futures prices, headline inflation was expected to remain in negative territory for a number of months, before rising later in the year, linked to strong upward base effects and the assumed oil price increases embedded in the futures curve.
In this context, it was argued that the current fiscal stance was out of line with the cyclical position of the economy.
It was underlined that households’ inflation expectations differed from those of financial market participants and professional forecasters, but it would be welcome if this translated into higher inflation expectations more broadly.
Annual average HICP inflation for 2014 was 0.4%.
There was thus broad agreement among members that a strong policy response was required, which was best achieved by a comprehensive package of measures that exploited the synergies and complementarities between its different components.
However, the fall in energy prices, combined with the recent appreciation of the euro and continued tightening of credit conditions, was expected to gradually dampen core inflation compared with the December projections.
Mr Lane reviewed the global environment and the recent economic and monetary developments in the euro area.
As regards developments in inflation expectations, members noted that longer-term market and survey-based measures appeared to be reasonably well anchored.
In the light of the prevailing uncertainties, it was also seen as important to reiterate that the Governing Council was monitoring economic and financial market developments very closely and that it was determined to preserve the very substantial degree of monetary accommodation that was necessary to secure a return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
This also was seen as an integral part of the Governing Council’s meeting-by-meeting orientation and offered the necessary flexibility.
Wage developments had been subdued overall.
Retaining the existing flexibility in PEPP reinvestments was seen as a prudent approach to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related to the pandemic, which still persisted in the current market environment.
At the same time, it was perceived that the reaction of financial markets in the euro area had been more contained than could have been expected, both in the initial responses and in the partial reversals that took place afterwards.
Second, risk-free rates and sovereign yields were leading indicators for financing conditions at the later stages of transmission.
At the same time, it was cautioned that while economic performance had been better than expected, the economy was not yet “out of the woods”.
However, it was still uncertain whether the funds provided by the ECB’s lending operations would reach those sectors of the euro area economy where liquidity was most urgently needed, such as small and medium-sized enterprises.
Accordingly, members widely agreed that, while the growth outlook had become more favourable, the overall picture of the outlook for price stability had not fundamentally changed.
Broad agreement was expressed among members to maintain the forward guidance on interest rates unchanged, as proposed by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Progress in structural reforms was also considered important for the banking sector.
While bank earnings had been lower in the first quarter of 2016 than in the first quarter of 2015 (when banks had benefited from valuation gains associated with the launch of the expanded APP), net interest income had still been holding up relatively well.
However, on the basis of ECB staff analysis and the work carried out by Eurosystem committees, the first option was considered to be less effective in the current environment.
To maintain the symmetry of its inflation target, the Governing Council recognised the importance of taking into account the implications of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation had stood at 2.0% in June, up from 1.9% in May.
Labour markets had shown further gradual improvement.
The borrowing costs of households for house purchase remained substantially below their level at the start of the pandemic, as did borrowing costs for consumer lending.
Going beyond the proposed 10 basis point cut would, in the view of some members, raise issues about increasing side effects over time.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion among the members, upon a proposal by the President, the Governing Council confirmed the decisions taken at its monetary policy meeting last December and as set out in the dedicated press release published after the meeting.
Several factors had contributed to this situation.
In addition to some positive developments in recent survey data, the Citigroup surprise index was trending upwards and had been close to achieving positive values in recent weeks, while according to various models estimates of the probability of recession had declined significantly.
However, for 2023, the projected inflation rate was 4%, which was significantly below the 5.5% inflation rate included in the September staff projections.
Longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area remained broadly unchanged from the 26-27 April Governing Council meeting, with the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead having declined by 3 basis points to 1.58%.
As emphasised in previous Governing Council communication, it needed to be reiterated that, given prevailing uncertainties, the Governing Council would continue to monitor closely the evolution of the outlook for price stability and, if warranted to achieve its objective, would act by using all the instruments available within its mandate.
However, if energy costs were to decline or demand were to weaken over the medium term, it would lower pressures on prices.
Therefore, there was broad agreement that the Governing Council should communicate that, on the basis of this updated assessment, it would recalibrate its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that financing conditions remained favourable to support the economic recovery, counteracting the negative impact of the pandemic on the projected inflation path and thereby fostering the convergence of inflation towards the Governing Council’s aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.
In all cases, the singleness of monetary policy was preserved, as reflected in the full control the Governing Council would always maintain over all its monetary policy instruments, including the design features of the expanded asset purchase programme, and with the ECB always coordinating the purchases.
Better job prospects, increasing confidence and continued government support were reinforcing spending.
Overall, it was generally considered that a recession in the euro area remained unlikely.
However, growth could be higher than projected if the strong labour market and receding uncertainty meant people and businesses became more confident and spent more.
There were four main reasons behind this.
While longer-term survey-based inflation expectations in the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2019 had been unchanged at 1.8%, the market-based measure of the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead had declined further since the Governing Council’s March 2019 monetary policy meeting, to stand at 1.4%.
In total, between two and three rate cuts were now priced in by the end of the year, up from two cuts immediately after the June meeting.
Geopolitical uncertainties continued to prevail.
The point was made that in the public perception repeated underestimations of inflation were likely to be more problematic than overestimations, as the general public was typically less concerned if actual inflation turned out lower than expected.
With regard to fiscal policies, the euro area fiscal stance, as measured by the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance, was expected to be mildly expansionary in 2016 and turn broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018.
As regards monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had remained at values close to zero for the past few months at very short maturities, while it had declined further at longer maturities.
Based on leading indicators, no immediate recovery was in sight.
The Eurosystem had participated in four primary market issuances and also in some retained deals.
HICP weights were expected to change substantially in 2021 as a result of the changes in consumption patterns during the pandemic, adding to the already elevated uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook.
The extent of the contraction and the recovery would depend crucially on the duration and the effectiveness of the containment measures, the success of policies to mitigate the adverse impact on incomes and employment, and the extent to which supply capacity and domestic demand were affected more permanently.
The overall cost of financing for euro area firms had remained very favourable by historical standards.
As regards long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, both survey and market-based measures had moved up slightly.
With spending in decline and incomes still supported by government short-term work schemes, the saving ratio was expected to rise again in the fourth quarter.
Moreover, it was deemed essential that the Governing Council reaffirm its commitment to achieve its stated inflation aim.
It did not necessarily imply “lower for longer” interest rates if it ultimately succeeded in anchoring inflation expectations at the target, as intended.
In the United States, markets now assessed the chance of a rate hike at the Federal Reserve’s meeting in May 2022 as well over one in two.
Turning to financial conditions, long-term risk-free rates were broadly unchanged from the level prevailing at the time of the March meeting.
While global economic growth was expected to pick up gradually, risks were assessed to remain on the downside, in part related to geopolitical developments.
Nevertheless, uncertainty around the future path of policy rates had increased, also in the euro area, which had contributed to the rise in market volatility.
Regarding monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had remained at values close to zero for the past few months at very short maturities, while it had declined further at longer maturities.
At the same time, domestic inflation was stubbornly high and longer-run inflation projections still seemed to be above the Governing Council’s target.
Reference was made to the very useful large set of sensitivity analyses carried out by ECB staff in the context of the latest projections.
Such a risk was considered as increasingly likely to materialise since HICP inflation was projected to stand above, and mostly far above, 2% for more than three years.
With regard to the euro area economy, members widely noted that the medium-term outlook discussed during the previous Governing Council meeting and entailed in the June 2024 Eurosystem staff projections had not changed overall.
The emergence of the second wave of the pandemic could lead to more widespread business closures in a number of sectors, for example retail trade.
The incoming information was sending a range of signals.
Concerning the composition of the APP, there was broad agreement that all its constituent programmes should remain active during the reinvestment phase.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the euro area economy had gained further momentum since the end of 2014, with increasing signs that the economic recovery would broaden and strengthen gradually – consistent with what had been expected in the March 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area.
The annual growth rates of loans to NFCs and of loans to households had increased further in the third quarter of 2017.
With regard to the execution of the APP, market liquidity had remained broadly steady, although some deterioration had been reported in certain market segments, such as agency bonds and covered bonds.
Reference was made in the discussion to a number of factors, including the impact of trade tensions between the United States and China, the threat posed by a trade dispute between the European Union and the United States, and the risks surrounding a disorderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union.
Moreover, the Governing Council stood ready to adjust all of its measures, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moved towards its aim in a sustained manner.
Nonetheless there were signs of a stabilisation in the outlook for global GDP.
The April 2016 bank lending survey for the euro area pointed to improving loan supply conditions for enterprises and improving loan demand across all loan categories.
It was noted that, while recent data were broadly in line with the baseline scenario and the forces underlying the baseline – such as solid wage growth and rising cost pressures – were still seen as intact, the uncertainty around the projected duration of the economic slowdown remained high, also affecting the medium-term inflation outlook.
At the same time, it would stand ready to provide liquidity support if needed to ensure a smooth monetary policy transmission.
It was noted that the growth of MFI loans to the private sector had strengthened further, continuing the upward trend observed since the beginning of 2014.
By July, and even more so by September, new information would become available that would allow the Governing Council to update its assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary transmission.
External financing flows to euro area NFCs had strengthened overall in the fourth quarter of 2016, driven by robust developments in bank lending and market-based financing in October and November.
Based on the developments in inflation expectations alone, the nominal ten-year OIS yields would be 65 basis points above the level prevailing at the time of the monetary policy meeting on 9-10 December 2020, at which the Governing Council had pledged to preserve favourable financing conditions.
It was noted that survey data covering several months, which had become available since the Governing Council’s meeting in early March, suggested that euro area growth in 2017 could be stronger than had been expected at the start of the year, while the labour market had also continued to improve, providing support for consumer spending.
It was highlighted that asset purchases were an essential tool with which monetary policy could affect macroeconomic developments and, ultimately, inflation outcomes, via a number of transmission channels.
Long-term risk-free rates and GDP-weighted sovereign bond yields had increased somewhat further since the March Governing Council monetary policy meeting and stood above their pre-pandemic levels.
However, it was also argued that firms had built up sizeable precautionary buffers and the recent slowdown in credit should not be interpreted as the start of a financial amplification cycle.
Some reassurance regarding the outlook for underlying inflation was drawn from recent developments in wage growth.
Economic agents had apparently learned to adapt to such restrictions, for instance by adjusting their consumption patterns, and the economy had demonstrated a strong capacity to bounce back rather quickly.
This suggested that a large part of the pass-through of past interest rate increases was still in the pipeline.
From a counterpart perspective, this was mirrored in further monetary inflows from outside the euro area, which reflected a recovery in foreign investor demand for euro area assets.
Moving on to monetary and financial conditions, the EONIA forward curve had steepened since mid-April, notably at medium to longer horizons.
In particular, these comprised the implications of the incoming economic and financial data for the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission.
Extra-euro area exports of goods had been stable as the negative contribution from Asia was offset by the positive contribution from the United States, while intra-euro area trade had proved weaker, especially in intermediate goods.
Turning to the euro area, real GDP growth in the second quarter of 2019 had been confirmed at 0.2% in Eurostat’s third release.
Members expressed broad agreement with Mr Lane’s proposal to reconfirm the very accommodative monetary policy stance and to leave the ECB’s monetary policy configuration unchanged, including the proposal to continue net purchases under the PEPP over the next quarter at a significantly higher pace than during the first months of the year.
The normalisation of the inventory cycle was expected to contribute to a strengthening in trade growth and a normalisation of trade elasticities in the period ahead.
Moreover, the concern was raised that, if the Governing Council deviated from its earlier guidance and surprised markets with a larger than expected increase, this would add to the prevailing market uncertainties.
Risks to the medium-term inflation outlook were seen to be clearly tilted to the upside.
Selling price expectations in the retail sector had likewise been improving in almost all the large euro area economies.
An economic contraction owing to the Russia-Ukraine war could lead to a weaker labour market, as observed in the 1980s.
At the same time, core inflation was expected to decline over the projection horizon owing to the fading impact of the pandemic, the easing of bottlenecks and the indirect contribution of the current surge in energy prices falling away.
A general question remained on the scale of pent-up demand and the extent to which excess savings could also be used for consumption rather than housing or other purposes, such as repaying debt.
Moreover, the higher purchase pace would ensure that the Eurosystem showed a more robust presence in the market during times of heightened volatility, not least in the market for corporate bonds.
The low volatility regime posed risks of abrupt and unpredictable price movements.
In particular, reference was made to the past sequence of over-predictions in the inflation projections, which was seen as a downside risk to the baseline.
Regarding the consequences of further negative supply shocks, specifically related to energy, the view was expressed that such a scenario was unlikely to play out in the same way as the large commodity price shocks of 2021-22, which had coincided, amid persistent supply bottlenecks, with the release of pent-up demand and the post-pandemic reopening.
On the other hand, it was maintained that the current environment differed from the 1970s in important respects, such as improved central bank transparency, weaker aggregate demand conditions, a lower degree of unionisation and a lower prevalence of wage-indexation clauses.
Risks to the growth outlook could now be considered to be broadly balanced, supporting confidence that the economic expansion was on a stronger footing.
In view of the high uncertainty and the risk that further supply shocks could materialise, the Governing Council’s data-dependent approach was also reaffirmed.
Reference was made to evidence from some countries which indicated that the share of firms that had lowered prices was increasing now that input costs were falling and this share – for the first time in the current inflation cycle – had exceeded the share of firms that were raising prices, indicating that the disinflation process was progressing.
Looking more closely at the factors behind the lower rate of underlying inflation, the decline was viewed as being related to significant calendar effects in several countries, reflecting the deceleration in volatile travel-related components, in particular package holidays, associated with the timing of the Easter holidays.
However, it was also reported that contacts with businesses pointed to a perception of higher inflation in a context of spikes in commodity prices, supply bottlenecks and rising production costs.
With regard to the eligibility of agency issuers for the PSPP, the Governing Council decided on a list of additional eligible agencies located in the euro area, which would apply from 16 April 2015 for purchases under the PSPP.
With regard to the monetary policy stance, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Praet in his introduction that the continued solid and broad-based expansion of the euro area economy, amid supportive financing conditions, had clearly reinforced confidence that inflation would eventually head to levels consistent with the ECB’s medium-term inflation aim.
Attention was drawn to the increase in consumer inflation expectations in March.
In particular, it was recalled that developments in narrow money had typically been a good leading indicator of turning points in economic activity.
The recent Eurogroup statement on the euro area fiscal stance was consistent with this assessment.
Overall, it was widely felt that the recalibration of instruments decided on in December remained appropriate and well-balanced, while all instruments needed to remain on the table, with due consideration of benefits and possible unintended side effects.
In some large euro area economies, recent data had surprised on the upside.
This tightening was significantly less pronounced than the tightening seen at the time of the financial and sovereign debt crises between 2008 and 2012, which was a sign that the ECB’s measures (together with the announcement in many countries of public credit guarantees and other support for firms and households) had so far largely protected bank-based credit flows.
Although employment had risen by 0.4% in the second quarter and survey indicators of employment perceptions still suggested further growth in the third quarter of 2022, high-frequency indicators signalled that job vacancies had started to plateau in July, possibly leading to a peak in the second half of the year.
Part of the exchange rate appreciation could be related to more positive sentiment towards the euro area, resulting from improvements in the euro area economy.
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation had decreased to 1.2% in May, from 1.7% in April, mainly due to lower energy and services price inflation.
Energy price inflation had remained the main driver of overall inflation, with an increasing contribution from gas and electricity prices.
However, it was also underlined that this was by no means a justification for the Governing Council not to fulfil its price stability mandate and support monetary policy transmission.
Summing up, Mr Lane remarked that the spread of the coronavirus was a major shock to the world and the euro area economies, with severe near-term implications for aggregate expenditure levels and supply chains.
Manufacturing was expected to perform strongly, even though supply bottlenecks were holding back production in the near term.
It was considered important to ensure that the protracted period of lower inflation in the short run did not lead to lower medium and long-term inflation expectations.
It was argued that some of the stronger tightening of credit standards reported in the survey, beyond the level that had been expected by banks in the previous survey round, was likely to be attributable to the recent tensions in the global banking system.
Eurostat’s second release had put euro area real GDP growth in the third quarter of 2018 at 0.2% in quarter-on-quarter terms, down from 0.4% in each of the previous two quarters.
Moreover, the demand for hospitality services was expected to strengthen further over the coming months, which should give an additional boost to services and core inflation.
Recent private sector forecasts continued to predict real GDP growth of around 3% in 2022, with predictions for growth in 2023 largely unchanged from before the war.
Changes in the expected future path of short-term interest rates might have helped to offset this upward pressure on bond yields over previous weeks, as market participants had been backtracking on their interest rate expectations both in the United States and in the euro area.
It was recalled that the Governing Council had liquidity instruments at hand to address potential liquidity strains in the banking sector and spillovers from international developments, which allowed it to look through the recent volatility in financial market variables to set interest rates in accordance with its price stability objective.
Bank lending conditions for firms and households remained very favourable, even if overall financial conditions had tightened marginally since the Governing Council’s April monetary policy meeting, largely on account of the re-escalation of trade tensions.
At the same time, it was cautioned that in terms of the flow of information over the summer, it would be unusually difficult to extract signals about the medium-term prospects for the economy and the inflation path, as the scale of the initial bounceback in activity was not necessarily a good guide to the speed and robustness of the recovery.
Labour markets remained resilient on the back of strong fiscal support but some indicators pointed to vulnerabilities further ahead.
In particular, a possible downward drift in inflation expectations could prove difficult to reverse and a lack of policy action at the current meeting could instil doubts about the Governing Council’s determination to implement the APP until a sustainable adjustment in the path of inflation was achieved.
However, it was recalled that wages were a lagging indicator, and some doubts were expressed as to whether the still comforting picture provided by the experimental ECB wage tracker would hold up.
Overall, economic activity could be expected to return to its pre-crisis level in the first quarter of next year.
The extension of the slower growth momentum had, in part, already been anticipated in the March 2019 ECB staff projections, but it was also acknowledged that some recent data had turned out even weaker than expected.
With regard to the economic analysis, members expressed broad agreement with the assessment of the economic situation in the euro area and the risks to the outlook provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
Members concurred that euro area banks had demonstrated their resilience, had high capital ratios and had become significantly more profitable over the past year.
Clear signs of a recovery in consumption had emerged since May, but spending remained far below pre-lockdown levels.
Both private consumption and total investment rose by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the last quarter of the year, with investment driven by construction.
In this context, it had to be emphasised that the measures put in place were appropriate in view of the current outlook but were also designed to react flexibly and equally to either potentially less favourable developments or upside surprises.
Against this background, there was no need to change the monetary policy stance decided at the last monetary policy meeting, while it was important to focus on the implementation of policy measures.
Pipeline pressures could take a long time to be transmitted to headline inflation, but one of the key uncertainties was that there could currently be a faster pass-through because of the scale of the increases in pipeline pressures.
The discussion would then benefit from a more comprehensive picture of the economic situation and of the medium-term price outlook, including a deeper analysis of potential second-round effects.
At the same time, Mr Lane underlined that the high level of uncertainty and the still elevated price pressures evident in the domestic inflation, services inflation and wage growth indicators meant that a restrictive monetary stance would still need to be maintained, following a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction.
However, it was pointed out that momentum for several inflation components had rebounded somewhat recently and remained well above the medium-term inflation target.
On balance, it was argued that lower oil prices should, in any case, allow the Governing Council to have more confidence in the economic recovery, while it was less clear whether the oil price decline would mainly affect the balance of risks to the outlook for growth or whether it would translate into an effective upward revision to euro area growth.
Measures of underlying inflation remained low by historical standards, although they had shown a marked improvement since the trough in 2016.
Finally, members generally agreed that monetary policy transmission was unfolding according to expectations.
Moreover, it was underlined that inflation remained below the Governing Council’s aim over the projection horizon, notwithstanding ample policy support.
So far there was no evidence of substantial second-round effects.
The point was also made that the June projections did not take into account the Commission’s recovery fund proposal or recently announced national fiscal measures, which could entail an upside risk to the economic outlook contained in the staff projections.
High corporate savings, reflecting strong retained earnings and contributing to the large positive net lending position of NFCs, was a major factor behind the widening savings-investment imbalance for the euro area as a whole, as mirrored in the increasing current account surplus.
The proposed extension of the calendar-based leg of the Governing Council’s forward guidance was generally seen as underpinning the monetary accommodation needed to support inflation converging towards the Governing Council’s aim.
Looking at the evolution of longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area, signals of upside risks were observed both in market-based indicators and in surveys.
By contrast, food price inflation had increased to 14.1% (from 13.8% in December).
Equity markets appeared buoyant, especially in the United States.
A 50 basis point increase was judged to constitute an appropriate pace at which monetary policy could be tightened in a manner that was still expeditious, while recognising the uncertainties surrounding the state of the economy and the inflation outlook.
Reference was made to producer price inflation, which had rebounded somewhat despite the recent decline in energy prices, as well as to the GDP deflator, which indicated somewhat higher underlying inflation and suggested upward potential for future HICP inflation if the two measures converged over the medium term, as had typically been the case in the past.
However, the July bank lending survey indicated a drop in demand for housing loans in the second quarter and in the following months.
Overall, sovereign bond yields had continued to decline in most euro area countries and the euro had depreciated against most currencies.
The dynamics of loans to firms had remained strong in May, driven by firms’ operational financing needs, in an environment of compressed cash flows – but with substantial variation across countries.
If only supply shocks were considered when estimating potential output, possibly resulting from the positive impact of past structural reforms, there could be more spare capacity in the economy than was currently implied by traditional measures.
Thanks to falling energy prices, the terms of trade had started to improve at the end of last year and this had led to an improvement in the goods trade balance.
As a consequence, the cost of bank borrowing both for NFCs and for households for house purchase had remained broadly stable at historically low levels in November.
The overall magnitude and duration of the shock remained highly uncertain.
The five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead stood at 1.7%.
By the time of the September meeting, a new round of staff projections would be available to the Governing Council.
The fall in nominal yields had not been accompanied by a similar decline in real yields, given that market-implied inflation rates had also declined.
Annual growth in compensation per employee had stood at 1.2% in the first quarter of 2017, down from 1.4% in the final quarter of 2016.
Therefore, preserving a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation beyond March 2017 was seen as necessary to secure the sustained return of inflation towards levels consistent with the Governing Council’s inflation aim.
Money markets had continued to function smoothly, in spite of the increase in uncertainty as a result of the UK referendum.
However, the point was made that some moderation in growth was naturally to be expected, in line with the experience of other reopening economies.
The first was a change in investors’ assessment of the economic impact of the Omicron variant.
At the same time, it was urgently felt that the crucial role played by other policy areas needed to be underlined, so as to avoid overburdening monetary policy and to ensure that other policy areas contributed to a more satisfactory economic outcome in the euro area.
However, companies could adapt more quickly to the challenging international environment and, together with the fading-out of the energy shock, this could support higher growth than currently expected.
Banks’ profits had recovered to levels seen before the pandemic, despite continued pressure on net interest margins.
As regards communication, members widely agreed on the need to emphasise that, in view of the prevailing outlook for price stability and the surrounding risks, the extension of the APP was warranted to fulfil the Governing Council’s price stability objective.
However, this was very different from a scenario in which the euro area entered a prolonged period of negative growth.
Regarding the monetary analysis, members widely shared the assessment provided by Mr Lane in his introduction.
Members generally agreed that the rise in longer-term interest rates in the euro area had tightened financing conditions by more than anticipated.
In such an environment, it was felt important for monetary policy to counter strongly any emergence of second-round effects in price and wage setting.
Turning to inflation expectations, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), the centre of the distribution of long-term inflation expectations had remained around 2% since inflation had peaked in the fourth quarter of 2022.
They took note that sudden liquidity needs of non-bank financial institutions might amplify market volatility.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in May 2019, after 1.7% in April, mainly reflecting lower energy and services price inflation.
The view was widely held that a change in the TLTRO III conditions would reinforce the transmission of changes in the policy rates to bank funding costs and bank lending conditions for households and firms, which to date did not fully reflect the intended monetary policy tightening.
This was seen to be consistent with the Governing Council’s data-driven approach to monetary policy and fully in line with the decisions taken at the Governing Council’s June monetary policy meeting.
Uncertainties related to global factors remained prominent.
The decline in the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead was also noted.
Survey indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for output and business expectations in the construction sector, had recovered slightly in recent months but still clearly pointed to contracting activity both currently and in the near future.
Inflation could be higher than anticipated over the next few months if the surge in energy prices intensified, especially if geopolitical tensions were to escalate further, if oil supply remained persistently sluggish, or if the bottlenecks in production and international commerce were to extend through the end of the year.
There was broad agreement that monetary policy had to remain highly accommodative for an extended period of time in the face of a protracted weakness in the economy and subdued inflation developments.
With regard to interest rates, taking into account the foregoing discussion and on a proposal from the President, the Governing Council decided that the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility would remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and ‑0.40% respectively.
Annual HICP inflation excluding food and energy had declined slightly, to 1.1% in September 2017, following 1.2% in August and July.
Surveys pointed to steady and broad-based global growth momentum at the start of 2018.
However, the decoupling of inflation expectations from oil price developments and the fact that market-based inflation expectations had not picked up from their low levels despite the increase in oil prices remained a matter of concern.
There was broad agreement about the important role of investment and a resumption of risk-taking in the real economy for a sustained recovery, as well as about the connection between a pick-up in investment and an improvement in profit margins.
As government bond spreads had remained resilient, the nominal euro area ten-year GDP-weighted sovereign bond yield had declined further since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 9-10 June 2021 and was currently again in negative territory.
Finally, it was pointed out that the cumulative increase in prices between 2021 and 2024 would be around 20%.
Moreover, the Governing Council would commit to an ambitious action plan, as outlined in the dedicated press release.
The annual growth rate of M1 also remained solid, despite a further decline in May to 9.1%, down from 9.7% in April.
Over the past year both headline and core inflation had fallen by several percentage points, and even services inflation had declined over the past six months.
Real disposable income growth in the euro area as a whole had picked up strongly in the first quarter of 2015, to 2.2%, year on year, and had been broad-based across the largest euro area economies.
Overall, each of the three elements suggested that the key ECB interest rates were at levels that were making a substantial contribution to the ongoing disinflation process.
Relative to the outlook in September 2023, the projected timely return of inflation to target had been reconfirmed in the December, March and June staff projections.
Wage agreements in the euro area’s largest economy accounted for the bulk of the latest tracker information, as agreements had been reached in the wholesale, retail, chemical and construction sectors, which tended to have long contract durations and therefore a more pronounced catch-up component during this phase.
Moreover, past cuts in the rate had not only led to lower short-term interest rates, but had compressed interest rates across the spectrum of the yield curve also at the longer end.
Following a slowdown in the pace of economic expansion in early 2015, the latest surveys suggested that the global economy had returned to a modest and uneven recovery path in the second quarter.
Moreover, policy rates were seen as likely to remain in restrictive territory for some time, while the effects of the present restrictive policy stance would continue to be felt even after the start of the easing phase.
According to the latest ECB staff projections this was expected to be the case, although by that time inflation would have exceeded the target for more than four years in a row.
In the financial sector, continued progress was needed in addressing non-performing loans and ensuring adequate capital positions.
Wage dynamics appeared to have gained momentum since the turn of 2017-18, with annual growth in compensation per employee reaching 2.9% in the third quarter of 2018.
However, the view was also expressed that near-term risks were now balanced, with reference made to recent rebounds in survey-based indicators and some hard data.
Since the Governing Council’s last monetary policy meeting on 11-12 September 2019, the prospect of a breakthrough in the trade negotiations between the United States and China, as well as declining fears of a “no-deal” Brexit, had helped to underpin global market sentiment.
It was considered noteworthy that volatility had been especially pronounced in markets that were traditionally considered low-risk, such as the money markets and the sovereign bond markets, with higher volatility in these markets since the beginning of the year than in the equity market.
It was also considered to be a positive sign that the probability of deflation had decreased further.
Second, it could determine an intended period for asset purchases, which could start in March 2015 with an end-date of, for example, the end of 2016.
Starting with the global outlook, Mr Lane noted that global economic activity was still subdued but there were some signs of improvement.
It was also remarked that the Governing Council’s assessment had been evolving over a number of monetary policy meetings.
However, it was also argued that a more moderate increase in the pace would better reflect the assessment of more balanced risks to the outlook, also in the light of previous decisions when a similar pace had been chosen but economic conditions had been worse.
Brent crude oil prices had risen markedly, to levels around USD 50 per barrel, since the April meeting.
With regard to risks for the global economy, there was agreement among members that the impact of the outcome of the UK referendum on global financial markets had been contained following an initial bout of volatility, in part owing to perceptions of possible policy reactions and to the robust regulatory and supervisory frameworks in place.
Members widely shared the assessment and policy considerations put forward by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Either investors were sanguine about the long-term repercussions of the crisis and expected a V-shaped recovery with no protracted effects on growth, or they were finding it difficult to price in the impact on growth and earnings from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Members shared the assessment that information available since the early June Governing Council meeting indicated that, while further employment gains and increasing wages continued to underpin the resilience of the economy, softening global growth dynamics and weak international trade were still weighing on the euro area outlook.
However, more recently the focus of investors had gradually shifted back towards a tighter monetary policy stance as inflation outcomes had continued to be higher than expected.
It was suggested that, with wage growth having begun to moderate as expected, the focus should shift to productivity developments.
As regards wage and price-setting, members agreed that wage pressures had strengthened on the back of robust labour markets and employees aiming to recoup some of the purchasing power lost owing to high inflation.
Sovereign bond yields in the euro area had already approached rather low levels, limiting the scope for further yield compression and, consequently, the potential funding cost relief to be passed on to final borrowers’ financing conditions.
HICP inflation had increased from 3.0% in August to 3.4% in September.
Labour costs had also confirmed continued moderate domestic price pressures.
It was expected that domestic demand would continue to be the main factor driving growth in the euro area, while exports showed signs of less dynamism.
marginally lower than in the survey for the third quarter, while expectations five years ahead remained unchanged at 1.8%.
Overall, the risks surrounding the outlook for economic growth were assessed to have remained broadly balanced, with downside risks related to the threat of trade protectionism having become more prominent.
Against the background of recent market concerns over parts of some euro area countries’ banking sectors which might have implications for their lending capacity in the period ahead, a remark was made that in large measure these concerns had been triggered by misperceptions about ongoing supervisory activities regarding bank practices for management of non-performing loans and the banking sector’s need to adapt to the new regulatory environment.
While the pull-back in euro area growth in the first half of the year could largely be attributed to weaker external demand, after exceptionally strong external trade in 2017, the point was made that the moderation in annual rates of growth over the projection horizon reflected convergence towards growth in line with potential.
Employment had increased by 0.3% quarter on quarter in the fourth quarter of 2016 and the unemployment rate continued to decline, easing to 9.5% in February 2017 after 9.6% in January.
Euro area risk-free interest rates and sovereign yields had fallen in both nominal and real terms since the June monetary policy meeting, with the euro area GDP-weighted ten-year bond yield falling back into negative territory.
Extra-euro area exports were expected to remain subdued on account of weakening foreign demand growth.
Oil prices had reached 12-year lows and were still declining, with the Brent crude oil price standing at USD 27.9 per barrel at the close of 20 January 2016.
However, firms’ expectations had remained contained for retail trade, while they continued to be above historical averages for contact-intensive services.
Global corporate bond markets had experienced some broad-based repricing.
It was also noted that the overall economic outlook for the euro area was more concerning and the projected recovery was fragile.
The endorsement by the European Council of the Eurogroup agreement on the three safety nets for workers, businesses and sovereigns, amounting to a package worth €540 billion, was welcomed.
In the context of weaker Chinese domestic demand, it was argued that Chinese exports would put additional negative pressure on international prices.
Member States were called upon to ensure a timely ratification of the Own Resources Decision, to finalise their recovery and resilience plans promptly and to deploy the funds for productive public spending, accompanied by productivity-enhancing structural policies.
The EURO STOXX50 index had gone up by 2% since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting on 23-24 October 2019 and the S&P 500 by almost 5%, hitting a new all-time high.
Developments in household bank deposits as an up-to-date, high-frequency proxy for savings showed that households continued to save less than during the height of the pandemic.
The point was made that this risk was elevated and was likely to rise non-linearly if inflation remained too high over an extended period of time, as suggested in the projections.
This was also seen to be consistent with the anticipation that a gradual easing of financial conditions would support economic activity, including much-needed investment to boost labour productivity and total factor productivity.
This earlier convergence to the target also helped to hedge monetary policy against the risk of reacting to forecast errors, which tended to be larger at longer horizons.
The annual growth rate of loans to NFCs remained stable at 3.9% in July, only somewhat below its September 2018 peak of 4.3%.
Compared with December expectations, risks to the growth outlook had become more balanced.
It needed to be stressed that reinvestments would be conducted for an extended period of time after the end of the net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary.
It was observed that expectations of substantial US fiscal support had led to a steepening of the US Treasury yield curve, which had only affected yields in the euro area to a limited extent, as a significant “decoupling” of yields could be observed.
According to the latest ECB Survey of Professsional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2021, headline inflation expectations had been revised up for 2021, while medium and longer-term expectations were by and large stable.
However, it was also argued that as long as the prospects for higher and more persistent policy rates were not priced into the term structure of market interest rates, that policy path would not be reflected in financing conditions.
This assessment was broadly reflected in the June 2017 Eurosystem staff projections, which saw annual HICP inflation at 1.5% in 2017, 1.3% in 2018 and 1.6% in 2019, implying a downward revision from the March ECB staff projections across the projection horizon.
In China, real GDP growth had rebounded strongly in the first quarter from its pandemic-induced slump.
Turning to financial and monetary developments, bank funding costs continued to reflect the transmission of monetary policy.
In contrast to oil prices, gas prices had declined by 33% since the December 2021 Governing Council meeting.
Overnight index swap (OIS) markets were currently pricing in a steeper and more frontloaded rate-cutting cycle than had been anticipated at the time of the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting.
Regarding the resilience criterion, it was widely noted that inflation convergence was becoming increasingly self-sustaining and its reliance on the contribution of the net asset purchases was gradually waning, although it continued to depend on an ample degree of monetary accommodation overall.
Headline inflation had fallen in August to levels previously seen in the summer of 2021 before the inflation surge, and there were signs of easing pressures in the labour market, with wage growth and unit labour costs both slowing.
Finally, prospects of higher interest rates in the United States had caused sizeable shifts in foreign exchange markets, with investors having increased their US dollar net long positions since about June 2021 to levels similar in magnitude to those seen at the heights of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Implementation of the asset purchase programme had proceeded smoothly, notwithstanding market reports of emerging scarcity in some market segments.
In the case of restaurants, the price increases had been much smoother than for accommodation, and inflation in that particular sector had just started to stabilise.
Regarding slack in the euro area economy, a range of estimates and indicators suggested a large degree of uncertainty while in general pointing to significant levels of slack.
At the same time, it was remarked that recent movements in the euro exchange rate seemed to relate more to relative monetary policy shocks, including communication, and less to improvements in the macroeconomic outlook for the euro area.
However, a declining vacancy rate was seen as reflecting weakening labour demand, although it remained above its pre-pandemic peak.
Moreover, although there was tentative evidence suggesting that wage growth was close to a peak, further evidence was required to be sure it was turning.
All in all, members agreed that the economic recovery was taking shape in line with the Governing Council’s earlier expectations and with the June Eurosystem staff projections.
One possible implication was that it might be necessary to acknowledge the longer time horizon over which monetary policy could be expected to deliver on its ultimate objective in the current environment, which did not necessarily speak in favour of additional measures at the current juncture.
At the same time, recent survey data, such as production expectations and business confidence, signalled the start of a recovery in the third quarter of 2020, as projected in the June 2020 projections exercise.
The latest ECB staff projections saw euro area real GDP as growing at a slightly stronger pace in 2017 and 2018 than had been expected in December.
Developments in equity markets had been mainly dominated by the negotiations with Greece.
Third, there would be more public spending to support Ukraine and the refugees.
The Governing Council’s commitment to preserving favourable financing conditions for all sectors of the economy over the pandemic period remained essential to reduce uncertainty and bolster confidence.
In 2016 and 2017 inflation was expected to rise further, owing to a gradual decline in economic slack and positive external price pressures, reflecting the lagged effect of the exchange rate and the upward sloping oil price futures curve.
The latest PMI survey data had pointed to a further slowing of the growth momentum, in particular in more cyclically sensitive industries, such as capital and intermediate goods.
With regard to the dimension of optionality, different positions were put forward as to whether an open-ended state-contingent formulation remained appropriate or whether the announcement of an end date was preferable.
Finally, members agreed with Mr Lane’s proposal to suspend the two-tier system for the remuneration of excess reserves by setting the multiplier to zero, since the two-tier system was no longer considered necessary in view of the positive value that the deposit facility rate would reach as a consequence of the decision to raise the three policy rates by 75 basis points.
Nonetheless, as on previous occasions, the observation was made that despite the recovery in credit to the private sector, credit dynamics remained modest overall.
Euro area equity prices had declined slightly since the July monetary policy meeting.
The risks to inflation remained twofold.
Recent monetary policy decisions by the Governing Council had improved broad financing conditions, which should support the outlook for consumption and investment.
Further ahead, the economic expansion and the associated significant absorption of economic slack were expected to contribute to a gradual convergence of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Overall, the signals provided by money and credit developments remained positive, as broad money (M3) growth and credit to the private sector were at their highest levels since 2009.
It was added that month-on-month figures showed that core inflation had again been on the rise for the last couple of months, which called for continued caution on the inflation outlook.
The argument was made that the export weakness could over time be expected to spill over to domestic demand and to the services sector of the economy, and there were already some indications of the slowdown in exports affecting labour market developments.
Although the recovery of the euro area economy was holding up well and financing conditions remained favourable overall, the external environment was characterised by heightened uncertainty about the growth prospects of emerging market economies, volatility in the financial and commodity markets and geopolitical risks.
At the same time, progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence of inflation remained conditional on a substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
In several other countries, such downward adjustments might be limited by nominal rigidities, implying that wage developments would not fully reflect the past decline in oil prices.
At the same time, it was argued that lockdowns in China had led to declines in the country’s imports of liquified natural gas, with dampening effects on gas prices.
Overall, wage pressures remained low and quite heterogenous across countries.
In addition, the firming and broadening of the economic expansion across countries and sectors should make the euro area economy more robust to any negative shocks.
This followed ECB communication that had countered the aggressive market pricing of a rate-cutting cycle starting as early as March 2024.
However, it was highlighted that in response to the increase in cases of infection further measures had been taken, or had been announced, in many euro area countries, which had led to tighter restrictions than had been anticipated in the December projections.
Members agreed that, although the monetary policy stance was being left unchanged, communication was of particular importance at present.
While fiscal policy was expected to be expansionary in 2021 and 2022, members considered that the prospects for 2023 were more uncertain.
At the same time, it was observed that broader measures of the degree of slack remained elevated.
However, in March 2022 household expectations regarding unemployment had increased visibly, albeit much less than at the start of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
With regard to the economic analysis, there was broad agreement among the members with the assessment of the outlook and risks for economic activity in the euro area, as provided by Mr Praet in his introduction.
Looking ahead, it was noted that Eurosystem staff had revised down their economic growth projection for 2023.
Some comfort was drawn from these recent developments, as they suggested that the recent weakness in headline and core inflation had not had a negative impact on expectations.
In the United States, marked-based inflation expectations had also declined more recently.
On the basis of this assessment, Mr Praet proposed, at this stage, to keep monetary policy unchanged and to reconfirm all elements of the ECB’s forward guidance, including the sequencing.
The recent strengthening of the euro constituted a noteworthy change in the external environment and would likely imply somewhat lower inflationary pressures for the euro area in the period ahead, even though the lagged effects of the euro’s pronounced past depreciation would still be working their way through the economy.
One of the reasons why domestic inflation had started to stabilise recently, in spite of the continued rapid increase in wages, might be that firms were moderating their markups.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures in place since June 2014 continued to support favourable borrowing conditions for firms and households, access to financing – notably for small and medium-sized enterprises – and, hence, credit flows across the euro area.
In response to the discovery of Omicron, stock markets worldwide had suffered marked losses.
In a historical context, valuations of euro area equities did not appear overly stretched.
In any case, macroprudential policy remained the first line of defence in preserving financial stability and addressing medium-term vulnerabilities.
Nominal wage growth had stabilised at a low level, with compensation per employee standing at 1.3% in both the third and fourth quarters of 2015.
Mr Lane also recalled that the wage tracker contained both old and new contracts, renegotiated at different points in time.
While activity in sectors such as hospitality and tourism was not likely to recover soon, in other sectors, such as IT or online commerce, there had even been a positive demand shock.
With the tendency of the projections to strongly converge to target in the last year of the horizon, the projection for that year was seen as having limited information content.
Commenting further on the global risks discussed during the IMF annual meetings in Washington, reference was made to: a possibly stronger slowdown in emerging market economies, including China; the potential return of financial market turmoil; the risk that persistently slow growth would lead to weaker potential growth via hysteresis effects; and geopolitical risks at both the regional and the global level.
It was also noted that the difference between the low levels of market-based measures and the higher levels of survey-based measures could be explained by a negative risk premium, but it was also argued that the negative risk premium might itself be of concern if it reflected hedging against outcomes of very low inflation or deflation and therefore provided no grounds for complacency.
So this survey was closely aligned with the view that inflation would come down to close to target in 2024 and stay there.
Commenting on measures of underlying inflation, members agreed that there were not yet convincing signs of a sustained convergence towards levels compatible with the ECB’s inflation aim.
Regarding inflation expectations, the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters for the second quarter of 2015 indicated that the expected five-year-ahead inflation rate stood at 1.84%, after 1.77% in the previous survey.
This further confirmed that profits had started to mitigate the inflationary effects of wage increases.
Primary issuance in the asset-backed securities (ABS) market had also picked up, although not on the same scale as the CSPP market.
Preserving favourable financing conditions for an extended period of time helped to support inflation developments via multiple channels.
Nevertheless, Mr Lane noted that long-term risk-free interest rates and sovereign yields had declined on the back of lower term premia and revised policy expectations, thereby supporting risk assets.
With respect to the medium term views differed, with risks, however, generally seen as remaining to the upside.
The current inflation dynamics most likely did not yet reflect recent monetary policy tightening.
This was supported by survey-based evidence on the distribution of inflation expectations.
Incoming economic data, surveys and high-frequency indicators pointed to continued economic weakness in the first quarter of 2021 driven by the persistence of the pandemic and the associated containment measures.
At the same time, it was remarked that the sluggish reaction of underlying inflation in the wake of the financial crisis was not confined to the euro area but appeared to be a global phenomenon.
At the same time, the current distribution of inflation expectations was still skewed to the upside.
Members unanimously supported the new formulation of the ECB’s price stability objective.
The risks to the growth outlook remained broadly balanced over the medium term.
Modelling the conditions for the new operations on the design of TLTRO-II was seen as a way to ensure their pass-through to the real economy and limit the use of funds for carry trades in government bonds.
It was noted that the outcome for real GDP in the first quarter of 2023 implied a technical recession and was weaker than the figure embedded in the June staff projections, while not implying that the economy was facing a material contraction.
This would increase the Governing Council’s optionality and flexibility without implying that lift-off would automatically follow shortly after the end of net purchases.
But, in a low interest rate environment in which the policy rates were more likely to encounter and remain constrained at the lower bound, the Governing Council would continue to employ other instruments when needed.
It was argued that such wage growth needed to reflect a persistent shift in the growth rate rather than a one-off shift in the level.
Neither had there been severe strains in money markets or liquidity shortages in the euro area banking system.
In this respect, attention was drawn to the correlation between movements in oil prices and market-based measures of inflation compensation.
It was also recalled that the ECB’s strategy review in 2021 had confirmed that it targeted headline, rather than core inflation, as the relevant yardstick for monetary policy.
It was also argued that there could be larger spillovers from weaker external demand to domestic demand.
In the light of heightened uncertainty, it was nonetheless seen as wise to keep some two-sided optionality and a data-dependent approach, as it was too early to tell how events would unfold in the following months.
Following the pandemic, the economy was going through a period of intensified job churning, so it was natural that labour productivity and wage growth were accelerating.
At the same time, it was pointed out that the current level of headline inflation understated the challenges that monetary policy was still facing, which called for caution.
However, none of these explanations was fully borne out by financial market data.
It was recalled that economic activity in the euro area had still not recovered to the level seen in 2008, and that investment was still far below its pre-crisis level.
Supply bottlenecks continued to restrain global activity and trade.
This would, in particular, support the recovery in the services sector, which had been the sector most affected by the crisis.
Financial markets had been driven by two opposing forces.
Such a path was seen as open to challenge in the light of various factors in energy markets pointing to more lasting upward pressures.
Raising policy rates to sufficiently restrictive levels and keeping them there would, over time, reduce inflation by dampening demand and would also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations.
Real GDP had grown by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2021 (according to Eurostat’s flash estimate) following a growth rate of 2.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter.
On the one hand, it was argued that the experience gained in the 1970s, when different inflation outcomes across jurisdictions could be traced back to different central bank reaction functions, suggested that central banks that acted earlier achieved better inflation outcomes.
Net demand for housing loans and consumer credit had increased for the first time since mid-2022.
Overall, credit conditions continued to be assessed as being favourable and supporting the economic expansion, thereby contributing to the return of inflation to the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim.
While labour cost pressures had remained resilient amid tighter labour markets, the weaker growth momentum was delaying their pass-through to inflation.
Growth could be higher if inflation came down more quickly than expected, if rising real incomes meant that spending increased by more than anticipated, or if the world economy grew more strongly than expected.
This would allow the NGEU programme to contribute to a faster, stronger and more uniform recovery and would increase economic resilience as well as the growth potential of Member States’ economies.
On the other hand, the view was taken that structural weakness could be amplified by high interest rates.
In the light of the confirmation of the medium-term inflation outlook, members agreed that the June 2018 monetary policy decisions remained appropriate and called for a reaffirmation of the prevailing policy posture.
Credit conditions for households and firms remained accommodative.
However, the rate at which jobs were being created was seen as potentially slowing, with unemployment rising over the coming quarters.
Starting with the United States, expectations of monetary policy tightening had declined and, by 20 January, the market was pricing in only one rate hike in 2016.
This related in particular to capital gains from banks’ sales of securities to the Eurosystem and lower provisions for loan impairment, with the overall macroeconomic environment having improved in part as a consequence of the accommodative monetary policy stance.
Attention was drawn to the widening of sovereign spreads over recent months.
He started by noting that the economic shock from the Russian invasion of Ukraine came in the context of otherwise solid foundations for a strong recovery in the euro area this year.
Alternative scenarios for the economic and financial impact of the war, which would be published together with the projections, foresaw that economic activity could be dampened significantly by a steeper rise in energy and commodity prices and a more severe drag on trade and sentiment.
Moreover, it was noted that – in contrast to consumption – investment remained very weak and had again disappointed recently, with the December projections showing a downward revision.
This technical assumption had been one of the main reasons for forecast errors in the past.
Commenting in more detail on the outlook and risks for the external environment, members agreed that global economic activity was improving, with the upswing showing further signs of synchronisation.
Yield curves in the US and German bond markets had flattened quite materially, by around 40 basis points and 30 basis points respectively, since about mid-March.
This included, in particular, its preparedness to adjust the purchase programme in terms of size and/or duration should the outlook become less favourable, or should financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
Investors continued to consider a scenario where inflation remained above target over the longer term significantly more probable than a scenario where it dropped below 2%.
It was argued that market participants seemed to question the credibility of the Governing Council’s forward guidance, as they expected a first interest rate increase at a date that was difficult to reconcile with the conditions set by the Governing Council for such an increase.
Moreover, high economic uncertainty was triggering a shift towards money holdings for precautionary reasons.
Since the Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting in July, risk-free interest rates had declined, partly in anticipation of additional monetary policy stimulus but also in response to a worsening macroeconomic outlook.
Overall, members judged that the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook over the medium term had become more balanced, although downside risks remained in the near term.
As a result, structural reforms might be seen as increasing inflationary pressures through their positive impact on the output gap in the short run, rather than reducing them.
Conversely, a shorter horizon would provide a stronger signal to banks that they needed to be prepared to secure funding on private markets and avoid becoming overly reliant on central bank funding.
Reviewing the demand components of GDP, the recovery in private consumption had been very strong until the third quarter of 2021, i.e.
It would also maintain the current degree of control over the monetary policy stance and ensure the full pass-through of the interest rate decisions to money markets.
In the United States, the effect of receding uncertainty surrounding Brexit and trade had been partially offset by changes in near-term monetary policy expectations in response to weaker economic data.
The ongoing recovery in domestic and global demand was boosting optimism among businesses.
If, by contrast, inflation declined sharply throughout 2022 from its current high rates, this would provide reassurance on the inflation outlook.
Similar developments had been seen at the start of the tightening cycle, when survey results had lagged the forward curves in the euro area and the United States for several months.
The question was posed as to whether the strong rebound in the economy, in part also as a result of monetary policy measures, was fully consistent with the underlying financial market assumptions, since expectations of a pronounced recovery in growth appeared not to square easily with interest rates and monetary conditions remaining very accommodative far into the future.
The stronger inflation dynamic in the revised projections meant that the estimated range for the terminal rate that would ensure a return of inflation to target in a timely manner had risen markedly.
In the mild scenario produced by ECB staff, the downward impact on inflation in 2020 was assumed to be around 0.2 percentage points, while the impact in a severe scenario was expected to be between 0.4 and 0.8 percentage points.
In this context, international coordination was seen as particularly important.
In the same vein, the latest results of the survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), covering the period from April to September 2016, showed that small and medium-sized enterprises had continued to signal an improvement in the availability of external sources of finance and in the willingness of banks to provide credit at lower interest rates.
Risks to the inflation outlook were on the upside and had intensified, especially for the short term.
As regards fiscal policies, members reiterated that government support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy.
The Purchasing Managers’ Index for manufacturing export orders had fallen into contractionary territory in March owing to the war in Ukraine and lockdowns in China.
This entailed the expectation that policy rates would remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019 and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure that the evolution of inflation remained aligned with the Governing Council’s current expectations of a sustained adjustment path.
At the same time, it was also argued that downside risks related to the euro area domestic economy and political risks had diminished markedly.
Turning to the euro area, in the first quarter of 2021 the economy had experienced a consumption-led drop in GDP growth.
The services sector was growing more strongly, owing to the reopening of the economy.
This reflected the carry-over from the recent weaker data outturns for 2023 and the still-subdued level of survey indicators.
It was also recalled that, while flexibility in the implementation of the PEPP was essential to successfully ease market conditions in times of stress, the capital key provided the benchmark for the allocation of purchases.
In this context it was pointed out that, in some countries, real estate transactions had already started to pick up again, presumably owing to reduced uncertainty about the future interest rate path.
Accordingly, it was necessary to reiterate that significant monetary policy stimulus was still needed for a continued and durable convergence of inflation.
But it was also noted that the latest developments cautioned against simply extrapolating the very large impact that had been included in the September projections.
Second, the conflict in the Middle East had resulted in rising freight costs and a lengthening of delivery times owing to the recent attacks on freight ships in the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
The point was made that, during recessions, the decline in employment was typically achieved through a reduction in hiring, not through increased firing.
Fourth, the outlook for price stability could still usefully be assessed on the basis of the future path of economic activity and the output gap, as well as the relationship between activity and prices, as measured by the Phillips curve.
Reinvestment was considered important for as long as necessary to maintain ample liquidity, thereby ensuring orderly money market conditions, and an appropriate monetary policy stance.
Covered bonds had thus benefitted from the flight to quality and this had possibly deterred some investors from reducing their covered bond positions in favour of other assets with better relative value.
On the upside, existing pipeline pressures could still send retail prices higher in the near term.
Turning to the euro area, members generally agreed that the assessment of the growth situation had improved, with the latest data providing confirmation that the cyclical recovery of the euro area economy was progressing broadly in line with the baseline in the March 2017 ECB staff projections and possibly more favourably in the first half of the year.
In the short run, however, inflation was expected to pick up again in the coming months, mainly owing to energy-related base effects.
Although different views were expressed about these scenarios, it was generally considered that, of the three scenarios presented, the “mild” scenario was probably already too optimistic.
Following an uptick in April, energy inflation had resumed the downward trend seen since last autumn.
At the same time, HICP inflation remained subdued and was set to persist at low levels for the coming months before gradually picking up, initially due to base effects but later supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery.
A “blackout period”, i.e.
Moreover, cutting interest rates by 25 basis points offered greater protection against downside shocks than keeping them at their current levels.
Moreover, the potential financial stability implications of the current monetary policy environment were seen to merit close monitoring.
Turning to the euro area, the more restrictive and extended lockdowns were weighing on the short-term growth outlook.
Any adjustment to the portfolio allocation across jurisdictions would be gradual and would be calibrated as appropriate to safeguard orderly market conditions.
Overall, based on the June staff projections, real GDP was expected to exceed its pre-pandemic level in the first quarter of 2022, one quarter earlier than envisaged in the March staff projections.
The EONIA forward curve had also flattened considerably in recent weeks, although this likely mirrored the decline in term premia related to the increased risk from the spreading of the Delta variant and did not necessarily reflect a genuine change in interest rate expectations.
The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, would not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but would also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate the benefits of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks.
Turning, in conclusion, to a more structural issue, Mr Cœuré referred to the year-end developments on the repo and the forex swap market.
Upside risks to inflation included the heightened geopolitical tensions, which could raise energy prices in the near term, and extreme weather events, which could drive up food prices.
Attention was also drawn to the evolution of inflation expectations, which had declined since the last meeting according to both the survey-based measures from the latest round of the SPF and market-based measures, as reported in the introductions by Mr Cœuré and Mr Praet.
The euro area net lending position, as a percentage of nominal GDP, had continued to increase over the last year and a half, despite the strong recovery in domestic demand.
While the war would likely dent economic growth in the short term, annual growth was projected to remain positive even in the severe scenario, pointing to “slowflation” rather than stagflation.
Even if activity and sentiment in the manufacturing sector were slowly improving, firms continued to face structural headwinds that were unrelated to the ECB’s monetary policy and needed to be tackled first and foremost by governments via structural reforms.
In stock markets, the EURO STOXX 50 index had further extended its gains, gradually approaching pre-pandemic levels.
Borrowing conditions for firms and households had remained very supportive.
Bank lending rates remained on a declining trend amid monthly volatility.
Looking ahead, additional information, including more hard data releases, new staff projections and news on fiscal measures, would become available by September.
Complementing earlier positive evidence from the bank lending survey on the general improvements in credit market conditions, the recent survey on enterprises’ access to finance (SAFE) had provided indications that the more favourable credit environment not only applied to large firms but was also trickling down to SMEs.
Looking further ahead, members widely shared the view that the more protracted “soft patch” suggested by the latest data remained consistent with the baseline scenario of a return to more solid growth in the second half of the current year.
Some sectors faced growing difficulties in sourcing inputs, which was disrupting production.
Market financing and bank borrowing costs for firms and households had remained very favourable and supportive of euro area credit flows, and credit conditions had loosened further.
At the same time, the view was also expressed that inflation risks had become balanced, as most analyses suggested that inflation was broadly evolving as projected, or that they had even moved to the downside.
As a consequence, the output gap was closing, albeit only gradually, as was to be expected after a balance sheet recession.
In the foreign exchange market, the euro had risen against most major currencies, including the US dollar, in part supported by expectations of a postponement of a first rise in official interest rates in the United States since 2006.
Looking ahead, in the September 2016 macroeconomic projections ECB staff foresaw annual HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, 1.2% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018.
In particular, even a fundamentally sound sovereign could be brought to the brink of default owing to a self-fulfilling dynamic involving market participants demanding higher risk premia based on a fear that the market might become illiquid.
A 25 basis point rate hike was fully priced in by the end of the year.
Real GDP had risen by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2015, following a rise of 0.5% in the previous quarter.
The ECB’s Corporate Telephone Survey showed that large companies expected margins to deteriorate in 2023 from elevated 2021-22 levels.
The appreciation of the US dollar during this time had been broad-based.
In exchanging views about recent wage developments, members noted that there had been a pick-up in wage growth.
Yet, despite the strengthening of the economic expansion, inflation remained subdued.
Meanwhile the growth in loans to households continued to weaken in annual terms.
Moreover, adequate policy action and measures needed to be put in place to address weak profitability and the remaining structural weaknesses in the euro area banking sector.
Concern was expressed that the sharp market repricing threatened to loosen financial conditions excessively, which could derail the disinflationary process.
The next projections in June would allow a more comprehensive analysis of the main risks and their implications for price stability.
These had fallen by 0.9% and 3.6% respectively.
The staff projections for inflation had been revised up, especially for the near term.
The forward curve had shifted outwards visibly after the strategy announcement, but had retraced its path more recently.
The behaviour of consumers in response to an easing of lockdown measures continued to be surrounded by uncertainty.
Moreover, although it was now clear that the United Kingdom would be leaving the EU at the end of January 2020, their future trade relationship still had to be agreed and there could be more divergence in this relationship than previously expected.
A further weakening of demand would also contribute to lower price pressures than currently anticipated, especially over the medium term.
Moreover, their relative shares would be maintained at the levels prevailing at the end of the net purchase phase.
Only towards the end of the projection horizon was output projected to return to its pre-pandemic level.
Developments in euro area corporate bond markets had mirrored those in equity markets, with spreads of investment-grade financial corporate bonds and non-financial corporate bonds in the euro area, excluding France, having narrowed overall.
This was illustrated by the fact that the latest projections now foresaw growth in global trade excluding the euro area of below 1% in 2020, compared with an increase of over 2% in the September 2019 ECB staff projections.
The balance of risks to the economic outlook was seen as remaining on the downside, with risks related mainly to the global environment, political uncertainties and continued balance sheet weaknesses in some sectors.
Accordingly, an adequately calibrated package of measures was seen as needed to secure the return of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
It was also very important to look at the labour market, where the December projections were returning to the pre-pandemic path.
A remark was made that a gap appeared to be emerging between favourable economic conditions and a policy stance that remained in a crisis configuration.
It was considered worrisome that, despite the stabilisation in oil prices, market-based inflation expectations had not picked up from their low levels.
In the September 2017 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, euro area real GDP growth had been revised up for 2017, to 2.2%, while remaining unchanged at 1.8% for 2018 and at 1.7% for 2019, compared with the June 2017 Eurosystem staff projections.
Annual consumer price inflation in the OECD area had remained stable in April, while inflation excluding food and energy had slowed marginally to 1.9%.
In contrast, growth had been revised down by 1.2 percentage points for 2023 and by 0.2 percentage points for 2024, owing mainly to the impact of energy supply disruptions, higher inflation and declining confidence.
At the same time, the steady absorption of economic slack gave grounds for increased confidence that price pressures would gradually take hold.
Regarding fiscal policies, an ambitious and coordinated fiscal stance was seen as remaining critical, in view of the sharp contraction in the euro area economy.
However, implied volatility had remained contained from a longer-term perspective and had retreated swiftly to previous lows.
Similarly, it was argued that the improved economic environment with vanishing tail risks, in principle, suggested also revisiting the easing bias with respect to the APP purchases, whereby the Governing Council signalled its readiness to increase the pace and/or duration of the asset purchases if necessary.
The ratio of net operating surplus to value added had increased further in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Turning to the euro area economy, various indicators for the manufacturing sector showed a sharp slowdown, with the PMI new export orders index falling below the 50 threshold in June.
Manufacturing was once again the principal drag on overall output, despite the continued easing in supply bottlenecks that had particularly benefited car production and sales.
It was recalled that, according to the March 2021 ECB staff projections, inflation was projected to be only 1.4% in 2023.
In the same vein, the April 2015 bank lending survey pointed to improving loan supply and demand conditions.
It therefore needed to be carefully monitored whether inflation would settle sustainably at the target in a timely manner.
Second, investors did not foresee a scenario in which inflation would return to below-target levels.
Their ongoing pass-through supported the economic upturn, which was steadily firming and broadening across sectors.
Taking into account the foregoing discussion among the members, on a proposal from the President, the Governing Council decided that the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility would remain unchanged at 0.00%, 0.25% and -0.40%, respectively.
Moreover, the improvement in the Citigroup surprise indicator was mainly related to confidence indicators, while the real economy remained weak and the improvement in hard data had been negligible.
It was remarked that monetary transmission through the banking sector had been effective, partly because the balance sheets of banks had been stronger at the start of the pandemic than before the financial crisis of 2008.
The Governing Council held its biannual structured exchange on the links between monetary policy and financial stability.
Summing up, Mr Praet noted that the euro area economic recovery was expected to continue at a somewhat slower pace than previously anticipated, largely reflecting the slowdown in emerging market economies.
At the same time, it was pointed out that in some small euro area countries stronger domestic demand had mainly led to higher import growth.
In the United States, fears of a recession had, at least temporarily, weighed on natural gas prices, and on commodity prices more generally.
It was acknowledged that the uncertainty about the impact of the pandemic crisis on potential output made real-time estimates of output gaps even more uncertain than in normal times.
While amending the TLTRO III conditions might have side effects, the abrupt and unforeseeable change in circumstances justified a change in the policy stance if this was in the service of the ECB’s primary objective.
The increase in long-term bond yields had been more muted in the euro area than in other advanced economies.
More recently the bilateral exchange rate had seen a more pronounced drop.
For 2023, growth had been revised up, reflecting the expected fading of supply bottlenecks, the continued global recovery and an unwinding of accumulated savings.
Doubts about the enforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact were seen to increase uncertainty and to risk weakening further the credibility of the fiscal framework over time.
Bank lending rates for non-financial corporations and households had continued their declining trend, despite some monthly volatility, thereby supporting credit demand.
While the war and the associated amplified energy supply shock created an acute dilemma for monetary policy, there was value in keeping a steady hand and waiting before deciding on further adjustments to the monetary policy stance.
This assessment was broadly reflected in the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, which had not seen any major revisions, and could be viewed as confirmation of the outlook for growth that had been embedded in the March 2015 ECB staff projections.
It had decelerated slightly for goods inflation, but was still very high.
The June 2018 Eurosystem staff projections for euro area real GDP growth were broadly aligned with, or slightly below, available forecasts from other international institutions.
The situation therefore had to be monitored closely and everything possible should be done in all policy domains to ensure that permanent damage was contained.
This had resulted in a market forward curve that embedded an earlier and stronger easing of the monetary policy stance than incorporated in the staff projections.
Downside risks related mainly to remaining uncertainties and vulnerabilities in the external environment.
It was pointed out that, while output growth in some countries had exceeded expectations, the level of GDP in other countries was still very low relative to pre-crisis levels.
It was underlined that the projected increase in HICP inflation excluding food and energy, from the current level of 0.9% to 1.8% in 2019, was based on a strong pick-up in wage growth.
In particular, the global PMI for new export orders had remained above its historical average.
At the same time, some nuances were expressed about individual elements of the policy package.
Over the same period, the euro had strengthened both against the US dollar and, to a lesser extent, in nominal effective terms against the currencies of the euro area’s 38 major trading partners.
Most measures of underlying inflation had risen over recent months, but the persistence of the rise in these indicators remained uncertain owing to the indirect effects of higher energy prices and the role of temporary pandemic factors.
By its December monetary policy meeting the Governing Council would have new data on GDP growth for the third quarter, the October and November inflation figures, fresh monetary data and a new round of projections.
All in all, it would be plausible to expect productivity growth to rebound in the near future, which would contain unit labour costs and inflation.
Significant slack in the economy, weak wage growth and the past appreciation of the euro meant that underlying price pressures would likely remain subdued for some time.
As regards the volume of the programme, a pace of combined monthly asset purchases in the order of €50 billion lasting from March 2015 to end-2016, which had been mentioned by Mr Praet, was widely regarded as a sizeable complement to the existing purchase programmes.
Food price inflation had come down from its peak of 15.5% in March but had still been almost 10% in August.
It was argued that core inflation continued to be sticky and that the previous quick progress on headline inflation was increasingly fading as energy base effects vanished or even reversed.
Net exports – supported by improved price competitiveness and lower energy prices – were also expected to contribute to the recovery, even though they had contributed negatively to economic growth during the first quarter of 2015.
This suggested that the sharp rise in US real rates earlier this year may have largely reflected increased uncertainty around the outlook for monetary policy, and that this uncertainty may have diminished in recent weeks.
In December the Governing Council would have the benefit of the latest incoming data, the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections extending through to 2019 and the results of the work of the Eurosystem committees on the options to ensure the smooth implementation of the APP until March 2017, or beyond, if necessary.
On the other hand, concern was expressed that such dichotomies could not last forever and that sooner or later there might be spillovers or contagion from the weakening in manufacturing.
Although risk-free rates and GDP-weighted sovereign bond yields had increased, it was observed that this had occurred mostly on account of higher expected inflation and a better outlook for the global economy.
This was also visible when looking at the significant impact of the global reappraisal of the inflation and interest rate outlook on broader financial markets.
The projected annual growth rate of global activity excluding the euro area stood at 2.9% in 2019, its lowest level since 2008-09.
Finally, spreading bond purchases over a longer horizon was also seen as having important implications for policy rate expectations via the sequencing embodied in the Governing Council’s forward guidance, which so far had provided a useful anchor for market expectations of future policy rates.
Economic activity and demand were likely to remain muted in the early part of 2022 as pandemic containment measures were affecting activity in consumer services, and high energy costs were constraining consumption and investment.
As wage developments in the euro area were accelerating, second-round effects through higher wages appeared to be starting to materialise.
It was argued that this would still need to be factored into the outlook and would imply a faster closing of the output gap.
The euro area labour market remained strong, with employment growing by 0.4% quarter on quarter in the first quarter of 2018 and the unemployment rate declining to 8.5% in April.
In the light of these developments and the new sources of uncertainty, there was no need to act at the present meeting, but it was very important that the Governing Council found the right balance between, on the one hand, not drawing premature conclusions on the lasting impact of the latest economic and financial developments and, on the other hand, recognising that downward risks had clearly increased.
At the same time, a wealth of research over the past years had helped to synthesise the experiences under the previous strategy and to mould it into the new one, which from now on would guide the Governing Council’s decisions, ensuring consistency in the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy.
At the same time, the labour market had continued to perform well in the third quarter, with the unemployment rate remaining at the historically low level of 6.6% in August.
If the outlook became less favourable, or if financial conditions became inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, the Governing Council stood ready to increase the programme in terms of size and/or duration.
It was underlined that the proposed extension of the PEPP was consistent with the Governing Council’s communication that net asset purchases would continue until the coronavirus crisis phase was over.
The market’s reassessment of the outlook for inflation in the euro area and the United States had led to the one-year inflation-linked swap (ILS) rates one year ahead declining broadly in tandem on both sides of the Atlantic.
At the same time, it was recalled that market-based inflation measures contained an inflation risk premium, which had turned positive.
The credit supply channel remained active.
In particular measures of momentum (i.e.
This implied inflation above 2% for an extended period of time and raised the question of whether the deviations from the inflation target could still be described as “moderate” and “transitory”.
Global financial conditions had loosened further, driven by higher equity prices and declining spreads.
The pass-through of the strong pick-up in intermediate goods producer prices to non-food consumer goods producer prices still appeared to be weak.
Since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting on 9-10 April 2019, US trade negotiations with both China and Mexico had progressively deteriorated, negatively impacting global equity markets and pushing equity risk premia higher.
It was evident that the war and the associated uncertainty were weighing heavily on business and consumer confidence.
It was emphasised that the continued increases in market-based inflation compensation measures, including the measure for five years forward five years ahead standing at above 2.5%, were mainly due to risk premia.
This was widely seen as validating the Governing Council’s March decision to significantly increase the pace of net asset purchases under the PEPP, effectively insulating euro area financing conditions from global spillovers and preventing a premature tightening.
Longer-term inflation expectations, five years ahead, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) stood at 1.8% in the first quarter of 2019.
These prices reflected a number of economic and geopolitical factors affecting the balance of demand and supply, as well as types of shock that could not have been foreseen.
Overall, it was nevertheless felt that it remained reasonable to expect a gradual economic recovery to take hold, thanks to a recovery in people’s real incomes from rising wages and a strong labour market, and this would underpin consumer spending.
For example, the transmission of market rates to time deposits and bank lending rates had been relatively limited and weaker than in the past in the fourth largest euro area economy, but more rapid than usual for lending rates in the largest economy.
This formulation would also keep an element of the focus on current developments by retaining the reference to underlying inflation.
The latter confirmed that the moderate recovery in the euro area economy was ongoing, with only small downward revisions to the outlook for 2017 and 2018, which were related to external, rather than domestic, factors.
A sizeable expansion in the monthly volume of purchases was seen as substantially strengthening the effectiveness of the asset purchases, mainly by reinforcing the portfolio rebalancing channel.
The impact of oil prices on inflation expectations should, in principle, be transitory and of limited relevance over medium-term and longer-term horizons.
Employment had increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2016, with positive growth across all major sectors and large euro area countries.
It was argued that attaching more weight to observable data would improve policy decisions, in particular when uncertainty was high.
Although measures of underlying inflation had generally remained muted, there were indications of a mild increase in line with previous expectations.
The balance of risks remained tilted to the downside, despite the downward revision to the growth projections, largely on account of persistent sources of uncertainty relating to the international environment.
There were many other reasons why monetary policy was still working its way through the economy, with research suggesting that there could be years of lagged effects before the full impact dissipated completely.
Moreover, while recent market volatility had not materially changed the assessment of the economic outlook, continued elevated uncertainty called for alertness and a readiness to respond, if necessary.
Global growth remained subdued.
A very broad consensus supported the 25 basis point rate increase proposed by Mr Lane, while a preference was also initially expressed for raising the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points in view of the risk of high inflation becoming more persistent.
Services inflation had dropped fairly quickly from its peak in mid-2023 to 4% in November 2023, but since then it had hovered around that level.
The decision by the Bank of Japan on 29 January 2016 to adopt a negative deposit rate structure had reverberated through global financial markets, contributing to a sharp decline in global bank shares.
Euro area real GDP had contracted by 11.8%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2020.
The new strategy acknowledged the advantages of having two specialised areas of analyses on the economy, but also recognised the value of integrating the analysis, in a world in which there were multiple feedback channels from the monetary and financial spheres to the broader economy, and vice versa.
In euro area bond markets, model-based analysis also suggested that the inflation risk premium had increased significantly since the start of the year, albeit from very depressed levels, implying that the compensation that investors currently required for this risk still remained small by historical standards.
The change in market expectations regarding US monetary policy had supported risk sentiment globally.