The majority mentioned that global economic activity continued to recover, although at a countries and sectors, associated with vaccine availability, the evolution of the pandemic, and shortage of inputs has contributed to a deceleration of industrial and manufacturing production. One member stated that retail sales and purchasing managers’ indices also show signs of moderation. He/she added that in several countries, output and employment gaps remain negative, particularly in emerging economies with a tighter fiscal and monetary space. Another member added that the global economy continues to be affected by the effects of the pandemic: i) the health challenge associated with infections and the vaccination process; ii) the heterogeneity in the recovery; iii) the differences among countries regarding the space available to incentivize spending; iv) the transition from an abrupt shutdown of activities to a vigorous expansion in a short period of time, which intensified the impact on the supply chains for goods’ production and generated an irregular pace in the recovery of services; and v) a profound reallocation of spending, with increases in consumption of durable goods and reductions in services, which increased the asymmetry in production and price pressures faced by each sector. One member stated that the revisions to growth expectations by international organizations point to a moderation for advanced and Asian economies, as well as to a marginal increase for Latin American economies. He/she added that the outlook continues to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty. He/she pointed out as factors of concern for global growth: i) the persistence of heterogeneity among sectors and economies; ii) the intensification in magnitude and duration of supply shocks; iii) the high demand due to the reopening and to the economic stimuli, and iv) the spread of the Delta variant. Another member noted that growth forecasts for the United States have been revised downwards for 2021. All members mentioned that global inflation continued to increase due to pressures from higher commodity and energy prices, as well as production bottlenecks. Most members added the higher ocean freight costs and some members added spending programs and the marked reallocation of expenditure towards merchandise. Regarding this last point, one member noted that in the United States, the deflator for durable goods spending increased from -1.54% in February 2020 to that have pressured inflation, the lack of flexibility in production of goods and the unprecedented distortions in the labor market that have led to lower availability of labor, which could be associated with the perception of contagion risk and with the effects of transfers to households. Another member detailed that OECD estimates suggest that transportation costs from China to the United States and Europe add about 11 percentage points to these economies' merchandise import price inflation, and about 1.5 percentage points to overall inflation. However, one member added that some stabilization of inflationary dynamics has been observed recently, particularly in advanced economies and in some emerging Asian economies. Another member noted that the difficulties faced on the production side do not correspond to typical supply shocks. He/she added that unprecedented stimuli spending has been channeled to the consumption of goods and services available under the pandemic, thus widening output and price differences among sectors. He/she argued that the lack of flexibility in the production of goods, the reallocation of spending towards merchandise, and an unprecedented fiscal support in advanced economies have reduced supply’s capacity to absorb the growth of demand, generating an environment prone to multiple shocks and inflationary pressures. In this regard, he/she pointed out that inflationary pressures have been heterogeneous and greater in economies that are more integrated to global trade and that have implemented greater spending stimuli. He/she mentioned that the disruptions caused by the pandemic are very different from those observed in other crises, contributing to an environment of high uncertainty, which has made it difficult to identify their short- and medium-term effects. One member considered that inflationary pressures can be foreseen to start subsiding once economic activity normalizes and the production of inputs increases. He/she pointed out that, in line with the above, the median of forecasts of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) anticipates inflation in the United States to be 2.2% at the end of 2022. He/she stated that the expectation of the transitory nature of inflationary pressures is also reflected in the implied trajectories for the future prices of wheat, corn and soybean, which anticipate deflations in 2022. Another member noted that several measures of inflation expectations in the United States, including those of business and consumers, have increased. He/she added that the argued that given the reopening of the economy, the higher inflation outlook and pressures on supply chains and on commodities and energy are not expected to revert soon, and uncertainty about their duration prevails. Another member said that while the effects of the shocks are expected to be predominantly transitory, the risks to price formation at the global level are on the upside, given the wide range of prices impacted and the magnitude of the price increases, and the extended time horizon over which they have affected inflation. One member added as upside risks that the potential approval of a new stimulus package in the United States reinforces demand, as well as a worsening of the energy crisis in China due to the shortage of coal and natural gas. However, he/she added that information from market instruments shows stable inflation expectations for longer terms. The majority pointed out that the central banks of the main advanced economies have maintained their accommodative monetary stance, although some of them are already expecting to reduce it, while those of several emerging economies continue reducing it. One member specified that in their latest decisions central banks of advanced economies reaffirmed that the accommodative stances, with interest rates at historically low levels, will be maintained for a prolonged period. Another member mentioned that the main challenge for central banks has been to distinguish between changes in relative prices that are of a transitory nature and more persistent ones. He/she considered that in some economies high inflation is being observed along with macroeconomic imbalances, forcing their monetary authorities to act more aggressively. Most members noted that the Federal Reserve indicated that it could start reducing its asset purchase program this year and that the program would end in mid-2022. One member mentioned that while this process is expected to be orderly, which would avoid an episode similar to the so-called Taper Tantrum, it is important to have greater caution, as the latest forecasts imply a more rapid adjustment than previously anticipated. Some members noted that both markets and FOMC members expect the first increase in the federal funds rate to be in 2023. However, one member added that several FOMC members moved forward their expectations of an increase to 2022. On the other hand, he/she noted that, in contrast to the global trend of stimulus reduction, and derived from the possible default of China’s real estate developer Evergrande Group, the People's Bank of China took measures to increase liquidity in that economy. Another member mentioned that despite the increase in inflation, most central banks in emerging economies continue with highly accommodative policy stances and negative real interest rates, which allows them to continue supporting economic activity. He/she added that Mexico stands out for having a positive ex-ante real interest rate, in contrast to what has been observed in other economies, which are also registering certain deviations of inflation from their targets. One member highlighted the greater margin for monetary policy maneuver in the United States and other advanced economies. He/she explained that this is due to structural factors that have lowered inflation, potential growth, and the neutral rate. He/she added that these economies could be more patient in withdrawing the monetary stimulus, as in recent decades their price formation processes and inflation expectations have remained anchored at or below their target levels. On the other hand, he/she mentioned that small and open emerging economies are highly sensitive to inflationary pressures and global monetary and financial conditions. He/she pointed out that Mexico is facing significant external inflationary pressures and, will soon face the effects of greater global financial restrictions. He/she stated that those economies that complement their domestic savings with external sources must maintain a sound macroeconomic policy stance. He/she added that monetary policy should contribute to maintain inflation around its target, enabling an orderly adjustment of the economy, the exchange market and the yield curve, while avoiding capital outflows. Another member pointed out the importance of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies and considered that monetary policy’s effectiveness to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target could be obstructed. He/she expressed that the processes of fiscal consolidation and normalization of interest rates can trigger different risks that could exert pressure on the dynamics of global inflation and international financial conditions, and thus it is likely that countries facing less fiscal pressure may achieve inflation convergence towards its targets with less effort than those in which the fiscal equilibrium has deteriorated significantly. Most members stated that international financial markets exhibited a stable performance, and that, recently, interest rates increased, particularly in the United States and the US dollar appreciated in view of prospects of a reduction in the Federal Reserve's asset purchase program. One member noted that although markets have shown some volatility in recent days, the announcements on the reduction of asset purchases have been carried out without major disruptions in debt markets or in risk premia. Some members pointed out that in recent weeks some stock indices reached historic highs. One member stated that this is due to a highly accommodative policy stance at the global level, which implies vulnerabilities in case of a correction in assets' valuation. Some members noted a mixed performance in emerging economies' financial markets. One member considered that they were favored by expectations that an accommodative monetary policy stance would be maintained in the United States. He/she noted that volatility in emerging market currencies decreased sharply, although it increased towards the end of the period. Another member added that emerging markets exhibited a negative bias due to higher risk aversion. One member mentioned that moderate capital inflows were observed, although they concentrated mainly in China. Some members noted that adjustments in monetary conditions could lead to episodes of volatility in international financial markets. One member noted that this could imply a tightening in financial conditions, especially for emerging economies. Another member pointed out that the lack of an agreement to increase the debt ceiling in the United States would cause nervousness in financial markets and capital outflows from emerging economies to safe-haven assets. He/she added as a risk the possible default of _Evergrande Group, since its_ relative importance would imply risks of contagion and systemic risks, which would translate into episodes of volatility at a global level and to a tightening of financing conditions. Meanwhile, one member considered that the highly accommodative monetary policy would continue to favor global financial conditions for some time. Most members mentioned that the Mexican economy continued to recover during the third quarter of the year, although stating that there are still marked differences across sectors and regions. One member added that the Central region, which has a higher concentration of services, was the most affected by the pandemic, while the Northern and North-Central regions, where manufacturing production is more prevalent, performed better. Some members highlighted that economic activity remains below pre-pandemic levels. One member stated that the latest data point to a deceleration in economic activity. He/she specified that, according to the Timely Indicator of Economic Activity (IOAE, for its acronym in Spanish), in August economic activity could have registered a level similar to that of May, indicating four months of stagnation. On the demand side, most members agreed that consumption continued to recover, although some of them noted that it fell in June. Some members highlighted that consumption was supported by the good performance of remittances and the wage bill. One member pointed out that, during the first 7 months of the year, remittances increased by 23.5% as compared to the same period of 2020, and that in July the wage bill exceeded the levels registered in February 2020. Another member noted that timely indicators of purchases in commercial establishments suggest consumption has performed well. In turn, some members underlined the weakness of certain indicators related to consumption, such as consumer confidence and sales reported by the National Retailers Association of Mexico (ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym). One member pointed out that credit card and debit card expenditure remained stagnant. Regarding investment, most members considered that it remains weak. Some members emphasized that it remains below pre-pandemic levels. One member considered that investment continued recovering moderately. Another member pointed out that it showed stability in recent months. One member mentioned that investment is expected to follow an unfavorable trajectory. underlined the differentiated performance of exports and problems related to the supply of inputs. Some members highlighted the impact on automotive exports, while non-automotive exports continued recovering. One member stated that in August automotive exports were 16.76% below the levels registered in February 2020, while nonautomotive manufacturing exports were 8.25% above the levels observed in the same period of aforementioned supply-related problems, exports have recovered considerably. However, one member mentioned that in August both oil and nonoil exports fell relative to the previous month. Another member highlighted that non-oil imports of intermediate goods and consumer goods are above the levels registered in late 2019, while capital imports are at lower levels. On the supply side, most members underlined the heterogeneous recovery across different sectors. They underlined that manufacturing is still being affected negatively by the shortage of inputs, especially in sectors more integrated to global production chains, such as the automotive sector. They added that services continued to recover, albeit heterogeneously across sectors. One member mentioned that industrial production reactivated in July, due to a boost in manufacturing. However, he/she warned that the sector overall seems to have lost momentum since the beginning of the second quarter. Another member stated that the construction sector shows a lack of dynamism and noted that tertiary activities have performed better, although in recent months they have slightly decelerated. One member added that most components of this sector are still below their prepandemic levels. Another member stated that services continue recovering, with the negative impact centered on the sectors most exposed to contagion dynamics. Most members highlighted that the labor market continues to recover. However, they noted that weak conditions still prevail. One member pointed out that labor participation has not returned to its prepandemic levels yet, that the urban unemployment rate is 5.5%, and that the underemployment rate is Another member stated that underemployment remains the buffer for the labor market. One member added that alternative unemployment increased slightly in July, and that it is currently above prepandemic levels. Another member pointed out that the unemployment rate has not decreased significantly since May and that it is still far from its pre-pandemic levels. He/she mentioned that the unemployment rate that includes the underemployed, the unemployed and the inactive who are available to work is at 26.3% of the extended PEA (Economically Active Population, for its Spanish acronym). He/she highlighted that formal IMSSinsured employment has continued to recover, and is currently at a level 192 thousand jobs lower than that observed in February 2020. Some members added that the recovery of the labor market is still unequal by gender. One member underlined that the reading of the labor market has become more complicated. All members agreed that the economy maintains ample slack conditions, with marked differences across sectors. One member stated that, according to timely information, slack conditions continued to narrow during the third quarter, although they remain wide and heterogeneous across sectors. Some members mentioned that these are expected to continue narrowing. One member emphasized that there is a greater uncertainty in estimates of slack. He/she added that this derives from the pandemicrelated effects on goods and services’ production capacity, and from a deep reallocation of spending. Another member expressed that the Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its Spanish acronym) has not yet surpassed its pre-pandemic level, and that aggregate activity remains 7.6% below its trend level according to the OECD. He/she stated that all of the above is evidence of the long road that the Mexican economy still has ahead to reach a full recovery. One member mentioned that the closure of activities and the decrease in certain firms’ capacity might have affected markets’ flexibility and competitiveness, as well as potential growth. These effects are hard to estimate given that, at the same time, digitalization and automation processes have accelerated and human-capital formation processes have been affected. Most members highlighted that the Mexican economy is expected to continue recovering during the rest of the year and in 2022. One member stated that said prevision is based on advances in the vaccination process, the boost from external demand, and the recovery of domestic spending. Another member mentioned that market consensus maintains optimistic expectations which confirm a more robust recovery pattern than initially anticipated. One member mentioned that the third wave of infections, less mobility, stagnation of the IGAE and the decline in business opinion and consumer confidence indicators represent risks for the recovery, which is not yet fully established and is incomplete. All members mentioned that global inflationary continue affecting headline and core inflation. inflationary pressures in the United States. In this regard, one member underlined that such economy stands out for its high inflationary pressures. Some members pointed out that the above has affected food merchandise prices. One member highlighted the importance of these prices in the case of Mexico, given that the food component has a weight of close to 25% in headline inflation, while in other emerging economies it is merely 22%, and in advanced economies it is 14%. Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that international references suggest that some of these pressures have started to decline. Another member mentioned the disproportionate impact of food commodity prices on a reduced group of products relevant for the Consumer Price Index. He/she mentioned that the atypical inflation of just three key products: cooking oils, corn tortilla, and fresh milk, accounts for 50 basis points of the increase in core inflation in 2021. Nonetheless, he/she added that the international prices of the main production inputs of the latter have already started to decrease. One member mentioned that non-food merchandise inflation is also highly correlated with that of the United States, which generates a process of imported inflation which would explain the dynamics of higher inflation in the Northern and North-Central regions of Mexico. Another member pointed out that during 2020, the decline in world inflation levels did not occur in the same magnitude in Mexico. He/she stated that, despite the stability of the Mexican peso, the prices of goods and services that are susceptible to foreign exchange adjustments have increased constantly, which suggests the high sensitivity of these goods to other global costs in addition to exchange rate pressures. Most members emphasized the increase in headline and core inflation in the first fortnight of September. One member indicated that unexpected increments have been observed since the previous monetary policy decision. He/she added that, this year so far, monthly headline inflation has been above analysts’ expectations and only on two occasions core inflation was lower than anticipated. rebounded consistently, coming close to 6%, despite economic activity remaining below pre-pandemic levels, the insufficient recovery of employment, and credit to the private sector continuing to contract. He/she added that the persistence of high inflation levels for a prolonged period can contaminate the price formation process and lead to a de-anchoring of expectations. One member underlined that headline inflation was affected by additional shocks, causing its trimmed mean indicator to be above 5%. He/she mentioned that, among emerging economies, Mexico has one of the highest levels of headline and core inflation relative to the headline inflation target, and that, in line with some estimates, recent inflationary dynamics are being pressured by both short-term and higher-persistence factors. He/she added that the frequency and the magnitude of fortnightly revisions have increased, particularly in merchandise prices. He/she noted that surveys among private sector businesses point to multiple significant effects on their productive processes, with possible implications on prices. Finally, he/she mentioned that the financial cost in real terms decreased for all agents and is below the costs expected at the beginning of the year. Another member considered that inflationary pressures have started to decrease at the margin. He/she stated that, over the last three fortnights, the monthly changes in headline inflation, services inflation, and non-core inflation have been in line with their historic average. He/she indicated that the only component with behavior deviating from its historic average is that of merchandise, which has been affected by disruptions in supply chains and by changes in consumption patterns. However, he/she considered that the magnitude of increments in this component is likely to have decreased. Most members noted that core inflation has followed an upward trend, mainly due to an increase in the annual change in merchandise inflation has been above 4% for a prolonged period. Some members noted that the trimmed mean indicator of this component continues to increase. One member stated that the levels the core sub- index is registering are among the highest observed since April 2009. All components of this sub-index are under pressure as more than half of their monthly increments lie above 4% at an annualized rate. Meanwhile the trimmed mean indicator continues showing the same trend than the official figure, which has increased for 10 consecutive months, and already stands nearly at 5%. One member mentioned that supercore inflation is at 3.43%, which is similar to its pre-pandemic levels. Another member noted that, over the past five years, merchandise prices have faced constant pressures, which could not be contained during the pandemic despite an unprecedented negative output gap. One member added that different measures, that adjust this index for seasonality or that are obtained from a decomposition at different frequencies, suggest that the pressures affecting it are greater than those observed in other inflationary episodes. He/she stated that pressures on non-food merchandise prices show a high degree of dispersion, making it difficult to determine the average duration of these pressures. Some members mentioned the rise in services inflation in recent months, although other members noted that this component declined at the margin. One member considered that, notwithstanding the above, the services component continues to be an additional factor of inflationary pressures. Another member noted that the phenomenon of reversion to trend associated to the gradual reopening of the economy has led to an increase in the annual rate of inflation in the clothing and services components which had displayed price increases below their historical average in 2020. However, he/she stated that the annualized biennial rate, which eliminates the ups and downs that occurred in the previous two years, shows that the trend in these components is quite stable. Some members mentioned that non-core inflation reached 8.86% in the first fortnight of September. One member emphasized that the evolution of this component has reflected two opposite movements: the effect of greater variations in agricultural and livestock product prices and the decline in LP gas inflation from June to date, as a result of the price cap policy. He/she considered that this contributes to an underestimation of inflation, since during this period the international references of LP gas continued to increase, and thus, in the absence of price caps, headline inflation would probably have been adjusted upwards. Another member stated that the recent behavior of the non-core sub-index is mainly explained by the increases in LP gas prices, since the price cap policy allows for an adjustment in consumer prices according to international references. The majority of members pointed out that expectations for headline and core inflation for 2021 and 2022 increased again, while medium- remained more stable, although the latter are at levels above the target. They highlighted that short-term expectations are well above the target. One member stated that expectations for the end of 2022 are at a level close to the average observed in other inflationary episodes. Another member attributed the stability of long-term expectations to the credibility of the central bank. One member considered the stability of these expectations to be consistent with the transitory nature of current inflationary pressures. As for inflation expectations derived from market instruments, he/she mentioned that those of 6 to 10 years are currently at 3.0%. On the other hand, another member added that the compensation for inflation and inflationary risk implicit in 10-year and the year of 70 and 73 basis points, respectively. He/she considered it of concern that these are on an upward trend and warned that such behavior could mark the beginning of a process of de-anchoring of long-term expectations. Most members noted that headline and core inflation forecasts were again revised upwards from those published in the April-June 2021 Quarterly Report. One member stated that this responds to the inflationary pressures that have arisen and to the reduction of slack. Another member pointed out that headline inflation is expected to converge to the target in the third quarter of 2023. He/she mentioned that the revised forecasts do not consider additional shocks or the possibility that the current ones may be prolonged. One member highlighted that the scenarios locate inflation at twice the target level. He/she estimated that headline inflation will be around 6.4% at the end of the year and that core inflation will be above 5% during the next nine months, reaching a maximum level of 5.6% in February 2022. The majority of members pointed out that shocks that are expected to be transitory. However, they noted the risk of a negative impact mentioned that pressures have continued to worsen due to external and domestic factors, and thus their transitory nature seems to be less probable. He/she warned that the persistence of high inflation levels for a prolonged period could de-anchor medium- and long-term expectations. He/she said that if inflation remains high for a prolonged period, economic agents incorporate it into their expectations without distinguishing between transitory or permanent increases or between those coming from supply or demand shocks, so that inflationary pressures tend to become entrenched. Another member mentioned that in addition to supply shocks, inflation is also facing various structural factors that will limit the decline in prices in the coming months. He/she pointed out that inflationary pressures point to a structural and inertial problem of core inflation that can hardly be considered transitory. He/she added that the changes in relative prices originated by the new consumption patterns possibly will not be reversed in a long time, given that the upward adjustment in service prices is occurring at the same time that merchandise inflation remains high. One member mentioned that high inflation is the result of various transitory or exogenous factors: i) the increase in international commodity prices; ii) the reversion of prices to their trend in a group of goods and services, which should not be cause for concern for the central bank since it is the result of the process of closing and gradual reopening of the economy; and iii) the adjustment in the relative prices of some goods derived from changes in consumption patterns and disruptions in production processes. He/she stated that the change in consumption patterns is a one-time change, and warned that, in the case of disruptions in production processes, it is foreseen that these pressures are to begin receding as the normalization process advances. He/she added that in the first fortnight of September the joint effect of the atypical variations in merchandise prices and the reversion in services and clothing prices was 109 basis points, which reveals that a significant part of the increase in core inflation is transitory in nature. He/she considered that inflationary pressures have started to ease at the margin, which will result in a reduction of the annual inflation rate in the future. Among the upward risks to inflation, most pressures. Some members added cost pressures and an exchange rate depreciation. One member mentioned also the risk of high persistence of core inflation and increases in agricultural and livestock product prices. Another member noted that higher inflationary pressures are expected as the reopening progresses and the output gap closes. One member noted that, although the deterioration in short-term inflation expectations is marginal, inflation has continued to rise and, although a further increase was already anticipated due to arithmetic effects, this dynamic represents a challenge if inflation expectations continue to be revised upwards. As for downside risks, another member pointed to the widening of the negative output gap, further social distancing measures, and an exchange rate appreciation. Most members considered the balance of risks to inflation within the forecast horizon to be biased to the upside. One member mentioned that this is due to the persistence of multiple supply shocks and the external boost to aggregate demand, and added that inflationary pressures are expected to continue for the next few months. Most members considered that Mexican financial markets have exhibited a mixed performance since the previous monetary policy decision. appreciated slightly, although in recent days, and internationally, it depreciated and its volatility increased. One member noted that the recent depreciation was due to the fact that the peso is one of the most sensitive currencies to interest rate adjustments, which has led to the currency reaching levels above 20.50 pesos per dollar. He/she added that a favorable adjustment could take place as volatility conditions normalize. Most members mentioned that interest rates increased. One member pointed out that the yield curve of government instruments rose, especially in the middle part. Some members pointed out that the stock market recently registered adjustments in a narrow range. One member added that the Mexican stock market recorded its highest level of the year during this period. Another member noted that trading conditions in both the fixed income and equity markets in Mexico had improved. He/she added that sovereign risk indicators deteriorated slightly. One member stated that Pemex's risk indicators are still among the highest of all oil companies worldwide. Regarding monetary aggregates, he/she emphasized the deceleration in their expansion rate, mainly explained by a lower growth of term deposits, since demand for liquid assets remains high, although another member considered that it is still below its level of 2020. One member pointed out that fiscal discipline in Mexico is an anchor for macroeconomic stability, since there is currently no problem in this area that could exert pressure on sovereign risk or the exchange rate. Another member added that optimistic growth expectations are strengthened by a balanced fiscal package that, although it does not generate much momentum, it does not distort the decisions of economic agents. Most members pointed out that credit to the private sector continued to perform poorly and highlighted the fall in financing to firms. One member stated that this segment has been the most affected, with a reduction of 9.7% in real terms. Another member mentioned that financing to Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) shows a contraction of 13% compared to pre-pandemic levels, with no signs of improvement. He/she argued that a contraction of credit is observed even in sectors that did not experience a recession. Most members noted that consumer credit continued to decline and some members indicated that mortgage lending has grown at a more moderate pace. One member pointed out that total financing continued to contract in real terms at an annual rate, albeit at a slower pace than in previous months. He/she added that foreign financing contracted more than domestic financing. Some members mentioned that delinquency rates have continued to decrease. One member pointed out that this, together with financial stability conditions, minimizes the possible harmful effect of higher interest rates on households and firms. He/she added that the decline in credit and investment responds to factors beyond monetary policy, such as economic slack and the environment of uncertainty. Most Governing Board members pointed out that due to the variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which the shocks have affected inflation, they may pose risks to the price formation process and to inflation expectations. In order to avoid such risks, they deemed necessary to reinforce the monetary policy stance by adjusting it to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. Therefore, they decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%. They emphasized that for the next monetary policy decisions they will assess the factors that have an incidence on the foreseen trajectory for inflation and its expectations, in order for the policy rate to be consistent at all times with the inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, enabling an adequate adjustment of the economy and One member considered that given the transitory and exogenous nature of the inflationary process, a less accommodative monetary stance would be inefficient as it does not solve the problems that give rise to the current levels of inflation such as the increase in the prices of commodities and the problems in supply chains. In contrast, he/she considered that a higher rate would have a negative impact on a wide range of the economy’s margins, such as consumption, investment, credit, public finances and domestic financial markets, among others. He/she argued that this would occur in the midst of a still incomplete recovery from one of the most severe crises on record. He/she added that the variables most sensitive to monetary policy, such as credit, consumption and investment, have deteriorated considerably. He/she pointed out that raising interest rates in the current juncture would also imply not taking advantage of the anchor of fiscal discipline on country risk and on the foreign exchange rate. He/she highlighted that in the absence of fiscal discipline, the central bank is obliged to provide such an anchor, but that the current fiscal policy should make room for a more accommodative monetary policy. He/she stated that interest rate increases reduce room for eventually reacting to a cycle of increases in the Federal Reserve’s funds rate and that if Banco de México acts too soon in anticipation, it may be forced to bring the interest rate to levels that are too restrictive in order to avoid a deterioration of its relative stance. He/she stated that a continued upward adjustment in interest rates may be interpreted as a signal that observed inflation is of a relatively permanent nature. He/she considered that this may affect inflation expectations and the price formation process. He/she pointed out that the recent interest rate increases and the subsequent adjustments to shortterm inflation expectations seem to confirm this. He/she stated that, from the first increase to date, short-term inflation expectations have only increased, so that the intended objective of the supposed reinforcement of monetary policy seems to have had very low effectiveness. He/she mentioned that it would be better to have a more effective communication policy that thoroughly explains the nature of the inflationary shock, instead of responding mechanically with interest rate increases, which do not manage to slow inflation down and may negatively affect inflation expectations and the price formation process. He/she expressed that, from his/her view, the idea that interest rate increases are necessary to reinforce the institution’s credibility seems to underestimate the progress achieved in this realm. Another member highlighted that with the aim of preventing inflation expectations from deteriorating, the recommendation has been to take prudent decisions that are predictable and well communicated. He/she highlighted that it is important to differentiate between a reinforcement of monetary policy and a cycle of interest rate increases, given that the Mexican economy is in a better macroeconomic position than other similar economies, fiscal and monetary stimuli in Mexico were limited, and an ample slack has been maintained. He/she stated that reinforcing monetary policy allows to act preventively in light of expectations of less accommodative monetary conditions worldwide in the following months, at a time when inflation has increased again and in which its expectations for the next 12 months and for the end of next year have been marginally affected. He/she considered that expectations for the next 12 months registered the greater increase and may limit the effectiveness of the monetary policy reinforcement. He/she added that monetary policy’s effectiveness is also achieved by effectively communicating the factors that are determining the evolution of prices. He/she pointed out that most of the current inflationary pressures are attributable to an unprecedented situation that will not continue indefinitely, but that these pressures represent a challenge to decision making. He/she estimated that, considering that the current asymmetric supply shock has favored some sectors and harmed others, a process of reallocation of resources in the economy, which monetary policy should facilitate, is expected. He/she warned that as a consequence of the pandemic, demand conditions in the loanable funds market have been significantly compressed to levels even below those of the 2008 crisis, which could suggest that the range in which the neutral interest rate is estimated may have adjusted downwards. One member stated that an increase in the reference rate indicates that the Governing Board is worried about the level and trajectory of inflation and is acting decisively. He/she mentioned that decisive monetary policy actions are required, taking advantage of the spaces available to meet the central bank’s primary mandate. He/she noted that recently inflation has been above expectations, leading to their steady deterioration, with levels above 6% for pointed out that this has led to expectations of reference rate increases in the following months, which, in the current scenario, may be justified. He/she warned that if these increases do not materialize, it could be interpreted as a signal of complacency. He/she noted that it must be explained that inflationary shocks demand decisive actions and it must be warned that, if inflation continues to increase, the expansionary policy stance will continue to diminish. He/she stated that in this way credibility will be strengthened in order to maintain inflationary expectations anchored, which allows to comply with the central bank’s primary mandate. He/she pointed out that expectations of a more robust recovery diminishes the need for a further stimulus. He/she added that financial conditions and the absolute and relative monetary policy stances allow to continue with an adjustment. Likewise, global monetary conditions also aim towards a relative monetary policy stance that is less lax. He/she stated that the improvement in trading conditions in money markets allows to raise interest rates without an undesired tightening of financial conditions. He/she considered that raising the reference rate will have a reduced effect on economic recovery, given the limited transmission of the credit channel. He/she mentioned that the causality of monetary policy on inflation via the expectations channel is not bidirectional, since a more restrictive policy stance helps to reduce inflationary pressures rather than the other way around. Furthermore, the increase in the interest rate sends a signal of greater commitment with the primary objective, while the inaction of monetary policy given the accumulation of inflationary shocks is a factor that generates a deterioration of expectations. For that reason, he/she pointed out that monetary policy must be proactive in face of the harmful effects of inflationary shocks, regardless of their nature or temporality. Thus, the increase in rates is a preventive and timely measure in view of transitory shocks that but which, when combined, have an indeterminate duration which may transcend the time-frame in which monetary policy operates. He/she added that this increase is a direct signal that that more inflation will not be tolerated, in order to avoid a greater deterioration of inflation expectations that would make it harder to maintain an environment of price stability. Finally, he/she pointed out that if the increase in prices were to continue, the expansionary monetary policy stance will have to be reduced until a neutral posture is achieved, or even one that is slightly restrictive, more consistent with the current inflationary gap and a much narrower negative output gap. Another member highlighted the rise in inflation once again above expectations, and the subsequent upward adjustment of the expected trajectory in an environment of high uncertainty, pointing out that this situation implies renewed tensions in monetary policy implementation. He/she added that the increase in inflation has implied a significant loss of purchasing power for the population and that if inflation were to remain elevated for a prolonged period, it would be incorporated into agents’ inflation expectations, which would tend to entrench inflationary pressures in the economy. He/she considered that any likely initial stage of a process of de-anchoring of long-term expectations necessarily requires timely action by this central bank. He/she mentioned that if a new adjustment were not implemented, the convergence of inflation to the target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates would be jeopardized. Additionally, he/she reflected that the appropriate pace for withdrawing the monetary stimulus must be evaluated, arguing that a greater effort should be made in normalizing monetary policy, in order to avoid a scenario of exchange rate depreciation and an acceleration in the pace of price increases. He/she pointed out that failure to do so would mean failing to comply with the primary mandate. He/she recalled that, between 2015 and 2017, it took an increase of 400 basis points and 20 months for core inflation to start declining, in the presence of new shocks. He/she highlighted that an increase in the rate would seek to prevent the further strengthening of second round effects in the price formation process. He/she stated that, for the time being, no additional risks have materialized but it is very likely that a more complex scenario will be observed, which, under a preventive approach, would require a more aggressive adjustment. He/she added that, in light of the above, it is essential to maintain a prudent approach in monetary policy that allows to implement adjustments in a timely and sufficient manner, and ensures an orderly and sustainable convergence of inflation to the target. One member pointed out that headline and core inflation forecasts have been revised significantly upwards on numerous occasions throughout the year, in response to inflationary pressures and to a reduction in ample slack conditions. He/she added that this points to the need for a trajectory for the interest rate target that reduces the monetary stimulus. He/she added that, considering the simultaneity and magnitude of the shocks that have affected headline and core inflation, as well as the upward revision of their forecasts and that slack in the economy will close at a faster pace than previously expected, it is essential for Banco de México to reinforce its commitment to comply with its constitutional mandate of safeguarding the domestic currency’s purchasing power. He/she argued that although shocks to headline and core inflation are expected to be mostly transitory in nature, there is a risk that price formation and inflation expectations may be contaminated due to: i) the broad range of prices affected; ii) the magnitude of price increases; iii) the extended horizon over which they have occurred; iv) the persistent reallocation of household spending; and v) greater uncertainty about the adjustment of the economy and prices in the face of an unprecedented scenario. He/she considered that tolerating high inflation levels, very much above the target, without reinforcing the monetary policy stance to levels consistent with a trajectory that fosters the convergence of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon, would contribute to deteriorate the price formation process and contaminate inflation expectations, which would in turn undermine Banco de México's credibility, with high costs for society. Although the shocks that have increased inflation are expected to be transitory, due to their variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which they have affected it, they may pose risks to the price formation process and to inflation expectations. In order to avoid such risks, it was deemed necessary to reinforce the monetary policy stance by adjusting it to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The Governing Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%. For the next monetary policy decisions, the Governing Board will assess the factors that have an incidence on the foreseen trajectory for inflation and its expectations, in order for the policy rate to be consistent at all times with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, enabling an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at 4.50%. I believe that raising the interest rate in the current juncture is ineffective and inefficient. It is ineffective because a higher rate does not solve the factors that originate inflationary pressures: increases in international input prices and disruptions in supply chains. It is inefficient because the increase may affect the economy in several areas: consumption, investment, credit and public finances. The increase also reduces future room for the time when the Federal Reserve begins its normalization process. Acting too soon in anticipation of said process may imply that in the future the rate will have to be adjusted to a very restrictive level to avoid affecting the relative policy stance. Finally, the increase could also be counterproductive. Continued increases could be interpreted as signals that inflation is of a permanent nature. This could affect expectations and the price formation process. Since the first increase to date, short-term expectations have only risen and therefore the sought objective has not been met. Thus, the question arises as to whether a communication policy that explains the nature of the current inflationary shock clearly would be better than responding mechanically with continuous rate increases.