All members agreed that global economic activity continued to recover heterogeneously across countries and sectors. Some members attributed the recovery to the loosening of lockdown measures, the vaccination process, and to the fiscal and monetary stimuli. One member added that those economies with the most support, mainly the advanced ones, will reach pre-pandemic activity levels in a shorter time period. Most members highlighted the improvement in mentioned the upward revision of OECD forecasts for 2021 and 2022, to 5.6 and 4.0%, respectively. In the case of the U.S., some members underlined that the OECD forecast for 2021 was revised from 3.2 to economies of the euro area, the United Kingdom and Japan have observed a relatively weaker recovery. Most members considered that expectations of a associated with the approval of the significant fiscal stimulus and with progress in the vaccination process. One member stated that the output gap in that economy is foreseen to be positive before the year ends and that it will remain positive during the next two years. Another member considered that the fiscal package approval has significantly affected the global economic outlook. Some members pointed out, as risks to the world economy, the evolution of the pandemic and possible delays in the vaccination programs. Most members noted that commodity prices rose. They highlighted that oil prices exhibited significant increases and volatility. One member added that increases in those prices have moderated in view of the OPEC’s decision to maintain its supply of crude oil. Most members pointed out that global inflation rose mainly due to the increase in energy prices, inflation remains at levels below their central bank targets. One member added that this also reflected the impact of temporary factors and the end of subsidies and tax cuts that had been implemented in some countries in response to the pandemic. Some members mentioned that in most emerging economies inflation has risen recently. One member considered that the exchange rate depreciation contributed to the above. Another member pointed out that in some of these economies inflation remains close to or even below the targets of their respective central banks. Most members stated that global inflation particularly in the U.S., in light of a greater fiscal stimulus and an outlook for a more vigorous recovery. Some members noted that compensation for inflation and inflation risk in the medium term has increased. One member stated that, in the U.S., inflation risk premia rose by 50 basis points this year so far and that five-year, five-year forward inflation expectations reached 2.4%. Another member pointed out that fixed-income assets have begun to incorporate the higher inflation expectations. Some members added that the fiscal stimulus is foreseen to enable higher growth without exerting significant pressure on prices. One member considered that this assumes a small slope in the Phillips curve. Another member recalled that inflation in said country has been persistently low in recent years, and that thus it is still to be seen if, on this occasion, the economic recovery will have a sustained effect on prices. Most members mentioned that the central banks of advanced economies reiterated their intention to maintain accommodative monetary policy stances. They underlined that the Federal accommodative policy stance for an extended period and that said central bank considers inflationary pressures in 2021 to be transitory, and that for this reason, an increase in the federal funds rate will not be necessary until 2023. One member emphasized that such central bank maintained the range for its reference rate and its asset purchase program for USD 120 billion, although inflation pressures seem to be demandrelated. In this regard, another member indicated that a first element of uncertainty over the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy stance refers precisely to the asset purchase program, which was designed for an environment of weak demand, and that it is currently in a juncture of increased public debt issuances and high uncertainty in the mid- and longend of the yield curve. He/she noted that an eventual announcement of a downward adjustment in asset purchases could have a significant impact on markets. One member added that a greater tightening in financial conditions, stemming from a possible reversal of the monetary stimulus, in a context of historic levels of both public and private debt, could pose a risk to global financial stability. Another member pointed out that the interest rate trajectory implied by market instruments indicates that the reference rate will start to increase in 2022, which differs from the Federal Reserve’s forecast. He/she added that this discrepancy, as well as the volatility observed in global markets, could be due to a lack of understanding or confidence in the implementation of the new monetary policy framework. In this regard, he/she noted the highly accommodative nature of monetary policy as a result of the change in long-term targets announced by the Federal Reserve last August. He/she mentioned that, on the one side, the maximum employment goal is more ambitious than before since it is now defined as broad-based and inclusive. He/she pointed out that said central bank has acknowledged that the benefits of the economic recovery reach the most disadvantaged only after several years of sustained growth. He/she stated that, on the other hand, the price stability goal is more lax than before given that after inflation has remained below 2% for a certain period, now it will be allowed to be slightly above 2% for a certain time. He/she concluded that the latter implies that monetary policy must remain accommodative for a longer period than what the past framework implied. He/she underlined that it would be foreseeable that the discrepancy in the trajectory of interest rates fades away insofar as the Federal Reserve communicates its signals clearly and consistently. Most members observed that some emerging economies’ central banks have begun to implement a less accomodative monetary policy and have even increased their reference rates. One member said that, in some cases, these actions were unexpected, and took place in a context of inflationary pressures. Another member pointed out that most central banks of these economies maintain highly accommodative monetary policy stances. He/she stressed that although it is true that some central banks of these countries have recently raised their reference rates, the idiosyncratic character of these decisions needs to be highlighted, and therefore no simplistic extrapolations of these episodes should be made. All members highlighted the large fiscal stimulus recently approved in the United States. Most of them observed that such stimulus equals approximately three times the US output gap in 2020. One member pointed out that it represents over 9% of 2020 GDP and it adds to the already expected deficit for 2021 of around 10.35% of GDP. He/she noted that a package of additional spending in infrastructure is currently being evaluated in the United States. He/she noted that it is not clear how much of the large transfers that will increase households’ disposable income will be spent, and in which time-frame. He/she highlighted that in some advanced economies transfers of this type have been saved in greater magnitude than initially foreseen, which increases the uncertainty concerning the temporality of fiscal spending’s impact on aggregate demand and its effect on inflation. Another member mentioned that while some specialists argue that this program would cause an economic overheating and a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, others consider that it would not generate a persistent increase in inflation above its target nor an early tightening in financial conditions. He/she stated that in any case the approval of the stimulus has had a significant effect on the world economic outlook and on international financial markets. One member stated that, for emerging economies, this environment implies higher levels of external demand and therefore higher growth –driven by the boost generated by a more vigorous growth in the U.S. – but also tighter financial conditions. All members agreed that global financial markets exhibited volatility and that medium- and long- term interest rates increased in the United States, in view of the approval of a large fiscal stimulus and prospects of higher growth. Most members pointed that an adjustment in portfolios has been observed. Some members stated that, in general, tighter global financial conditions have been observed, with increases in all terms of the yield curves. One member added that volatility in financial markets is also due to various factors, such as: i) the pandemic-related shock, whose origin is not associated to the economic or financial cycle; ii) the outlook of a heterogeneous global recovery across countries, with significant differences in their yield curves and with possible exchange rate adjustments and adjustments in the external accounts; and iii) the modification of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, which implies that there is no available information to anticipate or extrapolate the Federal Reserve’s possible actions or the implementation of its new strategy. Most members mentioned that the US dollar appreciated and that stock markets in advanced economies registered moderate gains. Some members pointed out the positive effect of higher growth prospects. One member mentioned that the technology sector was the exception because of a possible overvaluation of its assets. Another member stated that risk asset prices have increased in general due to excess liquidity, which implies a latent risk of adjustments in their prices. Some members noted a less favorable environment for financial markets in emerging economies, which incorporates the expectation of tighter global financial conditions. Most members stated that particularly to fixed-income assets. One member mentioned that inflows to equity assets continue, mainly towards the Asian region. Most members highlighted the recomposition of capital flows towards the Chinese economy, due to the incorporation of their debt instruments in global bond indices. Some members pointed out that, given the interest rate levels in China and the low exchange rate risk in its instruments, the remaining emerging economies face greater challenges to attract capital flows. One member added that the increase in medium- and long-term interest rates in the United States also implies greater difficulties to attract and retain capital, exchange rate adjustments, and upward pressures on yield curves. He/she also mentioned in addition to such challenges the idiosyncratic effects of the pandemic on the macroeconomic soundness and the recovery outlook of emerging economies. Another member pointed out that a slight increase in the country risk indicators of these economies was also observed. Some members identified possible inflation surprises as a risk for financial markets. In this regard, one member highlighted the case of the United States. Another member referred to the possibility of the monetary stimulus reverting in different economies and expects the environment of uncertainty to prevail until the effects of the fiscal stimulus on inflation and on interest rates are clearer. One member pointed out that global financial markets will continue to benefit from the economic recovery prospects. He/she added that the possibility of a reversion in long-term interest rates should not be discarded, in case market expectations start to align with the Federal Reserves’ messages, although there could be additional episodes of volatility as long as some degree of uncertainty or mistrust regarding the future trajectory of interest rates persists. All members highlighted that domestic economic activity decelerated in January and February. Most members stated that the deceleration was due to the intensification of the pandemic, the implementation of new mobility restrictions, as well as supply disruptions of certain inputs. They underlined that some timely indicators point to a contraction during the first quarter of 2021. One member stated that the Timely Indicator of Economic Activity suggests an annual variation of-4% in the Global Indicator of Economic Activity (IGAE, for its Spanish acronym) in February. Another member mentioned that the economic recovery is still in a critical situation. Regarding demand, most members agreed that the recovery has been driven mostly by the external sector. One member highlighted that in January manufacturing exports surpassed their prepandemic levels. In this regard, he/she stressed that external demand is expected to continue contributing significantly to the economic recovery in Mexico. He/she considered this to be the case, given the upward revisions to US industrial production forecasts for 2021. He/she added that the recovery of exports and the weakness of imports have contributed to a large trade surplus. Nevertheless, most members noted that exports decelerated in January. Some members underlined that the fall in Mexican exports was mainly due to a global shortage of key inputs. Most members mentioned that investment and consumption remain lackluster. One member pointed out that in the last months both components have decelerated in response to the additional distancing measures implemented, and highlighted that investment has been significantly affected. Some members added that investment and its components remain below pre-pandemic levels, one member noted that both domestic machinery and equipment, and construction remain the most affected sectors. Some members added that capital imports, construction and sales of heavy vehicles remain weak. As for consumption, one member underlined that total sales reported by the National Association of Self-Service and Department Stores sales of light vehicles and weekly spending via credit and debit cards increased moderately, and are still at levels below those recorded prior to the pandemic. Another member considered that job losses and the deterioration of consumer confidence suggest that consumption will continue to recover at a slow pace, despite the dynamism of remittances. One member highlighted that remittances continue supporting both consumption of over 1.7 million households and the economic recovery. Regarding supply, all members underlined the loss of dynamism in production at the beginning of the year. They pointed out that this was mostly due to the mobility restrictions implemented in some states and to the temporary interruption in the supply of some industrial inputs. Most members highlighted that the manufacturing sector, particularly the automotive industry, was affected by the shortage of semiconductors. One member recalled the disruptions to the supply of natural gas and of electric power in Mexico, which derived from climatic events in the south of the U.S. in mid-February. Most members pointed out that a gradual and heterogeneous recovery across sectors and regions is expected. One member underlined that the recovery has been differentiated and that the economic subsectors, which continue registering a contraction of over 5% in their monthly activity as compared to their pre-pandemic levels, account for around 26% of GDP. He/she added that, within the industry, manufacturing has led the recovery, while construction registers activity levels that are over He/she added that services have exhibited an even more differentiated behavior, in which those provided in person continue to be significantly affected. Most members noted that the recovery of the labor market has lost strength and that some indicators have deteriorated at the margin. One member mentioned that the national labor participation rate stagnated in January due to a lower urban participation rate. Another member pointed out that, although up to February of this year 9.7 out of the 12.5 million jobs lost between February and April 2020 were regained, said recovery has lost dynamism. He/she added that in February IMSSinsured jobs were 3.28% below the figure registered during the same month of 2020. One member mentioned that estimates of urban unemployment were above 6.5% in January, and that the broadest unemployment measure, which includes the unemployed population, the underemployed population and the population available to work, increased by 900 thousand people between December and January. Some members expressed their concern about the deterioration of the labor market being greater for women, which has widened the gender gap. One member indicated that differences between age groups have also increased. Most members highlighted the increase in growth expectations for the Mexican economy in 2021. They mentioned that this is mainly due to a greater boost from external demand and to prospects of progress in the vaccination process. One member added the better-thanexpected performance of economic activity during the second half of 2020 and higher levels of activity associated with the expenditure for the electoral process of June 2021. Another member emphasized that, starting from February 15, Mexico began the national vaccination campaign among the senior citizens. Some members pointed out that, as mobility restrictions ease and greater progress is attained in the vaccination process, the pace of recovery is expected to accelerate in the second half of the year. The majority of members highlighted that in the last weeks various sources have revised growth expectations for 2021 upwards. One member considered it feasible for the economy to grow over underlined that said growth will not be sustainable or lasting in the absence of a significant recovery of productive investment in the medium and long terms. The majority of members pointed out that productive activity continues to operate under ample slack conditions. One member stated that these slack conditions are shown by diferent indicators, which reflect a considerable underutilization of available resources in the economy. He/she mentioned that the output gap remained close to 7% and that the labor underemployment rate lied at 15%, close to twice the figure observed in normal times. Another member mentioned that available information suggests that slack conditions will remain significantly wide during the first quarter of 2021. Most members stated that throughout the forecast horizon. One member mentioned that the amount of slack might decrease as the economic recovery becomes more vigorous. Another member added that slack conditions will be very different across sectors. Some members highlighted that the balance of risks for economic activity is biased to the downside. One member underlined that, although this bias has diminished due to an improved economic outlook, challenges stemming from the weakness of demand and the labor market, as well as from the evolution of the pandemic, persist. Another member highlighted that despite the improvement in the expected recovery, the following risks stand out: i) an upsurge in COVID-19 cases or delays in the vaccination program; ii) negative effects of input shortages on production; iii) volatility in financial markets; iv) deterioration of credit portfolio quality; v) lower public revenues, impacts on sovereign risk and on the conditions of access to financial markets; and vi) uncertainty affecting investment. All members mentioned the increase in annual headline inflation. Some members noted that this increase was higher than expected. One member pointed out that it was above the market consensus and even above the highest expectations drawn from the latest survey. He/she explained that the prices of goods and services which are more sensitive to pressures generated by energy prices and the exchange rate, are the ones increasing the most. Another member pointed out that the pandemic has implied changes in relative prices, with upward pressures on merchandise inflation and downward pressures on services inflation. He/she added that in addition there are pressures on the prices of certain raw materials, mainly those that are energy-related. He/she stated that all of the above reflects the shocks to which inflation has been subject. One member noted that although the level of inflation during the first fortnight of March was above the interval established by Banco de México, this should not be interpreted as a generalized increase in prices. He/she detailed that the proportion of goods and services with significant monthly variations below their historical averages is close to 50% and that the percentage is higher if the components of core inflation are the only ones considered. He/she stated that this has not translated into lower inflation because the intensive component of increases in certain prices has prevailed over the extensive component of decline in inflation of most prices. Most members pointed out that core inflation increased during the first fortnight of March, with some members highlighting the upward trend of the non-food merchandise component. One member mentioned that this was mainly due to the increases in the prices of furniture and household appliances, clothing and footwear, entertainment material, and vehicles and car accessories. He/she added that the food merchandise component remained high. Some members highlighted the slowdown in services inflation and stated that the lower inflation of educational services partly offset the pressures in merchandise prices. One member noted the end of the downward trend in services inflation that had been observed since January. He/she highlighted that its increase reflected the rise in telecommunication and transportation services prices. He/she highlighted that housing and education prices continued registering lower increases, thus suggesting the prevalence of weakness in the domestic market. Another member pointed out that super core inflation remains at The majority of members mentioned that annual non-core inflation rose significantly during the first fortnight of March, due to the increase in energy prices. One member highlighted the faster increase in domestic gas prices. Another member underlined the increase in agricultural and livestock product prices, mainly in those of livestock. Some members pointed out that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2021 increased and that those for the medium and long terms remained stable at levels above the 3% target. One member highlighted that those for the end of 2021 ended near the upper limit of the variability interval of Banco de México's target. Some members mentioned that the inflationary risk premium has increased at the margin. One member noted that annual inflation expectations drawn from market instruments remained anchored at levels close to 3% for the 1-10 year average. Another member noted that while these expectations remain below 3.2%, they have increased at the margin, and so has the inflationary risk premium. One member pointed out that breakeven inflation rates increased marginally for the term remained at 3.34%, still below their historic average figures. All members mentioned that headline inflation is expected to increase in the next months. The majority pointed out that headline inflation will be temporarily affected by the arithmetic effects associated with last year’s fall in energy prices. They stated that headline and core inflation are still expected to converge to the 3% target as of the second quarter of 2022. Some members noted that the projected short-term trajectories for inflation are slightly higher than those published in the Quarterly Report October-December 2020. Some members mentioned that higher increases in energy prices are expected due to the reactivation of the world economy. One member stated that higher annual core inflation levels are expected due to a more depreciated trajectory for the exchange rate and to the indirect effects of the increase in energy prices. Another member mentioned that both headline and core inflation are expected to begin declining as of July and lie closer to the target during the entire second half of 2021. As for upward risks for inflation, most members mentioned possible episodes of exchange rate depreciation. Some members added greater pressures on energy price benchmarks. Some members pointed out greater inflationary pressures worldwide and tensions in core inflation due to the recomposition of spending towards merchandise. One member noted the uncertainty regarding the expected reduction in core inflation as of May, given the persistence it has shown for several years. He/she mentioned the risk of possible increases and volatility in commodity prices in world markets and in tourist services domestically. He/she added that slack conditions could be insufficient to offset the effects of supply shocks on inflation. Another member considered that the low services inflation will cease to offset merchandise inflation as activities start to reopen in the country. As for downward risks, some members highlighted the slack conditions in the economy, greater social distancing measures, and possible events of foreign exchange appreciation. Some members pointed out that the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the upside. One member pointed out that such bias is observed in the short term. Another member added that this occurs despite the amount of slack in the economy, since it is foreseeable that core inflation pressures will continue due to the recomposition of spending derived from the pandemic, and that the low levels of services inflation stops offsetting the high levels of merchandise inflation as activities begin to reopen. He/she also mentioned that more episodes of foreign exchange depreciation can be expected due to external and domestic factors and to a higher level of inflation worldwide. One member considered that the balance has deteriorated at the margin. Another member highlighted that none of the inflation determinants have deteriorated significantly to the point of expecting upward pressures on prices given that: i) ample slack conditions persist; ii) the peso exchange rate has withstood episodes of volatility and has depreciated only moderately; and iii) despite the increases in international oil prices, their impact on domestic prices is expected to be partially mitigated by the federal government's pricing policy. One member noted that both the global financial environment and the increase and volatility in international energy price benchmarks could represent inflationary pressures that are difficult to foresee. members mentioned that the Mexican peso depreciated. Most members noted that its considered that this is due to volatility in the longterm US Treasury bond market and that exchange rate tensions could be reinforced by downgrades of the sovereign and/or Pemex ratings, the election process to be held in June, and domestic policies that generate uncertainty. Regarding the stock market, most members highlighted that the IPC stock market index registered gains. One member stated that this was due to the improvement in the growth outlook, which allowed this indicator to register a gain of 8%, one of the highest among emerging economy stock markets. All members highlighted the increases in members noted that these were due to the rise in international interest rates generated by the expected impact of the US fiscal package. Some members pointed out that the long end of Mexico's yield curve has increased between 80 and 100 basis points. One member mentioned that short-term rates increased up to 20 basis points, resulting in a significant steepening of the yield curve. He/she noted that domestic markets have shown a deterioration in trading conditions and an increase in volatility, in line with developments in international markets. Another member highlighted the possibility that, given a greater convergence between market expectations in the United States and the Federal Reserve's actions and messages, a reduction in medium- and long-term interest rates could be observed, and even an appreciation of the Mexican peso. Most members pointed out that the sovereign risk premium increased due to a rise in global risk aversion. One member mentioned the impact of idiosyncratic factors. Another member stated that, despite the recent increase in the sovereign risk premium, it remains low, similar to pre-pandemic levels. He/she noted that this could be associated with the fiscal discipline in Mexico. Some members mentioned that a reduction in foreign holdings of government bonds was observed. Some members stated that Mexico has been affected by a recomposition of capital flows. In this context, they emphasized that it is important to monitor the effects of the integration of the Chinese financial market into international markets. One member noted that, despite equity market inflows, there was a net decrease in this position. Another member considered that, looking ahead, domestic financial markets could benefit from the favorable growth outlook. Most members mentioned that financing to the consecutive month. Some members noted that this contraction was observed for both large and smaller firms, although one member stated that demand for credit from SMEs has increased moderately. He/she noted that this contraction confirms the expectation of a tightening in credit approval for the first quarter of 2021 that was observed in Banco de México’s Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish acronym). In this context, another member mentioned that the decrease in financing to the private sector occurred due to both less debt issuance and lower bank lending, in an environment of tight lending conditions, despite the reduction in interest rates. One member pointed out that business loans contracted at a real annual rate of 5% in January, while loans to SMEs decreased 8.2%. He/she warned that this differs from what has been observed in other economies, both advanced and emerging, where credit to firms has continued to expand, driven, among other factors, by real interest rates lower than those prevailing in Mexico. Some members noted that there was a high demand for liquidity from firms and households. One member pointed out that this was due to precautionary motives and lower opportunity costs of holding low or zero-yield assets. Another member warned that the risks for financial stability have increased. Some members noted that firms and households register higher delinquency rates. One member added that this was observed even though most loans are established at variable rates and are benefitted by an accommodative monetary policy stance. He/she stated that low interest rates tend to reduce the profitability of financial institutions, especially smaller ones, which, along with the aforementioned increase in delinquency rates and the regulatory requirements, can reduce the room for maneuver to expand credit supply. This, in a context where an excess of global liquidity has increased world investors’ risk taking, which has affected both valuation and risk of financial institutions’ market portfolios. Another member noted that, although bank credit interest rates have followed the dynamics of the funding rate, intermediation margins continue to be at levels higher than those observed prior to the pandemic. Government's recently announced additional support for Pemex, for an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP, through a lower tax burden, greater capitalization and debt amortization. He/she considered that, although this support will not affect the public sector's budget deficit, it will imply issuing debt in an environment of higher interest rates. He/she added that in the next years Pemex will face increasing maturities that will be difficult to meet without a structural plan. In this context, he/she mentioned that it is foreseeable that this company will continue to require the support of the Federal Government and exert pressure on public finances. Another member pointed out that fiscal discipline has distinguished Mexico from other countries that have resorted to greater indebtedness. He/she mentioned that it seems increasingly unlikely that the sovereign debt will lose its investment grade rating in the next few years. Some members considered that macroeconomic fundamentals need to be strengthened to generate confidence and promote an orderly adjustment of the Mexican economy. One member pointed out that idiosyncratic risks continue to increase, with repercussions on the macroeconomic, institutional and rule of law framework. He/she highlighted the financial situation of Pemex and its implications for the sovereign debt rating, as well as the uncertainty related to the Electricity Sector Law. He/she stated that the latter has generated a significant number of legal proceedings that have so far resulted in more than 20 definitive suspensions. He/she stated that in addition to the negative effects for private investors, this could lead to actions by several countries, which would imply an environment of greater uncertainty, lack of confidence and volatility. forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target, all members agreed to maintain the target for the All members highlighted that monetary policy expectations, and that headline and core inflation follow a downward trend. They pointed out the importance of inflation converging to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Most members mentioned that this pause in the easing cycle does not mean that said cycle has ended, and that looking ahead they will be aware in case the conditions allow for continuing it. They stated that although monetary policy might contribute to the recovery, it must do so without jeopardizing price stability. Furthermore, all members highlighted that monetary policy implementation faces risks associated, mainly, with the recent evolution of financial markets, and mentioned the importance of applying a prudent and cautious approach. Finally, they pointed out that, looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on One member stated that emerging economies continue to be affected by pandemic-related shocks and that now they are also facing the effects of the US fiscal stimulus. He/she noted that said stimulus will increase the demand for exports, thereby supporting the recovery, but will also exert pressure on global interest rates and increase the risks of abrupt adjustments in financial markets. He/she pointed out that in small and open emerging economies, which need to complement their domestic savings with external financing sources, it is even more important to maintain a stable macroeconomic environment that attracts capital and fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy. In this regard, he/she considered that monetary policy should contribute to maintain inflation low and around its target, containing increases in risk premia and medium- and long-term interest rates, as well as exchange rate adjustments. He/she noted that the pandemic has implied a significant economic contraction and major changes in relative prices. This, in a context of an exchange rate depreciation, pressures on fiscal revenues, challenges regarding the sovereign credit rating, and recent increases in external interest rates. He/she pointed out that in addition to the above, the prices of some commodities, mainly energy-related, have increased. He/she mentioned that in view of the challenges described above, monetary policy must foster an orderly adjustment of relative prices and prevent an impact on price formation and inflation expectations, in order to maintain low inflation on a sustained basis. He/she added that the risks to which domestic financial markets and inflation are subject to have increased. He/she highlighted that the latest information shows a greater persistence of inflationary pressures on core inflation. Although it is foreseen that such pressures will be transitory, it is necessary to maintain a prudent monetary policy stance that leads to a decreasing trajectory for headline and core inflation towards the 3% target. Another member pointed out that headline inflation is expected to rebound during the second quarter of the year, due to two factors that will generate an increase in the non-core component. He/she pointed out that one factor is the arithmetic effect related to a low annual comparison base and the other has to do with the increases in energy prices that are already taking place due to the reactivation of the world. He/she stated that, in principle, both factors are generated by supply shocks that are transitory and that give rise to changes in relative prices or to firstround adjustments in inflation. On the other hand, he/she mentioned that since the last meeting, greater volatility in financial markets and a reversion of capital flows have been observed. He/she considered it prudent to make a pause in the monetary easing cycle and pointed out that this should not be considered as the end of such cycle, but rather a pause that will allow to validate expectations of a downward trajectory of the core component. He/she highlighted the need to evaluate the presence of second-round effects that affect inflation expectations, the effects of the fiscal stimulus in the United States, the conditions in which international financial markets operate, and the slack conditions. He/she underlined that on previous occasions the conditions were appropriate to act concurrently with the easing cycle, but that now it was necessary to monitor the available information carefully to evaluate whether there is another opportunity to support the economic recovery without jeopardizing price stability and without compromising the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation expectations. One member underlined that in the case of Mexico there is statistically significant evidence that the rise in long-term interest rates in the United States increases sovereign risk indicators, which in turn affects the exchange rate. He/she stated that the recent evolution of international financial markets suggests acting prudently, and therefore the monetary policy decision should consider the probability of a more depreciated exchange rate, in order to anticipate more objectively the trajectory of inflation’s convergence to the target within the forecast horizon. He/she added that said decision should take into account the beginning of the normalization of reference rates in emerging economies and the fact that despite the amount of slack, the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the upside. He/she added that the tightening in financial conditions and a low margin of fiscal support reduce the room for maneuver for monetary policy. Given the complex environment, he/she considered it essential that monetary policy is conducted prudently and cautiously, in order to promote an orderly adjustment of financial markets and the sustained convergence of inflation to the 3% target. Another member stated that, since the last decision, the window of opportunity for further monetary easing has closed. This, as a result of serious doubts about the forecasted trajectory of inflation’s convergence to the target, especially in the short term; the possibility of further external financial shocks; the stability of the financial system; the evolution of the pandemic and the vaccination campaign; and the limits faced by a low reference rate. He/she acknowledged that, while it has been confirmed that the economic recovery remains fragile and needs as much monetary support as possible, there are considerations that imply a pause in monetary easing. He/she pointed out an increase in inflation, a steepening of the yield curve, a greater depreciation of the Mexican peso, an increase in risk aversion, certain impacts on macrofinancial stability, and the possibility of more external shocks of a financial nature. He/she noted that this scenario is largely the result of the approval of the fiscal package in the United States. He/she highlighted that in order to be able to maintain low rates to support the economic recovery, the existing room for maneuver should be managed with caution, as we are near the lower limit of the reference rate. Thus, the accommodative cycle should resume only when the circumstances allow for it and better opportunities are present again. He/she pointed out that the highly volatile external circumstances have reduced the room for maneuver of the relative monetary policy stance. On the other hand, the space offered by the absolute policy stance can be reduced due to higher inflation rates and to an increase in the short-term neutral rate. He/she warned that Banco de México’s sphere of action is limited by domestic and external economic-financial aspects that evolve rapidly and in directions difficult to detect. In particular, economic policy faces many unknowns that will have to be resolved. He/she stated that the dilemma for monetary policy is that the economy is in recession with a temporary increase in inflation and a core component that is not decreasing. Consequently, he/she considered that given the extraordinary conditions of the pandemic and the lag with which monetary policy operates, it is time to cautiously assess monetary policy’s room for maneuver in order to avoid in the future a position of vulnerability that may affect the credibility of the Central Bank, as well as the anchoring of inflationary expectations. He/she emphasized that monetary support should continue, especially in the absence of fiscal support, which implies that monetary policy continues being the only available tool, even when this is not ideal. He/she therefore stated the need for a monetary support such as domestic and external financial conditions allow. He/she pointed out that this pause does not mean that monetary easing has ended, but that windows of opportunity should be carefully determined to continue supporting the economic recovery while reinforcing Banco de México's commitment to monetary stability. One member mentioned that a pause will allow for strengthening the message of the Central Institute's commitment to price stability at a time of various concerns due to both domestic and external factors. Looking ahead, he/she considered that there is still room for additional interest rate cuts, which, if they materialize, could contribute to the recovery of the Mexican economy without jeopardizing the price stability objective. He/she pointed out that Mexico, unlike other countries, has maintained solid macroeconomic fundamentals that could allow implementing an accommodative policy stance for a prolonged time, without the need to anticipate the adjustments the Federal Reserve will eventually make. He/she mentioned that fiscal discipline has contributed to reduce domestic absorption and, therefore, to improve the current account, which in turn contributes to reduce pressures on the exchange rate. He/she also stated that fiscal discipline relieves pressure on the sovereign risk premium and prevents capital outflows related to concerns about default. He/she highlighted that the origin of the recent episode of volatility in global markets is the prospect of a rapid economic recovery of our most important trading partner, so that the current situation does not essentially imply a negative shock. He/she mentioned that, from his/her point of view, most of the volatility stems from the inadequate perception of the role that central banks will play in the recovery process, which he/she considered will be resolved if the Federal Reserve remains clear and consistent in its policy messages and actions, as it has been doing so far. He/she considered that additional interest rate cuts would be beneficial for several reasons: i) the economy will continue to operate with an ample amount of slack for an extended period; ii) an unfavorable performance is observed in those areas where monetary policy has a direct impact, such as credit to households and firms, consumption and investment; iii) the current account surplus reflects that the monetary policy stance is still restrictive for the current economic conditions; and iv) Mexico's real interest rate continues to be above that observed in most emerging economies. He/she expressed that there could be a window of opportunity to continue with the monetary easing process as long as the rest of the macroeconomic policies continue being a factor of stability and price anchoring, and once the current uncertainty in financial markets is resolved. In a highly uncertain environment, the risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets pose major challenges for monetary policy. It is necessary to enable an orderly adjustment of financial conditions and a change in relative prices, without affecting price formation and inflation expectations. Considering the abovementioned inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target, with the presence of all its members, the Governing Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on its expectations. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions based on incoming information in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional framework, strengthen the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Galia Borja-Gómez, Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Gerardo Esquivel Hernández and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%.