The majority noted that global economic activity continues to recover heterogeneously across countries, associated with vaccine availability and the amount of stimulus spending. Some members added structural factors of each economy. One member mentioned that most timely indicators of global economic activity show significant rebounds. Some members noted that economic activity and labor markets in various countries and regions are still affected by social distancing measures. Most members highlighted the increase in global growth expectations, particularly in the United States, given its significant fiscal stimulus. Some members mentioned that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) growth expectation for that country in advanced economies, the US economy is expected to be the only one with a positive output gap in 2021 and 2022. One member added that this will allow it to reach its pre-pandemic output level towards the end of this year. Another member underlined that additional support packages are being evaluated, with infrastructure spending for up to 10 years, which also include tax increases to partially offset the higher levels of spending. Some members pointed out that the recovery is expected to be weaker in the euro area and Japan. One member stated that it is expected that it will take until 2023 for many emerging economies to regain their pre-pandemic levels. Among the risks to global economic activity, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic and a higher-than-expected increase in inflation. Some members mentioned that there could be disruptions in production and supply chains. One member emphasized the importance of ensuring a broad and inclusive distribution of vaccines that would contribute to an orderly reestablishment of these chains. He/she warned that, otherwise, the recovery will continue to be heterogeneous and would favor the emergence of disruptions in the provision of inputs or commodities, with unfavorable effects on output and prices. Another member added the uncertainty about the type of inflationary pressures that may arise in the United States as a risk. As for the risks for emerging economies, most members pointed out those associated with the vaccination process, more restrictive financial conditions, and All members pointed out that global inflation rose due to recent pressures on commodity prices, especially energy-related ones, and to base effects, and cost-related pressures. Most members added that supply chain disruptions and the economic recovery process also exerted an influence. Some members stated that pressures on world inflation are anticipated to be limited and transitory due to economic and labor market weakness and the fading of base effects. One member mentioned that the most recent forecasts by international organizations suggest that price pressures will be short-lived, due to the wide slack conditions in most economies, and to the gradual fading away of base effects. Another member highlighted the impact of the recovery of economies of systemic importance such as China and the United States. One member added supply factors, including poor harvests and precautionary stockpiling. Some members noted that in most advanced economies, headline and core inflation remain below their targets, except for the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. One member noted that in these countries the increases in inflation have been considered to be transitory. Most members mentioned that higher levels of inflation are expected in the United States. One member stated that the positive output gap that is expected for the US economy could exert upward pressures on inflation and interest rates. Regarding emerging economies, he/she noted that in most of them inflation has increased recently due to the increase in commodity prices, to supply shocks, and to exchange rate depreciations. Most members mentioned that greater pressures on prices could arise as a result of disruptions in production and supply chains. Some members noted that due to the effects derived from the pandemic, these chains are less resilient and have less capacity to absorb increases in demand without exerting pressures on prices. One member mentioned that world inflation is expected to be higher than at the beginning of the year. He/she noted that several global companies have warned about the possibility of raising their prices in 2021 and 2022 due to higher input costs, and he/she considered that the balance of risks for global inflation has deteriorated. Another member added that it is foreseeable that the supply of raw materials will tend to increase, thus contributing to lower inflationary pressures. He/she considered that since pressures on prices are transitory, longer-term inflation expectations should not be affected. He/she considered that for emerging economies, it will be important to monitor that the increase in inflation is indeed transitory and pointed out that inflation expectations for 2022 reveal, in general, lower levels than those anticipated for 2021. He/she added that the fact that some of the main economies have made progress with the vaccination and containment of the pandemic, has led to more favorable growth expectations and increases in the demand for various inputs. He/she considered that, in a context of global disruptions in supply chains, it is logical that the heterogeneous economic recovery process is also resulting in some bottlenecks in the provision of inputs. He/she stated that these price increases, however, should be understood as associated to supply factors. He/she added that as the normalization of activities progresses, supply chains are foreseen to begin to realign and prices will adjust to levels compatible with those prevailing prior to the pandemic. Most members mentioned that central banks in advanced economies reiterated their intention to stances. Some members pointed out that, in its latest policy decision, the Federal Reserve considered that there is still some way to go before achieving its targets. One member added that the Fed reinforced its expectation of a moderate increase in inflation, with no increases to its reference rate until 2023. Another member argued that the Federal Reserve has been very emphatic regarding the importance of fully understanding the character and the implications of the recent inflationary pressures. He/she recalled that, in its latest decision, that institution highlighted the transitory nature of the increase in inflation, explaining that inflation is expected to exceed 2%, and making it clear that such result is due to the low comparison base and to bottlenecks that limit the response of supply given the recovery of spending. He/she mentioned that the president of the Federal Reserve explicitly recognized that this temporary increase in inflation does not meet the conditions to begin a reduction in the monetary stimulus. He/she pointed out that it is necessary to remember the highly accommodative nature of the new monetary policy strategy adopted by the Federal Reserve. He/she noted that, because inflation has remained persistently below 2% in the past, such institution will now allow inflation to remain moderately above 2% for some time. He/she considered that this implies that the Federal Reserve will not increase its interest rates, nor will it reduce the level of its asset purchases in a mechanical way when inflation increases beyond 2%. He/she added that the Fed pointed out that labor market conditions are not close to meeting its definition of maximum employment. Some members mentioned that central banks in some emerging economies have started to reduce their monetary stimulus. They argued that in those economies the monetary policy stance had been relaxed aggressively, leading to exchange rate or inflationary pressures. One member pointed out that the currencies of some of these economies have exhibited a significant cumulative depreciation during the year. He/she added that the rebound in inflation prompted some central banks in emerging economies to conclude their monetary easing cycle and begin increasing their reference rates. He/she mentioned that the expectation of a tighter monetary policy in economies facing inflationary pressures persists. Another member considered that such pressures are strictly local and that they should not be extrapolated to economies that have acted in a more cautious and prudent manner, such as Mexico. He/she added that the majority of central banks in emerging economies still maintain strongly accommodative monetary policy stances and are expected to continue doing so at least for the rest of register negative ex-ante real interest rates. Most members mentioned that financial markets exhibited a more stable behavior. They noted that, after having increased significantly due to the expectation of higher inflation in the United States, longer-term interest rates in that country have stabilized. They pointed out that the main stock markets registered gains, some of them reaching historically high levels. They added that the US dollar appreciation was contained. One member noted that this environment is explained by factors such as the consistency in the Federal Reserve's announcements regarding the continuation of the monetary stimulus and the economic recovery. He/she considered that looking ahead, these factors will continue to support financial markets. Some members mentioned that, since the last monetary policy decision, financial markets in emerging economies exhibited a more orderly behavior. These members noted that capital flows to these economies continued. One member pointed out that flows to fixed-income assets continued and that those to equities continued to be channeled mainly to the Chinese economy. Another member pointed out that equity markets in emerging economies registered gains, while interest rates on government bonds remained relatively stable, although with some fluctuations. Most members agreed that one of the risks for financial markets is the evolution of inflation, particularly in the United States. One member mentioned that global financing conditions could suddenly tighten as a result of an inflationary surprise in that country. In this regard, another member emphasized the uncertainty about whether inflationary pressures in the United States will be moderate and transitory, or of considerable magnitude and more persistent. He/she pointed out that the eventual reduction in asset purchases by the Federal Reserve is a risk factor for fixed-income markets. Meanwhile, one member considered that the lack of confidence in the market regarding the possibility that the Federal Reserve adopts a less accommodative policy, while still manifesting itself in recent days, has begun to decline given the consistency in the actions and the rhetoric of that institution. Some members added the risk of adjustments in the prices of certain financial assets. One member added that public and private debts, which have reached record highs, might not be sustainable. Regarding emerging economies, another member stated that the global environment implies both the benefits of a higher external demand and the risks of tighter and more volatile financial conditions. He/she specified that the fiscal stimulus in the US economy will support the recovery, which is especially important for economies that are more integrated to that economy and have smaller spending stimulus programs. Nevertheless, he/she considered that should a greater-than-expected increase in US inflation take place, interest rates would be under pressure at a global level. He/she pointed out that to the extent that this occurs, emerging economies will face greater difficulties in attracting and retaining capital, possible exchange rate adjustments, and upward pressures on yield curves. In the same vein, he/she added the challenges associated with the inclusion of China in several global fixed income indices. He/she detailed that an environment of high uncertainty prevails in financial markets due to the interaction of several unprecedented factors: i) a health-related shock, unrelated to the economic or financial cycles; ii) a highly differentiated fiscal stimulus; iii) the negative impact on global and domestic supply chains; iv) the change in the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, for which financial markets do not have direct precedents to extrapolate possible monetary policy actions, making the adjustment more volatile; and v) a heterogeneous global recovery across countries and sectors, with differences in yield curves, exchange rates, and external accounts. All members agreed that economic recovery in Mexico has been heterogeneous across sectors and regions. Most members mentioned that the pace of recovery decelerated during the first quarter of the year, due to higher levels of contagion and reimposed mobility restrictions in early 2021, as well as supply disruptions of certain inputs. Some members emphasized that economic activity showed a higher growth rate towards the end of the first quarter of the year. Some members attributed the improvement in different activity indicators following an easing of mobility restrictions to a lower number of contagions and to greater advance in the vaccination process. One member highlighted that a positive quarterly growth was registered during said period despite the halting of business activity and the aforementioned supply chain disruptions. Regarding demand, most members agreed that the recovery continues to be driven by the external sector. One member pointed out that during the first quarter of the year non-automotive manufacturing exports to the United States stood out, given that automotive exports contracted in January and February. He/she highlighted that forecasts for industrial production in the United States increased as a result of the approved fiscal stimulus, and that therefore external demand is foreseen to continue contributing significantly to Mexico’s recovery. He/she added that the external accounts reflected the relative strength of exports and the lag in the recovery of imports that led to a large trade surplus, which is estimated to decrease over the following quarters. consumption has recovered slightly, it remains below pre-pandemic levels. They highlighted that consumption has been supported by the higher confidence has been improving. One member pointed out that the recovery was faster in nondurable consumption goods, spurred by remittances, the wage bill and government transfers. He/she pointed out that, in contrast, both services consumption and consumption of domestic durable goods still show a strong contraction. Another member considered that latest data on remittances and the consumer confidence index suggests that the process of recovery of private consumption will continue over the next months. Some members highlighted the improvement, at the margin, of timely indicators related to commercial activity and consumption. Most members highlighted that investment continues to show lack of dynamism. One member stated that in February it was 7.42% below the level registered at the beginning of 2020, and that it has been weak for several years. Another member emphasized that the government has not done enough to offset the sense of uncertainty prevailing in the business sector regarding the respect for the rule of law, and that for this reason a vigorous recovery in investment is not anticipated. As for supply, all members highlighted the heterogeneous pace of recovery across sectors. One member underlined that the subsectors that continue showing a contraction of over 5% in their monthly activity with respect to pre-pandemic levels account for around 27.8% of GDP. He/she stated that in March industrial production accumulated ten months of positive monthly changes. Some members emphasized the impact of the shortage of semiconductors on the automotive industry. One member pointed out that this has diminished the performance of the industrial sector and of exports. Another member mentioned that, after leading the recovery, manufacturing contracted in January and February, although in March it performed better. He/she added that in March construction was still at levels of monthly activity that were over 8% lower than those recorded in early 2020. Most members highlighted the weakness in the services sector and the differentiated performance among its subsectors. Some members pointed out that face- to-face services continue to be significantly affected. Most members noted that the labor market has been recovering, although it still exhibits deterioration with respect to pre-pandemic levels. One member mentioned that, despite the fact that the National Survey on Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its Spanish acronym) of March shows that the labor participation rate has recovered to 58% of the population, after having fallen below 48% during the pandemic, it is still below the levels recorded in early 2020. Another member pointed out that both formal and informal employment, which between February and April million of them were added during the first quarter of the year. He/she added that by April, IMSS-insured jobs were at levels 2.6% lower than those registered in February 2020. Some members noted that the asymmetric recovery across sectors and types of jobs has been unfavorable in terms of gender, affecting women to a greater extent than men. One member argued that the sectors that expanded the most are related to industry, which has allowed employment among men to recover, while the slowdown in services has made the labor recovery among women more difficult. He/she detailed that, since educational activities remain in distancelearning format, the unpaid workload for women has increased, which could considerably amplify labor gender inequality. Most members pointed out that there is still slack in the economy. Some members pointed out that the underemployment rate is 14%, a figure twice the level normally observed. One member highlighted that the output gap is estimated to be of around 6%. Another member underlined that slack conditions in January and February are estimated to have widened slightly, and to have resumed a decreasing trajectory as of March. He/she added that slack in the labor market remains ample and, over the following months, additional direct and indirect effects will be incorporated as a result of the reform to the Federal Labor Law on the subject of outsourcing. Some members noted that, considering the economic contraction of 2020, ample slack conditions are foreseen for the economy as a whole, with significant differences across sectors. One member argued that, due to the pandemic’s impact, measuring economic slack poses significant challenges, given that estimates of potential GDP and the Nonaccelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment that, in view of a considerable economic contraction, potential GDP is probably overestimated, which suggests a less negative output gap. Similarly, he/she noted that the open unemployment rate could be an inadequate indicator to illustrate a labor imbalance. Indeed, estimating the natural employment rate using the open unemployment rate has turned it into an irrelevant and dangerously mistaken reference. With an economy that is extremely weak it would seem that the open unemployment rate lies below the level of the natural unemployment rate, which is counterintuitive after observing the situation of economic activity. He/she stated that, in order to adequately calibrate the labor market’s pressures onto prices, a metric is needed which corrects for the structural changes experienced by the population that is economically inactive but available for work, as a result of the pandemic. Most members highlighted that higher growth is foreseen for the year and that growth forecasts for 2021 have been adjusted upwards. They mentioned that this stems from the fact that the recovery rate is anticipated to accelerate driven by the strength of external demand. Some members mentioned advances in the vaccination process. One member noted the gradual reopening of economic activities and another member added that recently the economy has performed better than expected. Most members agreed that the balance of risks for growth has improved and that it is now more equilibrated. Among risks to the upside, they mentioned a possible increase in external demand, given the improved outlook for world growth. One member added the possibility of observing greater revenues from remittances. He/she added that a greater external demand combined with the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) could stimulate investment. Some members underlined the possibility of greater progress in the vaccination program. Among risks on the downside, most members highlighted those related to the evolution of the pandemic, along with possible delays in the vaccination campaign. One member added the volatility in financial markets and the negative impact on input supply chains. Another member mentioned the risk associated with the next electoral process due to a renewed environment of risk aversion. All members mentioned that annual headline inflation increased significantly and more than highlighted that this increase mainly resulted from the effect of a low comparison base for energy prices. Most members added that pressures on commodity prices and cost-related pressures also contributed to the above. One member highlighted the outsized increase in the prices of some specific products and emphasized that the increase in inflation does not imply a generalized increase in all prices. Most members pointed out that an increase in inflation had already been anticipated. One member noted that the level of April had not been recorded since December 2017. Some members considered that inflation continues to be impacted by pandemicrelated effects. One member stated that changes in the consumption basket have implied that there are distortions in the measurement of inflation. Most members mentioned that the component which exerted the most pressure on headline inflation in April was non-core inflation, which registered 12.3%. One member underlined that this level is the highest since late 2017. Another member emphasized that it is the second highest on record in the last 20 years. He/she noted that between January atypically low values, below the mean of the last ten years, and that a reversal had thus been anticipated for some time. Most members highlighted the arithmetic effect of energy prices. Some members emphasized a greater-than-estimated increase in these goods’ prices. One member noted that, between April 2020 and April 2021, gasoline prices rose 35%, mainly due to a low comparison base. Another member pointed out the disproportionate increase in LP gas prices and in the prices of certain agricultural and livestock product prices. Most members noted that in April the core component registered 4.13%. Some members underlined that it exceeded the upper limit of the variability interval. Regarding its components, most members indicated that merchandise inflation remains the main source of pressure, particularly non-food merchandise inflation. Some members mentioned that food merchandise inflation decreased, although one member stated that it remained high. Another member pointed out the economy confronts an acceleration in the prices of non-food merchandise, mainly those sensitive to energy prices and to the exchange rate. Most members noted that services inflation has increased. One member highlighted that, although tourism services’ inflation and food related services inflation rose in light of a certain reopening of activities, housing and education services’ inflation continued to decline. Another member mentioned the pressures on merchandise prices, which were only partially offset by the lower pressures on services prices. Some members mentioned that super core inflation remains around 3%, suggesting that pressures on prices do not derive from the cyclical position of the economy. One member added that indicators which exclude extreme price variations show that price increases of a wide range of products are being contained by the economic slack. He/she noted that the median of core inflation in April was below 3.25% and therefore half of the products that make up this index registered inflation rates below said level. He/she added that 30% of goods and services in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) registered inflation rates below 2%. He/she thus considered that inflation is contained and that its recent increases do not imply a generalized increase in prices, but rather they respond to contextual factors or to specific goods. Another member considered that a measurement problem is being confronted, which leads to a loss of perspective about the inflationary phenomenon and the slack conditions. The weak response of inflation to economic slack that is observed in the data could be the result of distortions in the estimation of potential output and the output gap. If the potential output is overestimated, in reality the output gap is less negative than is suggested by the gap measured in the traditional way, and slack conditions are not as ample as they seem. He/she added that if that were so then the gap, as traditionally measured, and core inflation are not consistent with each other. He/she warned that this explains, in part, the weak response of prices to the phase of the economic cycle. Moreover, he/she added that the distortions in the estimation of the NAIRU based on the open unemployment rate lead to the equivocal conclusion that the open unemployment rate lies below the estimate of the natural unemployment rate, which would imply inflationary pressures. Some members mentioned that the pandemic generated significant adjustments in price formation. They highlighted the reassignment of household spending, which enabled a change in relative prices in favor of goods and against services. One member added that the shutdown of the economy led to problems in supply chains and generated additional costs for firms that had to adapt in an environment of greater social distancing. He/she added the historical fall in energy prices that has resulted in the base effect observed in 2021. He/she considered that even though these supply shocks continue to affect domestic inflation, they are expected to be transitory. expectations for 2021 rose and those for the medium and long terms remained stable at levels above the 3% target. One member noted that this is in line with the transitory nature of the recent increase in inflation. He/she mentioned several surveys in which inflation expectations for the following 12 months and for the end of 2022 remain at around 3%. Another member highlighted that expectations for the end of 2021 are above the 3% target and those for 12 months and the end of 2022 remain stable and below the levels observed in other inflationary episodes. He/she added that during such episodes, short-term expectations had been more susceptible to being affected by inflationary shocks, because, due to their nature, they are highly sensitive to observed data, which does not necessarily imply a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. One member underlined that inflation expectations for 2022 collected by Banco de México have remained above stated that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments are at levels close to 3%. However, some members noted that they have increased at the margin. One member mentioned that, for the 1-10 year average, inflation expectations were at 3.1%. Another member stated that breakeven inflation premia decreased marginally for the 10- and 30-year nodes, which suggests that the market also estimates that the current pressures are transitory. All members pointed out that the revised forecasts for headline and core inflation display short-term levels above those published in the Quarterly Report October-December 2020, but converge to the 3% target starting in the second quarter of 2022. Most members pointed out that inflationary pressures are expected to be transitory. One member emphasized that the arithmetic effects associated with the fall in energy prices last year, will continue to affect annual inflation rates for some time. He/she added that, although the most recent annual variations have been above the expected, a turning point in the evolution of inflation is foreseen in April. Another member stated that a higher non-core inflation is anticipated due to adjustments in the inflation trajectories of livestock and agricultural products as well as energy products. He/she added that a higher core inflation is also expected due to the increase in merchandise and services prices, which should be partially offset by a greater appreciation of the Mexican peso. One member noted that core inflation is expected to start decreasing as of the third quarter of the year. Another member considered that the expected trajectory of this component remains highly uncertain. Among the upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the possibility of external inflationary pressures, cost-related pressures or a reallocation of spending, as well as possible episodes of exchange rate depreciation. One member pointed out that increases in transportation costs and logistics issues in production chains contribute to increase the prices of imported inputs. persistence of core inflation. One member pointed out that this has been observed despite the tight monetary policy stance implemented prior to the pandemic and ample slack conditions during the COVID-19 emergency. Some members pointed out the rise in commodity prices as an additional risk. One member noted that expectations of an appreciation of the Mexican peso appear to be optimistic and may be reversed due to external and internal factors, which would generate pressures that could further divert the foreseen trajectory of inflation. Likewise, he/she pointed out that the foreseen trajectory for core inflation remains highly uncertain, given that the impact on the composition of expenditure may persist to the extent that the pandemic continues and mobility restrictions are maintained. Most members warned about the impact of production, which would exert upward pressure on non-core inflation. Some members foresee inflationary pressures on services prices as health restrictions are lifted. One member added that this would lead to the fading of the favorable effect that services inflation has had in offsetting the high levels of merchandise inflation. Another member added the risk of the deterioration of inflation expectations hindering the accelerated decline in inflation and its convergence to the target in the time frame envisaged. He/she considered that upward risks will be present in the short and medium terms. One member expressed his/her view that the delay of said convergence could lead to a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, which are already above the upper limit of the variability interval. mentioned the effects stemming from the negative output gap. One member highlighted the risk of greater social distancing measures and the possibility of an exchange rate appreciation. Another member noted that the risk of exchange rate depreciation has decreased due to the improvement in financial markets. He/she added that gasoline prices have stabilized in line with the federal government's pricing policy and that, therefore, looking ahead, their contribution to inflation will be more limited. Most members considered that the balance of risks that might affect the anticipated path for inflation within the forecast horizon is biased to the upside. One member stated that this bias is clear given the behavior of inflation and its expectations. He/she added that the risks for noncore inflation are also biased to the upside due to: i) the possibility of supply shocks associated with a lower availability of fuels; ii) negative impact on livestock and agricultural production; and iii) demand-related pressures, driven by the increase in consumption and the reactivation of the US economy. Another member mentioned that the balance of risks for headline inflation has deteriorated. One member considered that, on balance, beyond the increase that can be anticipated for the end-of-year figure, inflation risks are relatively stable. financial markets have exhibited a more stable behavior. One member considered that this is due to improved expectations for economic growth in Mexico and worldwide. Another member stated that the Federal Reserve has been categorical in conveying its monetary policy message, contributing to an orderly adjustment of markets. He/she added that the risks for financial markets observed at the time of the previous monetary policy decision have been dissipating. The majority of members noted that the Mexican considered that this reflects a greater appetite for risk worldwide and the greater weakness of the US dollar. He/she highlighted that the Mexican currency performed more favorably than other emerging market currencies. He/she added that in some economies aggressive monetary easing cycles have put their exchange rates under stress, which required substantial interventions to stabilize their value. Despite this, he/she noted that some of these currencies have depreciated significantly this year. He/she stated that, in contrast, the Mexican peso has shown less volatility, a moderate cumulative depreciation, and has not required exchange-rate interventions. He/she considered that this should be attributed to a responsible macroeconomic framework and a prudent approach to monetary policy. However, he/she pointed out that the positive behavior of the Mexican peso could be affected by episodes of volatility stemming from the dynamics of the US long-term bond market or the upcoming electoral process in Mexico. Most members mentioned that foreign investors' holdings of government bonds continued to decline. Some members noted that foreign investors have shown preference for Asian economies’ assets. One member pointed out that, over the past eighteenth months, China has absorbed two-thirds of the fixed-income flows to emerging economies. He/she considered that while this adjustment associated with China’s inclusion in global fixedincome indices may be transitory, while weights in investment portfolios are recalibrated, the lack of participation of foreign investors in Mexico’s primary auctions for government securities continues to stand out. Another member noted that nominal government bond yields increased, in a context of deteriorated trading conditions and limited interest for this type of assets by foreign and local investors, who have shown caution given the external and domestic conditions. In this regard, he/she highlighted the uncertainty about the monetary policy actions that the Federal Reserve may take and, at the margin, a decrease in the liability management operations by the Ministry of Finance (SHCP). One member mentioned that a steepening of the yield curve has been observed, given expectations of higher inflation in the United States. He/she argued that this has been reflected in lower risk appetite and in capital outflows. He/she noted that so far these outflows have occurred under conditions that have allowed for an orderly adjustment of rates and the exchange rate. He/she added that the surplus observed in the balance of payments’ current account has served to accommodate the outflows, while the banking sector has absorbed the reduction in foreigners' holdings due to the search for investment options to replace the lower credit placement. He/she considered that this situation may change in view of the expected reversal of the current account surplus and the limits of banks' absorption capacity, especially in view of an eventual improvement in credit placement. Another member stated that the equity market continued to show capital inflows and that, in view of the greater stability of financial markets, the sovereign risk premium decreased. He/she pointed out that the yield curve in Mexico exhibited a mixed behavior, with a decrease in the short end and increases in the medium and long ends. One member added that the interest rate on 10-year bonds registered fluctuations, reaching levels below 6.5%. Regarding the stock market, most members noted that the Mexican IPC index registered gains. One member stated that this was due to a positive balance in the corporate reporting season. The majority of members noted that financing to the private sector continues to decline and that credit standards have worsened. Some members stated that credit to firms continues to decrease and expressed concern regarding this situation. One member mentioned that this has been observed for four consecutive quarters. He/she added that, in terms of its annual variation, consumer credit has fallen in practically all of its segments. Some members stated that only housing credit showed positive growth. One member pointed out that in March, credit to Small and Medium-sized Enterprises He/she added that according to Banco de México’s Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish acronym), it has become more difficult to obtain credit from commercial banks. Another member noted that the intermediation margins of interest rates to firms remain at higher levels than prior to the pandemic. One member mentioned that delinquency rates remain at relatively low levels. He/she stated that, in terms of resource use, public sector financing dominates, while credit to the private sector remains deteriorated, despite the decline in interest rates. Some members pointed out that firms' and households' demand for liquidity persists. One member considered that this is due to precautionary reasons. Another member added that domestic sources continued to expand, while external sources continue showing lack of dynamism. All members agreed to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%. This, considering the inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target. They highlighted that the recent shocks that have affected the evolution of inflation pose challenges for the implementation of monetary policy, so that the adjustment in relative prices takes place in an orderly manner, and so that an impact on the members emphasized that in a highly uncertain environment such as the current one, a prudent approach is required. Finally, they reiterated that, looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on One member highlighted the complex environment for monetary policy. He/she pointed out that the effects of supply, demand and financial shocks associated with the pandemic are still being confronted. In this context, he/she considered that in small open emerging economies, which need to supplement their domestic savings with external sources of financing, it is even more important to maintain a solid macroeconomic environment that attracts capital and fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy. In this regard, he/she mentioned that monetary policy should contribute to such adjustment by maintaining inflation low and around its target, containing increases in risk premia and in mediumand long-term interest rates, as well as the exchange rate adjustment. He/she pointed out that the recent shocks that have affected inflation imply greater challenges for monetary policy implementation, in order to ensure that the adjustment of relative prices is orderly and to avoid affecting the price formation process and inflation expectations. For this reason, it is necessary for Banco de México to maintain a prudent monetary policy stance that favors a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation towards the 3% target. Another member stated that, despite the significant progress in counteracting the pandemic and its effects on the economy, important risks and challenges prevail. He/she noted that the supply shocks that have occurred are expected to be transitory. Consequently, he/she emphasized that it is important to reflect on monetary policy’s response capacity to this type of events, especially when inflationary pressures do not seem to arise from aggregate demand. In this context, he/she mentioned that the central bank needs to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored so that these shocks do not lead to second-round effects. In this regard, he/she pointed out that although very shortterm inflation expectations have deteriorated, medium- and long-term expectations remain stable, which indicates that, as a whole, they are anchored. Finally, he/she emphasized the importance of paying special attention to the evolution of commodity and services prices, with the aim of guaranteeing the convergence of inflation to its goal. One member stated that for this monetary policy decision, in addition to the economic and financial information available, there are other factors that gain relevance, such as the high sensitivity of Mexican assets to financial conditions in the United States, the decline of government bond holdings by the foreign sector, which has affected local market conditions, and a more intense competition for investor’s resources, who have revealed a growing interest in Asian markets. He/she added that domestic factors could compromise the convergence of inflation towards the target within the horizon in which monetary policy operates. In this regard, he/she referred to the risks for headline and non-core inflation. He/she argued that the observed tightening in financial conditions, despite the reduction in the reference rate and weak fiscal support, reduces the room for maneuver for monetary policy. He/she stated that the monetary policy statement should communicate clearly that with this decision there will be space to update the projections based on available information and take the necessary actions to achieve a downward, sustained and convergent inflation trajectory. This is due to the risk that since the last monetary policy decision, inflation expectations could be contaminated, which could affect the effectiveness of monetary policy and undermine the credibility of the commitment to price stability. He/she noted that the prudent monetary policy approach that has been followed, allows the Mexican economy to be in a better position to face the challenges of the economic recovery. Another member noted that the current economic cycle is not a traditional one, with unusual effects for decision making. He/she mentioned that several unobservable indicators, such as the output gap, the NAIRU rate, and the neutral real rate are biased and present challenges for their adequate interpretation. He/she stated that the real neutral rate was estimated to be around 2.6%, but because of the pandemic, it probably decreased, and thus the space for lowering the reference rate would be larger than currently considered. However, he/she added that there is uncertainty regarding this indicator and that it is necessary to wait for sufficient information in order to be able to make reliable estimates and act with certainty. He/she pointed out that there is an inconsistency in the level of the real interest rate, since if it is very high, it should, by inhibiting economic activity, have a beneficial effect on inflation. However, if the negative output gap is less wide than estimated, a higher real rate would be needed to lower core inflation. He/she mentioned that this is somewhat contradictory considering Mexico’s current situation. For this reason, it is necessary to be more analytic and careful of the current circumstances and of its implications for monetary policy. Given all of the above, he/she pointed out that a pause is necessary to unravel the distortions in the economic information and to act with greater certainty. He/she argued that given the passivity of fiscal support in the face of the severe economic recession, monetary support is more than necessary. However, he/she considered that due to the adverse outlook for inflation, with a balance of risks biased to the upside, and to the uncertainty in the economic parameters, the reference rate should be maintained at its current levels for as long as necessary. The above in order to guarantee the convergence, recompose expectations and reaffirm the priority mandate of price stability, since otherwise it will be difficult to grant greater stimuli. One member mentioned that it is important to understand that global and domestic inflationary pressures are mainly of a transitory nature, which implies that monetary policy stances should not necessarily be tightened in light of such pressures, but rather they should focus on avoiding inflation expectations from becoming contaminated or second-round effects on price setting from taking place. He/she added that the global economy is very fragile after more than a year of being affected by the pandemic. He/she considered that the economic recovery is still incipient and cannot be jeopardized, since this could deteriorate the growth and financial indicators’ outlook. He/she stated that interrupting the global or domestic economic recovery could result in significant and lasting damage. For this reason, he/she considered it important to maintain, as far as possible, an accommodative monetary policy stance for as long as necessary. He/she mentioned that in the case of Mexico this would allow for the recovery of consumption and investment, which are the most affected aggregate demand components. He/she pointed out that this would also allow maintaining appropriate conditions for the recovery of credit, especially to SMEs, which are the entities that require it the most in order to survive or expand. In this regard, he/she emphasized that the message that this Central Institute should send is one of caution and at the same time, it should contribute to reassure the markets through a better understanding of the nature of the current economic situation. In a highly uncertain environment, the risks for inflation, economic activity and financial markets pose major challenges for monetary policy. Given the recent shocks that have affected inflation, it is necessary for the adjustment in relative prices to take place in an orderly manner so that an impact on price formation and inflation expectations is avoided. With the presence of all its members, the Governing Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%. This, considering the abovementioned inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target. Looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on its expectations. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions based on incoming information in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional framework, strengthen the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Galia Borja-Gómez, Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Gerardo Esquivel Hernández and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%.