The majority pointed out that global economic activity continues to strengthen, mainly because of vaccine availability and stimulus spending. They added that the economic recovery has been heterogeneous across countries, highlighting that China and the United States continue leading the global recovery. One member highlighted the improvement in Europe due to the process of reopening in several countries, while in Japan weak conditions prevail due to new confinement measures. He/she noted that emerging economies show a greater heterogeneity because of the upsurge of infections in some regions and a reduced room to provide additional stimuli. He/she added that ample slack conditions prevail in most economies. In this regard, some members stated that the recovery is still incomplete. One member considered that a complete recovery is still far from being attained and highlighted that several productive sectors, and especially employment, still remain below prepandemic levels. Another member pointed out that unemployment in middle- and low-income countries continues to be much higher than it was before the pandemic, with significant differences across sectors and by gender, with older women being the most affected. He/she mentioned that emerging economies continue facing obstacles to achieve a significant and sustained recovery. The majority noted the upward adjustment in global growth forecasts, which is expected to continue to be supported mainly by the recovery in the United States and China. One member mentioned that the world economy is expected to grow faster in 2021 than in the last 48 years. Another member pointed out that the current recovery is foreseen to be the fastest since World War II. As for risks, some members mentioned those associated with the pandemic. One member added the risk of continued disruptions in production chains, which is anticipated until there is a complete normalization of activities around the world. The majority mentioned that global inflation continued increasing as a result of pressures on various commodity prices, base effects, and bottlenecks in production. Some members added labor market pressures and higher transportation costs. The majority pointed out that in some economies inflation is above the targets of their respective central banks. They noted that in the United States, the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation reached 5% in May, the highest expectations are at high levels worldwide. One member highlighted that while market expectations in advanced economies have recently declined, they remain at higher levels than those recorded in 2019. Another member stated that in the United States, 2- year inflation expectations have been above 3% over the last weeks. Some members pointed out that inflation pressures are expected to be transitory. One member said that this perception is shared among international organizations, central banks and analysts, and that it is reflected in the implied trajectory according to various market instruments. He/she argued that this derives from the fact that the base effects are expected to fade, that the observed increases in international commodity prices are expected to stabilize and even revert, and that the pressures that are currently present in certain markets are expected to ease, in view of an eventual response from supply. The majority highlighted the risk of supply chain disruptions being longer-lasting than anticipated and inflationary pressures being more persistent than anticipated. One member stated that, although these disruptions are considered to be transitory, a permanent destruction of the production capacity of certain links in global chains cannot be ruled out. He/she noted that, in such scenario, the shortage of inputs would have more serious and lasting consequences, exerting significant pressures on inflation. He/she added that, if the Federal Reserve normalizes its monetary policy more rapidly, this would exacerbate volatility in financial markets and accentuate inflationary pressures, especially in emerging economies. Some members added the presence of inflationary pressures stemming from the recovery of demand in the face of large fiscal stimuli, especially in the United States. One member considered that the balance of risks for global inflation has started to deteriorate. Another member emphasized that the effects associated with the pandemic are unprecedented and that their impact on economic activity and inflation is very uncertain. He/she added that the rate of infections and vaccine availability have been significant determinants of consumer confidence and labor markets. He/she pointed out that the disruptions caused by the pandemic are very different from those observed in other crises, and therefore it has been more complex to identify their short- and medium-term effects. In this regard, he/she mentioned that economic activity and inflation forecasts have not fully captured the challenges of the current situation. One member stated that the risk of a higher-than-expected inflation seems to have started to mitigate given the recent adjustments in commodity prices, food prices in particular. He/she mentioned that other sources of concern regarding the risk of higher inflation, such as disruptions in supply chains, higher freight costs, and labor market pressures are associated with unusual operating conditions caused by the pandemic. He/she sustained that it can be foreseen that as the normalization of activities continues, the operating conditions will also improve and wage pressures will begin to fade as a result of increases in labor supply. The majority highlighted that the central banks of stimulus unchanged. One considered that less monetary stimuli are expected in the medium term. The majority pointed out that in the Federal forecasts for inflation and economic growth increased, as well as the expectations for the federal funds rate. One member noted that the president of that central bank emphasized that some of the communication tools used, such as the socalled dot-plot, did not represent a decision or a plan of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Most members added that such institution has begun to analyze an eventual reduction in its asset purchases. In this regard, some members mentioned that any change will be announced in a timely manner in order to avoid sharp adjustments in financial markets. Some members emphasized that the Federal Reserve will maintain its current policy stance until the economy has made substantial further progress towards meeting its objectives. One member mentioned that it is important to remember that the Federal Reserve policy stance remains highly accommodative. He/she recalled that, although the members of its committee acknowledged an increase in inflation, they attributed said increase to transitory factors and reiterated that risks to economic recovery persist. He/she sustained that, even after incorporating the recent changes in the members’ projections, the interest rate would remain at very low levels, at least, until the end of policy framework, he/she considered that it has allowed it to achieve historically low levels of real interest rates. He/she stated that this implies that it has successfully dealt with the problems associated with the lower limit of the reference rate, without affecting long-term inflation expectations and achieving a greater stimulus. As to the possibility of an anticipated tightening of monetary conditions, he/she considered it improbable that the Federal Reserve would act hastily, as it would affect the economic recovery. He/she mentioned that said entity has been very consistent in its narrative and highly coherent in its actions, and therefore it is unlikely that the withdrawal of monetary stimulus will occur before there are clear signs of a large and inclusive economic recovery. He/she mentioned that the above is compatible with analysts’ expectations. Some members mentioned that given the increases in inflation and its expectations, central banks in some emerging economies have adopted less accommodative policy stances. One member said that given the inflationary pressures, some monetary authorities are expected to continue withdrawing the stimulus. Another member stated that in most emerging economies monetary policy stances are foreseen to remain highly accommodative. He/she argued that although there are some cases where higher policy rates are expected towards the end of is close to zero or in which adjustments are explained by idiosyncratic factors. He/she added that in most of these economies real interest rates remain in negative terrain, even in those that are currently undergoing significant deviations of inflation from their target. He/she highlighted that this is partly due to the fact that inflationary pressures are considered to be transitory and that the increase in international commodity prices is a dominant factor on inflation in these economies, and therefore monetary policy cannot do much to counteract such pressures. All members noted that after the Federal international financial markets exhibited some volatility. However, the majority considered that, in general, these markets have performed favorably. They highlighted the increases in equity markets, with some of them reaching all- time highs, as well as some stability in the foreign exchange and government securities’ markets. Some members highlighted the flattening of the US yield curve. One member mentioned that such flattening incorporates the expectation of higher-than previously anticipated increases in shortterm interest rates, which contributes to lower inflation expectations and inflation risk premia for longer-term rates. Some members highlighted that the latter exhibited some volatility. One member considered that, looking ahead, global financial conditions will continue to be favored by the Federal Reserve’s accommodative policy stance. As for emerging economies, some members said that the global environment implies a higher external demand for these economies, as well as higher inflationary risks. One member added that said environment also implies financial conditions that could be tighter and more volatile for these economies. He/she pointed out that as interest rates rise along the US yield curve, these economies will face greater difficulties in attracting and retaining capital, as well as exchange rate adjustments and pressures on short- and long-term interest rates. He/she stressed the challenges that each economy faces because of the evolution of the pandemic and the social effects that this has implied, as well as their macroeconomic characteristics. Another member highlighted that capital flows to fixed income assets in emerging economies registered moderate inflows, mainly to China, while those to equity assets registered moderate mixed flows. Most members considered the possibility of risk for global financial markets. One member pointed out that this would lead to an earlier-thanexpected tightening of monetary policy, which could compromise economic recovery. Another member added that central baseline scenarios for the global economy show a greater recovery, although differentiated among countries, with uncertain effects on inflation and financial markets that are prone to generate episodes of volatility. He/she stated that high uncertainty prevails in financial markets, which is associated with the levels of inflation in the United States, its outlook, and its implications for the yield curve. He/she also stated that, according to surveys among investors, an additional risk for financial markets is a possible monetary policy mistake in that country. The majority of members highlighted that the Mexican economy recovered notably in March and moderated in April. One member noted that advances in the vaccination process have supported the reactivation of the economy. Another member emphasized that, although economic activity continues to improve, its recovery is still fragile and partial and the economy is far from its potential. As for demand, most members agreed that the recovery. In this regard, one member highlighted the reactivation of external demand, especially that from the United States. Another member pointed out that manufacturing exports, particularly automotive exports, continued to perform well. One member mentioned that external accounts show an increase in imports and a reduction in the trade balance surplus. Most members stated that, although investment and consumption have improved, they still remain below their pre-pandemic levels. One member expressed his/her concern about the weakness and the particularly low levels of investment, while another member emphasized that this will affect economic recovery. One member mentioned that private consumption had an annual variation of -0.7% in March. Another member highlighted that it is 6% below the highest level reached in 2019. One member highlighted the weakness exhibited by consumption of domestic services and semi-durable goods. Some members noted that several indicators, such as consumer confidence, the real wage bill and remittances, have improved and have supported consumption. One member considered that these indicators suggest that the recovery of consumption will continue in the following months. Regarding supply, the majority of members highlighted the heterogeneous behavior of different sectors. They noted that industrial production, particularly manufacturing, has been semiconductors, especially in the automotive sector. One member mentioned that, as a result, the latter has continued to operate below its installed capacity. Another member noted that industrial activity was also affected by the loss of dynamism in construction. Most members noted that tertiary activities continued to recover, albeit with high heterogeneity across subsectors. One member added that trade-related activities have continued to improve, although he/she explained that their recovery continues to be slow. Another member stated that services are expected to continue recovering. However, he/she noted that accommodation and food services and arts, entertainment and recreation remain considerably affected. Most members noted that the labor market continues to recover, although it remains deteriorated vis-à-vis its pre-pandemic levels. participation rate increased in April. One member pointed out that it stood at 59.02%, a level higher than that of March, although below its pre-pandemic levels. He/she stated that in severe crises, it is the number of firms that go bankrupt what directly affects employment. In this regard, he/she mentioned that it is worrisome that from May 2019 to September 2020, over 20% of all the firms in the country closed, which contrasts with an increase in firm creation of only business closures of 21.2% and a rate of firm creation of only 2.8%. Another member explained that, after contracting by 12.5 million between February and April 2020, formal and informal employment had recovered by 11.5 million in April to the labor market during the first four months of the year. He/she added that, as of May 2021, IMSSinsured jobs were 2.45% below the levels of February 2020. However, some members noted that currently it is at almost twice the usually observed level. One member underlined that the unemployment rate increased to 4.65% in April, which represents 2.7 million people. He/she added that this occurs in a context in which the Economically Active Population rose, reflecting the incorporation of both more employed persons and more people seeking employment. Another member noted that the Non- economically Active Population still includes around two million people available for employment above its pre-pandemic levels. One member highlighted that disaggregated data by sector and gender reinforce the outlook of an uneven and weak recovery of the labor market. Most members stated that slack conditions are foreseen to persist in the economy as a whole. Some members highlighted the sharp differences between sectors. One member noted that slack is expected to diminish gradually. Another member noted that the negative output gap continues to be above 4% and is not expected to close before 2023. Most members highlighted that, according to the Central Institute's forecasts, growth is expected to reach 6% in 2021 and 3% in 2022. One member noted that the dynamics of the growth rate for 2021 are partly due to a rebound effect generated by last year’s contraction. Some members stated that the recovery would be driven by the strength of external demand, advances in the vaccination process, and the reopening of activities. One member mentioned that differences between sectors are expected to continue. Some members pointed out that the balance of risks for growth is equilibrated. One member stated that the risks described in the Quarterly Report January-March 2021 persist. Another member emphasized that the pandemic continues to be the most important challenge for economic activity. He/she added that Mexico’s COVID-19 traffic light monitoring system has recently reversed in some states, which indicates that there is still uncertainty about the recovery. The majority of members pointed out that inflation in Mexico continues to be affected by the direct and indirect effects of the pandemic. They mentioned that inflationary pressures are associated with base effects, as in the case of energy prices, with reallocation of spending, with international commodity prices, and with other supply pressures. Regarding the latter, one member stated that, in response to such pressures, the prices of wheat, corn and soybean by-products have increased. He/she added that the reallocation of spending generated an increase in mobile phone and internet services’ prices. Some members mentioned that base effects, changes in consumption patterns, and increases in commodity prices, which explain the increase in inflation, are of a transitory nature. Most members noted that inflation has been affected by supply pressures. One member stated that the prices of intermediate goods have increased considerably, which was reflected in the producer price index with increases that have not been observed in a long time and also highlighted the possibility of additional supply shocks, such as the observed pressures on the prices of basic food items. Another member pointed out that factors such as the differentiated reopening of activities across countries and sectors has had an impact on the provision of inputs, transportation and inventory management, leading to bottlenecks in production. He/she added that production costs have also increased due to the new sanitary and social distancing requirements in production processes, and the lower availability of labor. He/she added that suppliers of goods and services have shown a lower response capacity, as well as delays and product shortages. He/she argued that, due to the pandemic, supply has less capacity to absorb the growth in demand without exerting pressures on prices. One member considered that, due to the unprecedented nature of the crisis, it is difficult to foresee the size and duration of supplyrelated pressures and their interaction with demand patterns. In this context, most members mentioned that headline inflation has been close to 6% and that it is significantly above Banco de México’s target. One member argued that the current levels are due to the significant price changes that a reduced number of products have registered and, therefore, in his/her view, the 6% increase is far from being generalized. He/she noted that some prices that had registered the highest increases have already started to stabilize. Regarding non-core inflation, some members mentioned that it was affected by a decrease in energy inflation and by upward pressures on livestock and agricultural product prices. One member pointed out that the latter have undergone pressures from adverse weather events and from a strong increase in their demand. Another member noted that non-core inflation has gone from 2.6% in January to double-digit levels since April. Most members highlighted the rise in core inflation, which is associated with the increase in services inflation and the persistently high levels expressed their concern about core inflation’s resistance to decline. They explained that since May trended upwards. One member emphasized that the core component has shown persistence despite the ample slack conditions. He/she noted that non-food merchandise inflation remains high, while food merchandise inflation increased. He/she added that an upward trend can be observed in the core component, which is foreseen to continue for several months. Another member highlighted that, while between April 2018 and February 2021, core inflation had not exceeded 4%, since March it has remained above that level. He/she argued that this component faces problems that go beyond base effects. He/she noted that, when controlling for seasonal effects, monthly inflation has increased rapidly in a considerable proportion of merchandises and services. He/she explained that the prices of certain merchandises, such as clothing and footwear, have been adjusted upwards to recover from the low profit margins registered during the pandemic. One member stated that the prices of 75% of merchandises are increasing at a rate of over 4% and show annual variations of around 6% as a whole. Most members noted that, with the reopening of activities, services inflation has reversed the downward trend it had shown during most of 2020. One member mentioned that it has increased consistently since the beginning of 2021. Another member added that this change in trend is a risk to inflation given that the depressed demand so far has contributed to contain price increases in this item. As the economy opens during the post-pandemic period, more pressures on these prices will be observed, derived from new consumption patterns. This same member indicated that, although supercore inflation remains on target, it is an analytical concept that needs to be taken with caution. He/she recalled that it is interpreted as the one that responds more to the economic cycle. He/she mentioned that its current level of 3.1% indicates that, since the economy remained in the contraction part of the cycle for almost 3 years, the pressure on prices that are more susceptible to cyclical factors is low. However, he/she stated that this indicator does not show a level compatible with the inflation target, given that it only reflects 35% of the generic items of core inflation. He/she added that supercore inflation would have to show a higher level, in view of a higher economic growth rate, even if the latter were due to a base effect. expectations for the end of 2021 increased once expectations remained stable at levels above the 3% target. Some members mentioned that shortterm expectations are the most sensitive to the observed data. One member indicated that inflation levels above those anticipated contributed to the increase in inflation expectations for this year and the next one. Some members highlighted that, based on different surveys, the median of expectations for the next 12 months remains close to 3%. One member added that said median even decreased gradually and is close to the target. He/she added that, although inflation expectations drawn from market instruments increased at the margin, they are still within the variability interval, which suggests that markets anticipate that the inflation increase will be transitory. In turn, another member detailed that in Banco de México’s latest survey, specialists assigned a probability of 54% to inflation locating above 5.1% at the end of 2021, and a probability of contradicts the projection that the target would be attained in mid-2022. In addition, he/she specified that, after new inflation data for June are released, analysts are anticipated to assign an even higher probability of inflation locating very much above the target level this year and the following one. incorporating the recent behavior of inflation, the new expected trajectories for headline and core inflation for the following quarters are higher than those published in the Quarterly Report January–March 2021. He/she added that headline inflation is forecast to lie around the 3% target in the third quarter of 2022. One member recalled that, in the monetary policy release of May, headline and core inflation were anticipated to converge to the target in the second quarter of 2022. He/she added that in the Quarterly Report January-March 2021 it was stressed that the central forecast scenario for inflation excluded additional pressures and that their materialization would imply a more adverse scenario for inflation. He/she pointed out that, in the updated inflation forecast, the convergence of headline inflation to its target would be delayed until the third quarter of 2022 and that core inflation’s convergence would also take longer. Some members highlighted that, since the previous monetary policy decision, the inflation trajectory for the following eight quarters has been revised significantly upwards. One member underlined that the central proposition of the last Quarterly Report and of many analysts is that the current inflationary pressures generated by shocks and the arithmetic effect derived from a low base of comparison are transitory, and thus they should begin to dissipate over the next twelve months. However, skepticism persists over the possibility of inflation converging to the target starting in the second quarter of next year. The aforementioned due to the high uncertainty and to a balance of risks for inflation biased to the upside. He/she expressed his/her concern about the magnitude of the deviation from previous forecasts being observed once again, in particular, regarding the convergence of inflation to its target. Inflation expectations could deteriorate given a continuous adjustment of the forecasts towards higher inflation. pressures are anticipated to be transitory. Some members highlighted the moderation in energy prices, the stabilization in international commodity prices, and that the effects related to reallocation of spending are one-off. One member mentioned the fading of increases in agricultural and livestock product prices. Another member mentioned that inflation dynamics in Mexico followed the global upward trend, although more noticeably. He/she pointed out that a reversal in the inflation trend starting from May had already been previously expected, due to the fading of base effects. Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that, after considering the most recent data, currently a new rebound in inflation is anticipated, which may continue until August or September, due to unanticipated factors, different from the base effect. He/she highlighted that, unlike other emerging economies, the increase in inflation in Mexico between January and May largely responded to structural factors. One member pointed out that, in line with the new forecasts, a very significant base effect could be observed during the fourth quarter of activity is estimated to moderate in 2022, coinciding in general terms with the moment in which some base effects of inflation will fade. Among upward risks to inflation, most members highlighted the possibility of a higher external inflation, high persistence of core inflation, episodes of exchange rate depreciation, cost- related pressures or reallocation of spending. Some members added possible volatility episodes in financial markets. One member highlighted the risk of droughts exerting pressure on agricultural and livestock prices. Another member mentioned a more dynamic economic activity. One member considered that there are risks regarding the recovery of pent-up demand, especially in the service sector. Regarding downward risks, some members mentioned the effects of the negative output gap and greater social distancing measures. One member emphasized the possibility of an exchange rate appreciation. Most members considered that the balance of risks that could affect the anticipated path for inflation within the forecast horizon is to the upside. One member mentioned that short and medium-term risks should be clearly differentiated. He/she pointed out that the balance of risks in the short term has deteriorated considerably. Nonetheless, he/she argued that medium-term risks, albeit remaining high, have improved given the stability of the exchange rate, the containment of energy prices, and a better outlook for international commodity prices. Another member highlighted that risks to non-core inflation are also biased to the upside, due to: i) new supply shocks associated to both increases in energy and commodity prices, and in transportation costs, and ii) pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices. Most members indicated that domestic financial markets have exhibited a stable behavior. One member mentioned economic growth and its expectations, sound public finances, a lower current account deficit, and a less restrictive monetary policy stance among the factors that have contributed to said behavior. However, the majority of members pointed out that the Federal Reserve's latest decision led to certain volatility. In this regard, they highlighted the recent exchange rate depreciation, after it attained a level close to 19.70 pesos per dollar. However, one member highlighted that, at the margin, the Mexican peso has started to appreciate again. Most members noted that shorter-term interest decreased. One member stated that this was due to expectations of a less accommodative monetary policy stance in the near future. Some members highlighted the favorable performance of the stock market. One member mentioned that default premia showed an improvement. Another member considered that although outflows of foreign investors' holdings of government securities have been absorbed by local financial intermediaries and investors, a cautious environment persists, which could translate into a lower appetite for local assets. One member recalled that China's inclusion in various global fixed income indexes has contributed to the fact that it has received two thirds of the fixed income flows towards emerging economies in the last 18 months. He/she stated that although part of this adjustment may be transitory, the low level of participation of foreign investors in primary auctions of government securities in Mexico stands out. Another member noted that greater external volatility and, in the medium term, lower monetary stimuli at a global level, could exert pressure on the exchange rate and affect capital flows. The majority of members mentioned that bank credit has continued to contract. Some members highlighted the decline in consumer credit and in lending to SMEs. One member noted that this has occurred despite the ample liquidity available to banks. Another member added that this has taken place in an environment of tight financing conditions and that the decline in credit is also a result of lower demand due to a precautionary behavior and the lower payment capacity of SMEs in the face of the economic slowdown. He/she emphasized that only mortgage lending continues registering positive growth rates. One member pointed out that since since the beginning of the pandemic, it has contracted proportionally more than during the 20082009 financial crisis. He/she noted that, despite the measures taken by the authorities, credit so far has been weak and that intermediation margins are still above pre-pandemic levels. Some members pointed out that recent studies show that, both in advanced and emerging economies, credit is highly important for a faster and more robust economic recovery, and that its absence will affect consumption and investment. One member stated that this would have negative consequences for the recovery of sales, for critical sectors such as construction, and that it could affect the reactivation of SMEs. Another member mentioned that, in a context of high uncertainty, a tightening of financial conditions could be counterproductive. In this regard, he/she considered essential to foster conditions that continue ensuring the efficiency and stability of the financial system, so that it encourages the adequate channeling of resources among economic agents. One member noted that the domestic sources of financing continued to expand at high rates in response to the demand for liquidity from households and firms. He/she added that in April and May there was a reactivation of corporate debt issuance in the domestic and foreign markets. Regarding credit risk, he/she mentioned that although delinquency rates remain at low levels, those corresponding to housing and corporate lending have increased. He/she considered it crucial for development banks to resume their countercyclical role as inducers of credit to the private sector in order to promote firms' recovery, mainly of SMEs, and to seize the space provided by their high capitalization levels. Most members of Banco de México's Governing Board highlighted that, although the shocks that have affected inflation are of a transitory nature, given their variety, magnitude, and the extended time frame in which they have been affecting inflation, they may pose a risk to the price formation process. They deemed necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance by increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.25%, to attain an orderly adjustment of prices and enable the convergence of inflation to its target. Some members voted for leaving the target unchanged at monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on One member argued that in small open emerging economies, such as Mexico, which supplement their domestic savings with external sources of financing, it is essential to maintain a solid macroeconomic policy stance that fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy and attracts capital. In this regard, he/she stated that monetary policy should contribute to contain increases in risk premia along the yield curve, as well as possible adjustments to the Mexican peso exchange rate, in addition to maintaining low and stable inflation around its target. He/she also pointed out that the shocks that have recently affected inflation pose significant challenges to monetary policy implementation. He/she highlighted that it must be ensured that relative price adjustments take place in an orderly manner and that possible effects on the economy's price formation process and on inflation expectations are avoided. He/she added that the baseline scenario for inflation foreseen in the Quarterly Report did nor incorporate additional pressures, and that their materialization would imply a more adverse scenario for inflation. He/she highlighted that in said report the Governing Board indicated that it would determine its monetary policy stance with the aim of guaranteeing an orderly price adjustment and ensuring the convergence of inflation to the 3% target. In this regard, the most recent information clearly shows considerable additional pressures for headline and core inflation and a revision of its forecasts for the next eight quarters. He/she considered that a tightening of the monetary policy stance will contribute to a downward trajectory of headline and core inflation towards 3%. Another member considered that the internal and external outlook for inflation has continued to deteriorate significantly. In particular, he/she pointed out that although inflationary pressures are largely, but not exclusively, explained by supply shocks, their transitory character can clearly turn out to be more lasting than previously anticipated. In view of this, he/she emphasized that it must be ensured that second-round effects are not generated and that the risk of expectations being contaminated or of the credibility of the Central Bank's commitment to the convergence of inflation to its target becoming deteriorated, is avoided. He/she pointed out that a significant correction in the observed data and in inflation forecasts cannot be ignored and requires a timely adjustment of the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that, although most analysts do not anticipate an increase in the reference rate in this decision, the minimum adjustment made is necessary and pertinent to give a clear and strong signal of the Central Bank's commitment to primary mandate. He/she added that price stability must be reinforced to avoid adverse consequences on the population, particularly on the most vulnerable. He/she emphasized the importance of the monetary policy statement mentioning the adjustment of inflation forecasts with respect to the trajectories in the last Quarterly Report, the delay in the convergence to the target, and that the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the upside. He/she added that this decision does not necessarily imply the beginning of a monetary tightening cycle but an adjustment, and that the following decisions will be taken accordingly, as new information emerges. One member noted that the absolute and relative monetary policy stances suggest that the room for lowering the reference rate has been exhausted and that the monetary stimuli should even be reduced. He/she considered that signaling that the downward cycle will continue in order to support economic activity may be very risky. He/she stressed that when implementing monetary policy, the costs of the decisions taken should be evaluated. In the face of uncertainty due to unanticipated shocks or measurement problems in the indicators, the cost for price stability is lower when mistakenly maintaining a conservative position than when mistakenly taking a riskier position. He/she considered that the improved economic outlook reduces the need for further monetary stimulus measures. He/she added that the monetary policy stance that was needed in 2020, when the economy contracted 8.5% and inflation ended at 3.15%, is different from what is needed now, given that growth is expected to be 6% and inflation could close the year nearly at double its target level. The urgency that had previously favored the reduction in the reference rate loses more strength in light of the deterioration in the balance of risks to inflation. He/she pointed out that the credibility of monetary policy and the Central Institute's commitment to price stability must be maintained, avoiding any notion that the Central Bank has, a _de facto dual mandate. He/she stated_ that recent and estimated future inflationary pressures, both domestic and external, in an international scenario prone to volatility and less accommodative monetary conditions worldwide, require immediate action. He/she pointed out that this decision shows that Banco de México is prepared to make difficult decisions, consistent with its primary mandate. He/she added that this will place the Central Bank in a better position to ensure that the expected trajectory for inflation materializes. He/she highlighted that given the uncertainty and a balance of risks for inflation that is clearly biased to the upside, in the following decisions it will be necessary to show resolve in order to avoid a deanchoring of expectations and a greater vulnerability to external or internal shocks. Another member mentioned that the monetary policy stance has been calibrated in an unprecedented context, ensuring the convergence of inflation to its target within the horizon in which monetary policy operates. He/she noted that, given that the economy is in a non-traditional cycle, there are no structural demand pressures that imply generalized price increases. He/she pointed out that it is important to reflect on monetary policy ability to respond to the supply shocks being confronted, considering that there are factors that are beyond the control of the monetary authority and that in the short term may have an impact on inflation. He/she stated that the Central Bank should seek to keep mediumand long-term inflation expectations anchored in order to avoid second-round effects. In this regard, he/she mentioned that, according to estimates, monetary policy implementation had, up to that point, maintained medium- and long-term inflation expectations anchored. He/she considered the importance of monitoring that this continues to take place, and that monetary policy should be conducted in such a way as to enable the orderly convergence of inflation to its target. He/she noted that the best way to meet this objective is by following the prudent, cautious, gradual and predictable approach that has characterized monetary policy. He/she emphasized that acting in a prudent and gradual manner is not synonymous with being tolerant, and that the Central Bank has the tools and experience to act in a timely manner, and even preemptively, if necessary, in order to ensure that inflation converges to its target in the horizon in which monetary policy operates. One member argued that, if the reference rate remains unchanged, the inflation target would not be jeopardized, because the factors that account for its recent increase are not only exogenous but also transitory. He/she stated that, in reality, monetary policy can do very little to offset price pressures caused by base effects and by external factors. He/she recalled that, when pressures are demandrelated, monetary policy can be more efficient, but that with an atypically high output gap and a labor market barely recovering, this type of pressures are limited, and that for this reason the current pressures actually come from abroad or are supply-related. He/she mentioned that, in contrast, an early withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would imply major costs for the economy in a context in which the recovery is still incipient and fragile. He/she stressed that said cost would fall on the margins of the economy that are currently more damaged, affecting the recovery of credit and removing an essential support for the reactivation of many small- and medium-size enterprises, and delaying the still incipient recovery of the aggregate demand components most affected by the pandemic: private consumption and investment. Finally, he/she recalled that Banco de México’s goal is to preserve low and stable inflation, in an efficient manner, that is, not at all costs, but rather at the lowest cost possible. In this regard, he/she considered that in the current juncture, Banco de México must emphasize and inform comprehensively and clearly about the transitory nature of the ongoing inflationary shocks, which would contribute to provide certainty to markets as to the framework of monetary policy implementation and would reinforce the anchoring of inflation expectations without harming the possibilities of economic recovery. Although the shocks that have affected inflation are expected to be of a transitory nature, given their variety, magnitude, and the extended time frame in which they have been affecting inflation, they may pose a risk to the price formation process. In this context, it was deemed necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance in order to avoid adverse effects on inflation expectations, attain an orderly adjustment of relative prices, and enable the convergence of inflation to the 3% target. With the presence of all its members, the Governing Board decided by majority to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to unchanged at 4.00%. Looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will depend on the evolution of the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on its expectations. The Governing Board will take the necessary actions based on incoming information in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional framework, strengthen the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a better adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the economy as a whole. Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at Inflation has been subject to significant pressures in recent months. Most of them, however, seem to be associated with supply-related problems and to changes in consumption patterns, as a result of the pandemic -which remains the most important challenge- and thus I believe will hardly be solved through monetary policy. It is reasonable to conclude that these pressures are transitory and will decrease over time, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored. Up to now, there is no evidence that medium- and long-term inflation expectations have been affected by the observed inflation shocks, and they are consistent with the time frame in which monetary policy operates. Under economic circumstances of high uncertainty, an unpredictable tightening of the monetary policy stance could be interpreted as a change in the cycle rather than a reinforcement of the current policy stance, which would lead to an even greater tightening of local financial conditions, and therefore be counterproductive. In my opinion, and given the nontraditional cycle we face, the best way to meet our constitutional objective is to be consistent with our communication and monetary policy approach, which has been characterized for being prudent, cautious, gradual, and predictable. I believe the decision to raise the interest rate was hasty. Although it is true that inflation is significantly above the Central Bank's target, it is also true that this is mainly due to base effects and supplyrelated factors. This implies two things: first, that these effects are transitory and, second, that monetary policy can do little to address them. A similar explanation had been put forward just three weeks earlier in the Quarterly Report. I therefore consider that this decision suggests an abrupt change in narrative, which sends the signal of an erratic and unpredictable behavior by the Bank. The fact that no analyst had anticipated a rate increase also points in that direction. On the other hand, it has been said that the rate increase could contribute to anchor inflation expectations. However, this abrupt change could also have an undesirable and counterproductive effect on inflation and its expectations by suggesting that shocks are of a more permanent nature, which could negatively affect the price formation process.