All members mentioned that global economic activity continued to recover, and the majority pointed out the heterogeneity across countries, spending. One member stated that leading indicators suggest a moderation of the growth rate. He/she considered that the recovery should be taken with caution and added that the IMF announced a Special Drawing Rights (SDR) allocation of USD 650 billion to member states. Another member underlined that the recovery is still incomplete, indicating that employment figures remain, overall, below pre-pandemic levels. Some members mentioned that the global economy is expected to grow in 2021 at the highest rate in the last five decades. They underlined that growth expectations for advanced economies have adjusted upwards while, in the case of emerging economies, they have been adjusted downwards, as a result of differences in the evolution of the pandemic and in the available space to provide stimulus spending. One member highlighted the large fiscal stimulus approved in the United States. Among risks to the global economy, most members pointed out those associated with the spread of the Delta variant. One member mentioned that less developed economies, or more labor-intensive ones, are still the most vulnerable. Among short-term risks, he/she mentioned a possible abrupt termination of the monetary stimuli because of persistent inflation increases and the subsequent tightening in international financial conditions, in addition to credit risks derived from high levels of government and corporate indebtedness. All members mentioned that global inflation highlighted that, in various economies, inflation is already above the targets of their respective central banks. Some members stressed that, in the United States, annual inflation is above 5%. One member stated that inflation expectations for this economy have increased and that the 10-year breakeven inflation rate exceeds the 2% target. Among the factors that are affecting global pressures on commodity prices, the shortage of inputs, logistical problems and the temporary mismatch between supply and demand which has affected production chains. Some members added also the reactivation of the world economy and stimulus spending. One member mentioned labor market distortions and another one climate-related factors, such as droughts. Some members highlighted that international organizations, central banks, and analysts agree that the factors that are affecting inflation are of a transitory nature. One member stated that medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain anchored, which implies that pressures are anticipated to be transitory. Another member added as evidence that inflationary pressures are transitory, the fact that labor market dynamics remain below pre-pandemic levels and the fall in the labor participation rate. He/she considered that the factors that exert pressure on inflation cannot operate indefinitely and stand in contrast with structural inflation determinants, such as globalization and technological change. He/she added that most monetary authorities at the international level have opted for communicating the nature of inflationary pressures and their monetary policy outlook, to contribute to the formation of expectations conducive to the gradual convergence of inflation during the following year. One member argued that, insofar as the process of economic normalization progresses, an increase in the global production of materials and inputs, a reestablishment of global value chains, and a decline in price pressures is anticipated. Another member pointed out that the global economy shifted from a sudden closure of activities, which caused businesses to reduce production capacity, to a scenario of vigorous spending expansion, with an irregular recovery and with significant disruptions in production. He/she underlined the recent slowdown in industrial production, especially in the manufacturing sectors that have very extended supply chains, which has propitiated multiple bottlenecks in production and adverse effects on prices. He/she added that the disruptions caused by the pandemic differ greatly from those observed in other crises, making it more difficult to identify their short- and medium-term effects. He/she mentioned that projections for economic activity, inflation and delinquency rates have not captured the effects of the pandemic and the challenges of the current juncture adequately. Most members highlighted that central banks in advanced economies maintained their monetary accommodative policy stances reflect the fact that these institutions consider pressures on prices to be transitory in nature. Most members emphasized accommodative policy stance, but with the possibility of decreasing its asset purchases in the near future. One member highlighted that this institution announced that it would maintain its stimulus until greater progress is made in achieving its mandates. He/she added that, in view of the various statements of its members, and given an environment of high uncertainty, financial markets anticipate that the Federal Reserve will announce a decrease in its asset purchase program this year and that it will begin increasing interest rates in 2022 and decline in expectations for the federal funds rate for the end of 2024, which has affected long-term rates in advanced economies. He/she delved into the fact that the effective, sustained, and coherent communication strategy followed by the Federal Reserve has contributed to the assimilation of its new monetary policy strategy’s highly accommodative tone by market participants, allowing news about the asset purchase program to have a limited impact on financial markets. Some members noted the importance of monitoring the Federal Reserve’s decisions. One member emphasized that it is necessary to adequately anticipate the evolution of the balance between the Fed’s goal of not inhibiting the recovery of the economy and of the labor market, and the need to respond to inflationary pressures unseen in decades, along with the difficulties in managing its balance sheet, which could affect the early withdrawal of its monetary stimulus. Some members added that the European Central Bank announced a symmetric inflation target, indicating that it could remain above 2% for some time. One member pointed out that this new monetary policy paradigm adopted by both the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank will allow interest rates in advanced economies to remain at low levels for a longer period. Another member stated that, despite the central banks’ commitment in advanced economies, except Canada, to maintain accommodative monetary policy stances for a long period, the higher levels of inflation have raised concerns among analysts regarding the possibility that they would transition to a tighter policy stance earlier than expected. Some members pointed out that those advanced economies that previously and during the pandemic registered inflation levels below their central banks’ targets, have more room for maneuver and more time to begin withdrawing their stimuli. One member pointed out that, in the United States, this responds to structural factors, including demographic ones, which have contributed to reduce inflation, potential growth and the neutral interest rate, allowing for more patience in withdrawing the monetary stimulus. He/she added that in that economy, the atypically high levels of economic growth are also expected to be transitory, which has kept real interest rates at low and even negative levels throughout the entire yield curve. Another member argued that economies that registered inflation levels consistently above their targets during the health crisis, face greater restrictions and must act rapidly and decisively to attain the convergence of inflation to its target and to preserve their credibility. One member mentioned that this environment of gradual adjustment, and of a heterogeneous economic recovery with higher inflationary pressures, implies considerable challenges and risks that reduce the room for maneuver of fiscal and monetary policies in emerging economies. He/she pointed out that it is necessary to enable an orderly adjustment and to avoid both contaminating the price formation process as well as abrupt adjustments in portfolios and capital outflows. Some members pointed out that several central banks of emerging economies have reduced their monetary stimulus. One member highlighted that the monetary authorities of these economies have modified their narrative, acknowledging that inflationary pressures could be more severe and less transitory than anticipated, and that some authorities have even acted, or expect to do so, in order to avoid an impact on the price formation process. Another member stated that most central banks in emerging economies maintain highly accommodative policy stances and negative real interest rates. He/she mentioned that, although in most of these economies limited increases in interest rates are expected in the next 12 months, for most of them those adjustments will not substantially modify their accommodative policy stances. He/she added that, in 13 out of 16 emerging economies analyzed, interest rates for the next 12 months are expected to be equal or below the current interest rate level in Mexico, and that only Brazil and Russia, which face idiosyncratic problems, have interest rates higher than in Mexico. One member underlined that in a broad sample of emerging economies, Mexico maintains one of the greatest deviations in headline and core inflation with respect to its target. As for international financial markets, most members mentioned that the yield curves of government securities flattened, particularly in the United States. Some members pointed out that the main stock indices registered increases and that, in some cases, they reached historic highs. One member stated that the US dollar appreciated slightly. He/she noted that financial markets in emerging economies registered adjustments with a negative bias, capital flows to equity assets were moderate and mixed, and fixed income assets registered moderate inflows, mainly to China. He/she added that the preference for China’s assets will continue posing a major challenge for the rest of emerging economies. Another member pointed out that for these economies the global environment implies taking advantage of the benefits of the dynamism of external demand, as well as facing the challenges of greater global inflationary pressures, of possible volatility episodes, and tighter financial conditions. He/she added that this is accompanied by idiosyncratic risks in these economies, which have increased after the pandemic. He/she stated that all of the above represents a challenge to attract and retain capital, as well as to enable an orderly adjustment of the exchange rate market and the yield curve. He/she underlined that it is essential for these economies to maintain a solid macroeconomic policy stance and for monetary policy to contribute to keep inflation around its target and to contain risk premia increases in the yield curve. All members highlighted that the recovery of the Mexican economy continued during the second quarter. One member pointed out that this has been driven by the services sector as the vaccination process has progressed. The majority pointed out heterogeneous across sectors. One member said that the health crisis is once again complicated and highlighted that the latest data suggests a slowdown in June. Another member added that the economy is 2.4% below its pre-pandemic levels. On the demand side, the majority agreed that consumption continued to recover moderately. One member noted a certain improvement in consumer confidence and the favorable behavior of remittances. Another member said that there is a significant lag in the consumption of domestic services. Most members highlighted the weakness of investment during the second quarter, although one member considered that it continued to recover moderately. Another member pointed out that, in May, fixed investment was 15% below the highest level reached in previous years. Regarding the external sector, most members highlighted the slowdown in exports, particularly manufacturing exports. One member attributed this to problems related to the supply of key inputs, such as semiconductors. Another member noted that manufacturing exports registered a slight increase with respect to the previous quarter, as a result of price increases. One member stated that manufacturing exports are expected to continue benefiting from the recovery of external demand. On the supply side, most members highlighted the heterogeneity across sectors, reflected in a reactivation of tertiary activities and a weakness of secondary activities. In this regard, some members pointed out that industrial production was affected negatively by the shortage of several inputs, mainly in sectors integrated into global chains. One member underlined the good performance of accommodation and transportation services. Most members agreed that the labor market continues to recover. However, they considered incomplete and that the labor market faces significant challenges. One member noted that the total number of unemployed, underemployed and inactive people as a percentage of the potential Economically Active Population (PEA, for its Spanish acronym) is 26.3%, a level comparable to that observed during the 2009 financial crisis. Another member added that, in June, the labor market registered the same alternative open unemployment rate level than in May, which is above pre-pandemic levels. One member pointed out that the underemployment rate is over 12%, almost twice the level recorded in normal times. Another member mentioned that as of June, formal and informal employment was 700 thousand people below, and IMSS-insured workers were 400 thousand people below, their pre-pandemic levels. One member emphasized that the extent of the unemployment gap is still considerable, so it is important to keep in mind that labor market recovery could take longer in view of an eventual increase in infections. Some members added that gender-disaggregated data reinforce the view of an uneven recovery. All members agreed that slack conditions are anticipated. In this regard, most of them highlighted the marked differences across sectors. Some members mentioned that, given the progress in economic activity, slack conditions continued tightening during the second quarter. Some members underlined that they still remain ample. One member stated that the output gap remains at 4%. He/she added that the economic recovery is still incomplete, which is evident when observing levels of slack in different sectors of the Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its Spanish acronym). Some members highlighted the difficulty of estimating slack in light of the adverse effects on productive capacity. One member considered that slack is not likely to be as ample because business closures and operating restrictions imply a lower potential production capacity. Most members highlighted that the economic recovery is expected to continue for the rest of the year. One member underlined that, given the advance in the vaccination process and the boost from external demand, growth forecasts for 2021 are expected to increase. Another member pointed out that consumer confidence, the wage bill, light vehicle sales, and sales reported by the National Retailers Association of Mexico (ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym) have started to decelerate, which could indicate a moderation in growth in the second half of the industrial sector could affect GDP by more than one percentage point if these problems persist until the end of the year. One member emphasized that it is necessary to be attentive of the recovery maintaining its pace beyond the rebound effect, given that during June economic activity may have decelerated significantly. He/she added that the number of infections has increased and, although it is unlikely that social mobility will be restricted again, the reopening process may take longer. All members agreed that global inflation and the effects on supply chains and production processes of various goods and services have exerted pressure on headline and core inflation. pressures coming from the United States. One member highlighted that while inflation has followed the upward trajectory of global inflation, it appears to have a more pronounced and generalized dynamic. He/she added that some analyses show how, since the beginning of the pandemic, the global factor’s incidence on core inflation has been negative, while the incidence of the idiosyncratic component has been positive. Another member highlighted the recent increase in the prices of intermediate inputs for secondary sector activities. One member stated that, during 2021, the aforementioned effects and the lack of flexibility in production have predominated, which has reduced the resilience and capacity of supply to absorb a higher demand without exerting pressure on prices. He/she added that the current environment has been conducive for inflation to register multiple shocks. Another member stated that the contribution of import prices seems to explain to a greater extent the variation in core inflation and that given Mexico’s economic integration with the rest of the world, global inflation could be a limiting factor for the behavior of domestic inflation, especially if its main trade partner is registering high levels of inflation. Some members mentioned that inflation has also increased due to changes in household consumption patterns and that, after having declined significantly in 2020, some prices are in a process of recovery in tandem with the gradual reopening. One member added that some CPI items have been affected by multifactor issues related with weather conditions and external factors. The majority mentioned that in July annual headline inflation was 5.81%, while core inflation was 4.66%. They pointed out that inflation has remained above the central bank's target for several months. In this context, some members warned that inflation is at historically high levels. Some members highlighted that, in the last six months, more than 50% of the CPI components have registered seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations higher than 4%. Some members pointed out the reduction in headline inflation in July versus previous months. One member stated that this result was due to a lower incidence of non-core inflation, which was partially offset by a higher incidence of core inflation. Another member mentioned that the new shocks have shaped inflation dynamics, offsetting the reductions stemming from arithmetic effects. He/she also noted that slack has had a diminishing effect in containing inflation. Regarding core inflation, most members pointed out that it shows an upward trend due to a recovery in the demand for services and to additional pressures on merchandise. Some members highlighted that more than 50% of core inflation’s components have registered variations higher than 4% in the last three months. One member stated that, according to an analysis of the inflationary process, pressures on the core component have tended to intensify, even after discounting the base effect. He/she stated that the moving averages of merchandise inflation are above currency market. Another member underlined that the above has taken place especially in the prices of said sub-index that are more susceptible to exchange rate pressures and to increases in energy prices. He/she highlighted that core inflation rates for May, June and July were the highest for similar months since 1999. He/she also added that the annualized monthly rates of inflation of food merchandise have registered levels around 10% in each of the three months. One member noted that, in July, more than 70% of the prices of the merchandise basket registered variations higher than 4%. Some members indicated that the non-core component decreased, supported by the decline in energy prices, which was partially offset by the higher variations of agricultural and livestock product prices. Most members pointed out that expectations for headline and core inflation for the end of 2021 rose again and highlighted their increase for 2022. Some members pointed out that medium-term expectations were revised upwards. Others stated that they remain anchored. One member indicated that the latter are relatively contained at levels above the target and that this outlook is conditional on expectations of increases in the reference rate, which is foreseen to reach 5% by the end of 2021 and 5.4% by the end of 2022. He/she also noted that business prospects point to input supply problems and to an increase in inflation expectations for the next 12 months. Another member warned that the increase in short- and medium-term expectations entails the risk of contagion to longer-term expectations and of them becoming unanchored. He/she expressed his/her concern of core inflation expectations continuing to deteriorate and being above the upper limit of the variability range. He/she added that nowadays there is a greater probability of headline inflation reaching levels higher than 6% and core inflation reaching levels above 5% by the end of the year. He/she highlighted that the mean and median of core inflation expectations remain above 3.5% until 2023. One member noted that medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored and that those derived from market instruments for the 6 to 10-year average are below there have been two major adjustments in these expectations, the first, in March, as a consequence of the increase in observed inflation, and the second, in June, after the monetary policy decision. One member stated that these expectations have increased less than in previous episodes of supply shocks. Another member highlighted the increase in compensation for expected inflation and inflation risk. He/she added that long-term expectations have remained anchored for some time at levels above the target. He/she said that they have remained stable during episodes of severe shocks. He/she considered that the resilience of these expectations is the result of Banco de México’s credibility, as it has firmly and consistently stated that it will take the actions available to achieve the convergence of inflation to the target. One member stated that shortterm expectations have been increasing since the previous monetary policy decision. Most members noted that the revised forecasts for the expected trajectories of headline and core inflation are higher than those published in the latest Quarterly Report. Some members added that convergence to the target is now expected to be achieved in the first quarter of 2023. One member mentioned that the inflation trajectory had been revised upwards in the June decision, and that from his/her view, he/she remained skeptical that said convergence would be reached in the period proposed on that occasion. At present, in the face of additional shocks with levels of inflation, unseen in many years, the forecasts have been revised upwards and its convergence within the forecast horizon has been postponed. Another member noted that the most recent adjustment in the forecasts with respect to estimates published in the Quarterly Report January-March 2021, presents increases of 90 basis points for headline inflation in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the second quarter of increased by 110 basis points in the fourth quarter of basis points in the fourth quarter of 2022. He/she also noted that these forecasts assume less accommodative monetary conditions over the forecast horizon. The majority of members pointed out that pressures on inflation are associated with shocks that are expected to be transitory. Nevertheless, the majority mentioned the risk that the price formation process is affected. One member considered that we can face shocks that might lead to knock-on effects with continuous pressures on prices of indefinite duration. Although these can be assimilated, we have to remain attentive so that they do not contaminate the formation of prices. He/she stated that the adjective expected trajectory of inflation. He/she pointed out that recent supply shocks, such as the lack of production inputs, could last longer than anticipated and that there are pressures associated with the reopening process, such as the increase in services prices. He/she warned that such shocks seem to have generalized effects, rather than on a few goods. Another member highlighted that several items have been affected by the pandemic and by factors associated with the current juncture, and considered that such effects will be transitory despite the uncertainty about their duration. One member stated that the higher levels of inflation are explained by three transitory phenomena that should not be a cause of concern: i) the reversion of prices to their former trend due to the reopening of activities, which explains why high inflation rates are temporarily being registered; ii) global shocks leading to increases in international prices of commodities and various industrial inputs, which have had an atypical impact on a few products that have a significant influence on inflation; and iii) the change in household consumption patterns and readjustments in relative prices. He/she added that, in some cases, price increases will reverse as normalization continues, while in others they will remain in place, although their effect will tend to fade gradually because they are one-time increases. Among upward risks to inflation, some members highlighted external inflationary pressures, especially from the United States. One member stated that these pressures are expected to continue to affect headline and core inflation in the second half of the year. Some members mentioned additional cost- related pressures. One member added the risks of core inflation’s high persistence, a depreciation of the peso, and increases in agricultural and livestock product prices. He/she mentioned that, as long as the pandemic does not fade, it is foreseeable that further impacts on prices will be observed. He/she added that, although rains have reduced pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices, the United States is facing a severe drought, which could affect prices in Mexico. Another member noted that commodity prices have shown greater stability, and thus the risk of greater inflationary pressures from this source has been mitigated. He/she pointed out that the exchange rate has remained stable and is not under pressure from deteriorating external accounts or public finances, while energy prices have reached stability and gas prices have even decreased. He/she indicated that the economy continues exhibiting ample levels of slack, so no demand pressures are anticipated. He/she added that no additional risks to inflation are foreseen beyond those that have already materialized. Some members mentioned as downward risks the effects stemming from the negative output gap, additional social distancing, and an appreciation of the peso. Most members considered the balance of risks to inflation within the forecast horizon to be biased Most members highlighted the stability of the peso exchange rate and its better performance compared to other emerging-market currencies. One member pointed out that open emerging economies are very sensitive to both global inflationary pressures and monetary and financial conditions in advanced economies, particularly in the United States. He/she stated that the baseline scenario incorporated by financial markets considers global effects on inflation, and patience in the response of the central banks of advanced economies. He/she pointed out that for emergingmarket economies such as Mexico, this implies first of all facing global inflationary pressures, and afterwards the tightening of global financial conditions, although there is still the risk of said adjustment occurring beforehand. Another member considered that the good performance of the Mexican peso was due to progress in the vaccination process, to an improvement in growth expectations, and to sound macroeconomic fundamentals. Some members noted the increase in interest rates, particularly for the shorter terms. One member added that, in line with the appreciation of the peso, Mexico's default premia improved. He/she mentioned that after the last monetary policy decision, one-year interest rates increased by as much as 75 basis points, well above the increase in the reference rate. He/she added that, in contrast to advanced economies, the long end of the yield curve also increased, and that the 10-year bond reached levels more than 30 basis points higher because of the market’s overreaction to the decision. Another member noted that the eventual process of monetary normalization at a global level could have implications for the exchange rate and for capital flows, which could present greater outflows than those observed at this point. Some members pointed out that the stock market registered gains. One member emphasized that a rating agency downgraded Pemex's credit rating once again, leaving it with a negative outlook. He/she added that according to the rating agency, despite the Federal Government's support, liquidity risk persists given the considerable requirements that the company will face due to its debt maturities, and highlighted the possible operational losses it would suffer due to the expansion of its refining capacity. He/she considered that the above shows the deterioration of its financial situation and represents a risk for public finances and the government securities market. The majority of members noted that private unfavorably, and mentioned the fall in lending to firms. Some members noted that this was due to a tightening in banks' lending standards. One member added that it also responds to lower debt issuance. Another member mentioned that credit to Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) contracted and showed no signs of improvement. Some members observed that consumer credit continued to decline and that mortgage lending has grown at a more moderate pace. One member noted that, in some sectors, credit has fallen by more than 20% as compared to pre-pandemic levels and that a contraction is observed, even in sectors that did not experience a recession. Another member pointed out that, in the second quarter, total sources of financing declined for the first time since the beginning of the pandemic, after having reached high and increasing annual flows. He/she added that this is explained by the fall in domestic sources of financing. One member stated that this is a matter of concern, given the relevance of credit for the recovery, and that it would be desirable to avoid a premature and counterproductive tightening of financial conditions in the face of the fragile recovery. Most members of Banco de México’s Governing Board pointed out that, due to the variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which the shocks have affected inflation, they may pose a risk to the price formation process. For this reason, most members deemed necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance by increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.50%, in order to avoid adverse effects on inflation expectations and enable an orderly adjustment of relative prices. Most members highlighted that, in the next monetary policy decisions, the Governing Board will assess the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectory expectations. This, in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, and enable an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial One member noted that, in view of the unexpected monetary policy decision of June, there was a significant adjustment to the level of the reference rate for the end of the year anticipated by both markets and analysts. He/she expressed his/her view that this is not consistent with Banco de México’s forecasts, nor with the communication released regarding the strengthening of monetary policy that the majority of the Governing Board opted for in the previous decision. He/she argued that bringing the policy rate closer to the levels expected by analysts and markets may imply tightening financial conditions more than required. He/she noted that, although such an increase would appear to leave the rate at its neutral level, there is currently no certainty that this level has changed due to the pandemic. He/she added that the lower end of the estimated range for the neutral rate may suggest to stop the rate increases before the levels that markets are expecting for the end of the year are reached. He/she pointed out that validating an upward cycle would aim at containing inflationary pressures on sources that are not necessarily monetary, so its success would require the contraction of prices whose inflation is already within the target or that are undergoing a recovery process. He/she considered that Banco de México's best contribution is keeping inflation expectations anchored, and for that purpose, the reference rate, which is the ideal instrument, is not the only instrument. It also has its communication, which must play a key role in times of uncertainty, when a timely, gradual and prudent monetary policy stance must be maintained. He/she stated that it continues to be relevant to point out that the decrease in inflation might synchronize with the horizon in which monetary policy operates, causing the mechanism of incidence of the policy stance to operate precisely at the moment when it would be least useful. He/she argued that, looking ahead, Banco de México must remain attentive to the evolution of commodity prices, the announcement of reductions in the Fed’s asset purchases, and to market trading conditions. Another member stated that, given the broad consensus about the transitory nature of the rise in inflation, keeping the reference rate unchanged would not jeopardize the convergence process. He/she pointed out that the central bank's decisions and communication affect the beliefs about the evolution of inflation, and unexpected decisions affect their expectations. He/she argued that the origin of observed inflation should be explained, reiterating its transitory nature, which would give a signal of tranquility. He/she highlighted that this policy would be similar to that used by other central banks and to the one used by Banco de México when facing the supply shocks of 2012. He/she added that a pause would allow to continue granting stimulus to economic activity. He/she indicated that it is not advisable for central banks to respond to supply shocks as they cannot affect them directly. He/she pointed out that an increase in the reference rate has a generalized and negative impact on investment, consumption, employment, credit, and public finances. He/she mentioned that, prior to the consolidation of the anchoring of expectations, it was logical to respond to supply shocks. However, Banco de México’s actions allowed an anchoring of expectations and since the episode of 2012, it was no longer necessary to increase the rate because the control of inflation and its expectations was achieved with effective and consistent communication. In the episode of 2017, gasoline prices increased sharply, in a context of exchange rate depreciation and deteriorated external and fiscal accounts. He/she highlighted that the change in pricing policy worked as a coordination mechanism, which affected expectations. He/she added that in the current scenario, gasoline prices and the exchange rate remain stable, there is fiscal discipline and a trade surplus, and long-term inflation expectations remain anchored. He/she noted that the current conditions are more similar to those of 2012 than to those of similar to the former. In his/her opinion it is not convenient to bring forward what could be interpreted as a cycle of normalization. He/she mentioned that the Fed is expected to begin the normalization process of its reference rate around mid-2023 and, thus, closing the relative position and bringing the local interest rate into neutral territory prematurely may have an impact on future macroeconomic and financial stability. One member pointed out that with an inflation gap of three percentage points, if the reference rate is not increased, there would be no convergence in the foreseen horizon. He/she pointed out that progress in economic activity suggests the presence of a less amount of slack, which opens the possibility of strengthening the monetary policy stance without widening slack conditions. Also, given that the problem of measuring economic indicators persists, the output gap could be smaller than estimated, which reinforces the proposal of increasing the monetary policy reference rate. He/she explained that a reference rate of 4.50% is still an expansionary policy stance and lays below headline and core inflation figures. He/she considered that, at these levels, the ex-post real rate will remain negative until low levels. He/she noted that monetary policy cannot affect supply shocks directly, but that actions should be taken against inflationary shocks regardless of their nature, in order to avoid second-round effects. A preventive adjustment reinforces the expectation that such effects will not be allowed. He/she expressed that one of the main transmission channels is the expectations channel, and that an image of complacency should be avoided. He/she argued that the success of the inflation-targeting regime resides in central banks not sacrificing the inflationary objective to achieve short-term growth targets. He/she highlighted that an interest rate trajectory that minimizes inflation and output gaps should be chosen. He/she pointed out that an optimal trajectory revolves around expectations that monetary policy will keep inflation stable and close to its target in the long term. He/she emphasized that overreactions in markets should be avoided, given that they may anticipate aggressive increases. Thus, it should be emphasized that inflation forecasts show a delay in the convergence to the target, which indicates that an additional strengthening of the monetary policy stance is needed, but does not necessarily imply an accelerated cycle of interest rate increases. He/she added that Banco de México must effectively communicate its reaction function and that its forward guidance should have clarity regarding three aspects of the interest rate’s trajectory: its directionality, the magnitude of possible adjustments, and the timing of their implementation. He/she pointed out that, given the slack conditions, the inflationary outlook and the transitory shocks, it would appear that the new monetary policy stance may be sufficient for the time being and that further rate adjustments will depend exclusively on incoming data. Another member argued that, given the complex environment, it is essential for Banco de México to act in a timely and decisive manner to reaffirm its commitment to its primary mandate. He/she stated that, failure to do so would require sharper adjustments in the future, with greater costs in terms of output and employment. He/she recalled that, although inflationary pressures are mostly, although not exclusively, explained by supply shocks, for which monetary policy has a limited scope of action, it is essential to strengthen the expectations channel, in order to avoid second-round effects, contamination of the price formation process, and to prevent an impact on the anchoring of expectations. He/she emphasized that the monetary policy action adopted, both in terms of magnitude and operating channel, does not seek to solve the effects of supply shocks, but is rather a fundamental signal that reinforces the commitment of convergence to the target. He/she warned that this is the central element in an inflationforecast targeting regime, and that renouncing to this commitment means losing sense of the central bank’s mandate. He/she highlighted that, given the still weak performance of the labor market, investment and domestic financing, and given the effects of the pandemic on inequality, Banco de México’s role in achieving price stability is of vital importance to avoid worsening the situation of the most vulnerable part of the population, which suffers the effects of high inflation to a greater extent. One member considered it essential for Banco de México to show and reinforce its commitment to its constitutional mandate to protect the purchasing power of the national currency. He/she pointed out that this is particularly important when considering the significant upward revisions to headline and core inflation forecasts, and that the outlook for economic activity reveals a faster growth rate and is likely to be revised upwards. He/she highlighted that since the target for the interbank interest rate has been used as the monetary policy instrument, it has been below core inflation on only three occasions: i) in 2009 during the global financial crisis, when core inflation was following a rapid downward trajectory; ii) in 2014 when core inflation was close to the target; and iii) from March to July 2021, when core inflation followed an upward trend for more than five months, deviating considerably from the target. He/she stated that maintaining a distinctly accommodative monetary policy stance and tolerating high inflation levels well above the target, could lead to a de-anchoring of price formation, erode Banco de México’s credibility, and exert pressure on inflationary risk premia, thus increasing the financial cost of all economic agents, to the detriment of a sustained recovery. He/she argued that, although the shocks that have affected inflation are expected to be transitory, considering the simultaneity, magnitude and the extended horizon over which the shocks have affected headline and core inflation, as well as the high levels they have reached, there is a risk that the price formation process is affected. For that reason, it is essential to strengthen the monetary policy stance to keep medium and long-term inflation expectations anchored and enable a decreasing trend of inflation towards its target. Some members pointed out that Banco de México's decision to publish inflation forecasts improves its communication channel. One member added that this is an exercise of transparency and accountability that puts the Central Bank at the forefront of communication. Although the shocks that have increased inflation are expected to be transitory, due to their variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which they have affected it, they may pose risks to the price formation process. For this reason, it was deemed necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance in order to avoid adverse effects on inflation expectations and enable an orderly adjustment of relative prices and the convergence of inflation to the the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by For the next monetary policy decisions, the Governing Board will assess the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectory within the forecast horizon, and on its expectations. This, in order for the policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, and enable an adequate adjustment of the economy and financial markets. Alejandro Díaz de León, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.50%. Galia Borja and Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at In the present conditions, I believe that increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate would validate interest rate expectations for the end of the year, associated with a controversial communication in June’s decision. In my opinion, validating said expectations does not clarify the meaning of strengthening the monetary policy stance, could lead to a dynamic inconsistency in future decisions, and may imply a greater-than-necessary tightening of local financial conditions. In my opinion, inflation is being affected mainly by global inflation, as well as by distortions generated by the pandemic, such as bottlenecks, changes in consumption patterns, the recovery of prices, and multifactor elements related to weather conditions. Although there is little certainty as to how long these factors will last due to the unprecedented situation we are facing, I still believe these will be transitory in nature. In an environment of high uncertainty, opting for a policy stance based on gradual decisions allows to establish a better communication and avoids mistaking a strengthening with a cycle of interest rate increases, given that the end of this strengthening may coincide with a tightening of international financial and monetary conditions, in which it will probably be necessary to have more room for the use of monetary policy. There is broad consensus regarding the predominantly transitory nature of worldwide inflationary pressures. For this reason, and because an interest rate increase would have no effect on inflation stemming from supply shocks, I believe that maintaining the reference rate does not jeopardize the convergence of inflation to its target. On the contrary, raising it again could send the wrong signal that the current inflation is of a more permanent nature, which in turn could affect short- and mediumterm expectations, as well as the price formation process. It should be kept in mind that the central bank's decisions and communication constitute a signal that affects economic agents' expectations. In this regard, I believe that, in the current context, the appropriate policy is to maintain the reference rate and explain with greater detail the origin and causes of observed inflation, reiterating its transitory nature. A strategy based on a careful and coherent communication is being used by other central banks in the present situation and was successfully used by Banco de México in 2012 in the face of similar supply shocks.