One member stated that this occurs even despite an environment of economic slowdown and of accumulated increases in the reference rate.
Most members pointed out that the global economy continued growing during the second quarter.
He/she added that this will place the Central Bank in a better position to ensure that the expected trajectory for inflation materializes.
Meanwhile the trimmed mean indicator continues showing the same trend than the official figure, which has increased for 10 consecutive months, and already stands nearly at 5%.
He/she specified that across different regions of Mexico, the weakening of employment is more evident in the Northern border free zone, where the larger wage adjustments have been observed, and that the lessons derived from this experience should be taken into consideration.
The same member emphasized that both types of risks are operating in the same direction and reinforcing each other.
Another member estimated that the persistence of inflation stems from domestic pressures.
The majority of members noted that private unfavorably, and mentioned the fall in lending to firms.
Some members pointed out that the contribution of energy prices to the increase in headline inflation was significant during the first half of September and larger than that exhibited in January 2017.
One member stated that leading indicators suggest a moderation of the growth rate.
In this regard, he/she highlighted technological change and the integration of regions with abundant labor force into globalization, which have allowed for the fragmentation of productive processes according to comparative advantages and to the cost structure of different countries and regions.
The majority of members mentioned that it is expected that, in its annual measurement, they will decrease to a larger extent after one year and that they will converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon.
The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along contaminated, and the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of monetary and financial considerations, on this occasion, the majority of the Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%.
He/she added that, although slack measures are unobservable factors and their estimation is subject to uncertainty, it cannot be ignored that timely data indicate that the economy has had three consecutive quarters of marked weakness.
He/she also pointed out that business sector expectations are still at high levels.
He/she added that information from surveys in advanced economies suggests an increase in short-term expectations, while expectations drawn from longer-term financial instruments show moderate increases.
He/she added that the rebound in inflation prompted some central banks in emerging economies to conclude their monetary easing cycle and begin increasing their reference rates.
Most members stated that, looking ahead, inflationary pressures are expected to continue decreasing.
Another member considered that the expected trajectory of this component remains highly uncertain.
He/she added that gasoline prices have stabilized in line with the federal government's pricing policy and that, therefore, looking ahead, their contribution to inflation will be more limited.
The majority mentioned that the Mexican peso appreciated slightly and its trading conditions improved.
They emphasized its orderly behavior in an uncertain and volatile international aversion.
Some members stated that it has been heterogeneous, with differences in the recovery rates of domestic demand as compared to those of external demand.
Some members stated that in the main advanced economies, headline inflation continues converging to their central banks’ targets, albeit one of them added that core inflation has remained below such targets.
One member pointed out that this derives from the fact that the reduction in services prices have offset the rebound in energy prices.
However, some members highlighted that, according to Banco de México estimates, a wage-price spiral is not being observed.
Some members underlined that analysts’ inflation expectations for all terms remain above those projected by Banco de México.
One member argued that, although formal employment has already recovered and total employment is close to its prepandemic level, public policy should strive to attain the employment levels that would have been observed if the pandemic had not taken place.
Most members underlined that the Mexican peso has traded within a broad range.
All members mentioned that the described external environment has consolidated expectations that the main central banks will not tighten monetary conditions in the foreseeable future.
Some members indicated that in most economies inflation is expected to converge to their corresponding central banks’ targets by 2025.
The same member argued that the natural outcome of this combination of trends has been a fall in formal employment, an increase in informal labor, and a rise in the unemployment rate, which has probably been softened by the higher levels of employment in the informal sector.
With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
Regarding the latter, he/she emphasized that greater weight should be given to climate-related factors in the balance of risks to inflation.
In view of the deteriorating environment, it is necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance and confirm the commitment that the necessary actions will be taken so that inflation expectations remain anchored and a deterioration of the price formation process is avoided.
Finally, some members pointed out that the uncertainty related to elections in both advanced and emerging countries as well as to the terms and conditions of Brexit, may also have a negative effect on confidence levels and, in turn, on global investment and growth.
One member stated that the pandemic led to the early exit of older generations from the labor force and a lower participation of women and young people.
Nevertheless, the majority warned about Pemex’s business plan continuing to be a cause of concern for the rating agencies.
He/she considered that the factors that exert pressure on inflation cannot operate indefinitely and stand in contrast with structural inflation determinants, such as globalization and technological change.
The same member emphasized that the Federal Reserve raised its projections for economic growth for 2018, for inflation for 2018 and 2019, and lowered those for unemployment for 2018, 2019, and 2020.
Most members stated that global economic activity weakened during the second quarter.
In the case of the Chinese economy, some members stated that, as a consequence of the trade tensions with the U.S., several policies have been adopted to revamp economic growth and continue an orderly rebalancing of this economy.
Some members mentioned that the fall observed in the stock market was due to lower economic activity and to local uncertainty factors.
One member highlighted several factors to consider for this decision before beginning any cycle of reference rate cuts: i) that the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside and is uncertain; ii) that services inflation does not show a downward trend or signs of an imminent decline soon; iii) that analysts' inflation expectations for the end of 2024 are above the central bank's forecasts, and thus they do not anticipate that the intermediate inflation target will be attained; iv) that the output gap is positive and certain indicators suggest demandrelated pressures; v) that the labor market continues showing strength; and vi) that credit growth is not slowing down, while the monetary base is growing above 14%.
However, they added that, in lower than those registered during the previous quarter.
Another member stated that, in his/her opinion, although it is convenient to modify the objective for the reference rate, currently a single 25 basis point increase is far from being sufficient to realign the expected trajectory of inflation to its target of 3% in general, not only within the forecast horizon.
He/she stated that the central bank’s reaction function must be communicated with a clear and explicit forward guidance.
He/she considered that risks to economic activity remain balanced.
One member highlighted that the recovery of the labor market continues to be uneven in terms of gender.
Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period.
Some members noted that economic activity in advanced economies is expected to grow at a lower rate overall in 2024.
Another member mentioned that remittances, which are a determinant of consumption, continue increasing, although with heterogeneity among sender and receiver states.
One member considered that, despite the recent reduction of headline inflation and its forecasts, high risks and a considerable degree of uncertainty persist, which makes it difficult to establish the balance of risks.
One member pointed out that the increase in commodity prices and the orderly resolution of the electoral process in the United States also contributed to the improved functioning of financial markets.
Most members mentioned the high levels of non-residential construction, although one member added that it declined marginally in September.
Second, such member indicated that the proposals about using the international reserves to finance public spending, for example in investment or any other type of expenditure, do not take into account the fact that international reserves are not a source of net wealth, since these have to be financed with the issuance of liabilities by the central bank.
He/she added that, given the fragility of the economic recovery, further monetary tightening could affect people's wellbeing.
One member pondered that monetary policy actions implemented by Banco de México have led to an attractive volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States.
One member stated that its evolution has mainly been concentrated in imported goods.
One member stated that, in his/her opinion, it shows a slight improvement.
Most members pointed out the possible consequences on economic activity of an environment of uncertainty related to the electoral process, to institutional weakness, as well as to crime and public insecurity.
One member added that the Bank of Canada is also preparing to do so.
One member added that although the ten-year inflation risk premium apparently is decreasing, it remains at levels similar to those recorded in stress episodes.
One member argued that the downward trajectory of inflation seems to be starting to consolidate, although its decline has been slow and marginal so far.
He/she mentioned the importance of avoiding that the Central Bank actions in one dimension (credit facilities) be limited by its actions in another dimension (interest rates).
One member emphasized that its seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate was 3.53% in July 2024.
Some members mentioned the stabilization of the labor participation rate.
He/she added that regarding economic activity, recent World Bank estimates show that a simultaneous one percentage point deceleration in the growth of the U.S., the euro area and China would generate a negative impact of 1.4 percentage points on growth of emerging economies in the first year alone, followed by a further fall of approximately one percentage point during the second year.
In particular, this members expressed that there has been greater liquidity and depth in this market, as well as an increase in net long derivatives positions on the Mexican peso.
They pointed out that the main stock markets registered gains, some of them reaching historically high levels.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%.
Another member stated that since the previous monetary policy decision, inflation has continued accelerating.
Regarding this last point, one member noted that in the United States, the deflator for durable goods spending increased from -1.54% in February 2020 to that have pressured inflation, the lack of flexibility in production of goods and the unprecedented distortions in the labor market that have led to lower availability of labor, which could be associated with the perception of contagion risk and with the effects of transfers to households.
Some members pointed out that during the first five months of the year around one million IMSS-insured jobs were lost.
Most members argued that economic activity is expected to resume a greater dynamism in the first half of 2024.
He/she added that, in that context, stock market indices increased, which offset the previous decreases.
Most members considered that said institution could slow down its pace of adjustments in the near future.
They stated that although monetary policy might contribute to the recovery, it must do so without jeopardizing price stability.
He/she considered that additional interest rate cuts would be beneficial for several reasons: i) the economy will continue to operate with an ample amount of slack for an extended period; ii) an unfavorable performance is observed in those areas where monetary policy has a direct impact, such as credit to households and firms, consumption and investment; iii) the current account surplus reflects that the monetary policy stance is still restrictive for the current economic conditions; and iv) Mexico's real interest rate continues to be above that observed in most emerging economies.
Another member said that while the effects of the shocks are expected to be predominantly transitory, the risks to price formation at the global level are on the upside, given the wide range of prices impacted and the magnitude of the price increases, and the extended time horizon over which they have affected inflation.
Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy.
He/she argued that it will be important to monitor that the effects of this stance are fully transmitted to the economy.
One member mentioned that its asset purchase program has concluded.
Some members underlined that fruit and vegetables inflation, which had undergone significant pressures in December 2023 and January 2024, decreased in February.
He/she added that given the prevailing risks, medium and long-term inflation expectations could rebound.
In the case of the main advanced economies, most members mentioned that headline and core inflation remain below their central banks’ targets.
One member underlined the decline in mobility caused by the contagion rate.
The majority clarified that in the U.S., the euro area and Japan, core inflation lies below their central banks’ targets.
They message that reference rates will remain at high levels for an extended period.
He/she said that this reflects the high levels of both energy and agricultural and livestock product prices.
One member highlighted that the US Federal Reserve included corporate debt with a wide range of credit ratings in its asset purchase program.
He/she stated that Banco de Mexico’s communication must be as explicit as possible, avoiding an insufficiently clear forward guidance; for this reason, he/she pointed out that the monetary policy statement should justify the decision clearly, as well as the future intentions, specifying that these do not represent a fixed commitment and that they are subject to incoming data.
Another member indicated that, looking ahead, disinflation is anticipated to continue in advanced economies.
Some members mentioned that the manufacturing export sectors will also be affected.
One member highlighted that it registered a seasonally adjusted quarterly growth rate of 1.1%, expanding for eight consecutive quarters.
One member mentioned that, if the economy remains resilient, its cyclical position will exhibit tighter conditions.
One member added the volatility in financial markets and the negative impact on input supply chains.
The majority noted the upward adjustment in global growth forecasts, which is expected to continue to be supported mainly by the recovery in the United States and China.
One member added that this not only responds to temporary external pressures.
One member mentioned that foreign investment inflows have been observed, in particular, to government securities.
One member highlighted that it is to be expected that over the next months, the path of inflation will be very much influenced by the combined impact of the deceleration of economic activity, supply shocks from several sources, and the persistence of a situation of high uncertainty with potential effects on the exchange rate.
Another member added that the trend-cycle measure of the private consumption index seems to have reached an inflection point at the end of the previous year, without reversing its downward trend since then.
Some members associated said resilience with the support from private consumption.
He/she added that agencies have downgraded the credit ratings of multiple sovereign issuers and firms, exacerbating the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion.
Some members stressed that core inflation’s persistence has even contaminated inflation expectations, one member adding that, in particular, it has had an influence on medium-term expectations.
The majority highlighted that among the main risks those that stand out are: i) an escalation of trade disputes; ii) a disorderly Brexit; and, iii) political and geopolitical risks.
Another member argued that the persistence of services inflation is a widespread phenomenon, even in economies that exhibit some slack, which could be largely explained by a reversal in consumption patterns rather than by demandrelated pressures.
They noted that this was observed in all its categories.
Some members mentioned that it has remained above 5% despite the monetary tightening.
One member noted the importance of promoting the adoption of new technologies, strengthening human capital, reducing opportunity gaps and generating the necessary incentives for growth and development.
He/she added that domestic financing to the private sector exhibited solid growth in April, although it continued decelerating.
However, some members pointed out that in certain cases they reduced their reference rate in view of concerns over the deceleration of economic activity.
He/she added that the complex and uncertain environment requires maintaining a cautious and firm monetary policy.
One member indicated that it is expected to gradually approach zero over the forecast horizon.
One member added that the latter registered historically low prices.
In this regard, such members argued that the effect on inflation of the minimum wage increase is expected to be moderate.
He/she highlighted that in the absence of fiscal discipline, the central bank is obliged to provide such an anchor, but that the current fiscal policy should make room for a more accommodative monetary policy.
Another member added that, according to INEGI’s Telephone Survey of Occupation and Employment, the national unemployment rate is currently at 4.7%.
In this context, some members warned about the negative variation in the holdings of foreign investors in peso-denominated assets.
A strategy based on a careful and coherent communication is being used by other central banks in the present situation and was successfully used by Banco de México in 2012 in the face of similar supply shocks.
He/she mentioned that during this period the monetary policy stance continued strengthening, as the real ex-ante rate continued increasing due to the decline in inflation expectations.
Nevertheless, one member considered that they have left open the possibility of additional increases.
Most members mentioned that services inflation continues reflecting the cost-related pressures that have accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine.
One member mentioned that in the first quarter of 2023 GDP surprised to the upside.
Looking ahead, the possibility of lower potential growth could make it difficult to observe high growth rates without inflationary pressures being generated.
Some members added that the US Federal Reserve established new liquidity swap lines with other central banks.
Most members also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy, stemming from the ongoing tightening of global pressures associated with the geopolitical China, as well as the possibility of greater negative effects on inflation.
Another member stated that, although there appears to be additional room to reduce the policy rate, it is to be expected that risks are also increasing and thus any adjustment in such direction should be based on that assumption.
Therefore, if the expected convergence of inflation to its target is confirmed, the same member mentioned that a greater monetary policy easing might be considered.
One member highlighted that in some cases, such as in the United States, convergence is expected to occur in early 2026.
As to the lack of flexibility in production, he/she pointed out that the impact on supply chains, the lack of investment in hydrocarbons due to the energy transition, and the end of the negative effect on manufacturing prices that had been observed with China’s increasing participation in world trade.
He/she mentioned that the Fed is expected to begin the normalization process of its reference rate around mid-2023 and, thus, closing the relative position and bringing the local interest rate into neutral territory prematurely may have an impact on future macroeconomic and financial stability.
He/she added that, given its robust macroeconomic stance, Mexico is in a better position to face the Fed’s restrictive cycle.
Another member expressed his/her concern about services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, maintaining an upward trend for over a year and reaching levels close to 5%.
Another member argued that non-core inflation continues growing above its historical average of around 6%.
All members agreed that some of the shocks that have affected inflation have shown signs of easing and pointed out the lower pressures on supply chains.
He/she indicated that the central bank must be willing to act in case signs of a significant deterioration of economic-financial conditions arise, and that this includes taking actions in unscheduled dates.
Regarding the foreign sector, most members noted the good performance of exports.
One member added that it exhibited healthy trading metrics and a considerable trading volume.
On the other hand, most members mentioned that core inflation exhibited slight reductions, laying at 3.65%, a pattern that one member emphasized has been observed since early 2018.
He/she added that, in the current juncture, core inflation, which reflects the mediumterm trend of inflation, is slightly below 4%.
One member pointed out that it has narrowed for two consecutive quarters.
headline inflation has resumed a downward trend, more certainty is still needed that progress in the inflation outlook is significant before lowering the reference rate.
In particular, they pointed out that on March 9[th], the Foreign Exchange Commission increased the size of its foreign exchange peso hedge program and auctions were carried out on March 12[th] and 18[th].
One member mentioned that the expansion of domestic financing sources continued reflecting the acquisition of longterm instruments, which is consistent with the offered yield given the level of the reference rate.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
Another member mentioned that the fiscal front in emerging economies continues to be a risk factor, since a deterioration both in the balances as well as in the debt to GDP ratio is expected, due to the budgetary pressures arising from the stimulus programs and decreased economic activity.
Most members stated that expectations drawn from market instruments continued adjusting upwards.
One member argued that the monetary policy implemented in recent months has made a significant reduction in the reference rate compatible with an approach based on prudence.
Another member noted that Mexico's economic recovery is still incomplete.
Most members mentioned that in the first half of July 2018 inflation reached 4.85%, after having posted 4.65% in June and 4.51% in May.
He/she added that, in the absence of specific measures in said direction, as well as in general to permanently strengthen government revenues, it would not be convenient to seek greater support from fiscal policy to face the pandemic, taking into account the expected decline in the FEIP balances and the resulting increase in the vulnerability of public finances.
They pointed out that, in line with developments in international financial markets, these adjustments tended to reverse in the last few days.
One member stated that ensuring the conditions for the country to take full advantage of the reconfiguration of global production chains would give a greater boost to domestic production, helping to counteract the anticipated cyclical weakness in external demand.
They argued that several assumptions of the economic package might not materialize, emphasizing those related to the evolution of oil production and economic activity.
However, he/she warned that the outlook is still complex and uncertain.
He/she added that in the current juncture, the availability of credit is crucial to prevent solvent firms from going bankrupt due to liquidity problems, and therefore the central bank measures to facilitate lending to small- and mediumsized firms are appropriate.
He/she added that it will only be possible to decouple from the Federal Reserve when the inflationary dynamics diverge or when there is certainty regarding the Federal Reserve’s final interest rate.
Some members expressed concern about this behavior.
In this context, considering that the lower levels registered by headline inflation, the ample slack in the economy, as well as the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.50%.
One member argued that in view of an unprecedented recession, an inflation near the lower range of the variability interval, and in the verge of undergoing a massive unemployment crisis, it is important to continue easing monetary policy.
Some members highlighted the risk of exchange rate depreciations in light of international financial volatility events.
All members emphasized that international trade flows are already showing the effects from these protectionist measures.
He/she noted that these measures should aim at promoting investment and consumption, particularly of durable goods.
The same member also added that this has led to the following trends in the adjustment process: i) a high dynamism in exports; ii) a slight moderation in consumption; and, iii) a tendency for weak investment.
He/she considered that the monetary policy statement should convey a cautious tone.
One member expressed that this component declined during the first seven months of the year, although it has exhibited an upward trend in the last four months.
He/she considered that this segment is the one that could best reflect the nearshoring process.
Some members added that government bond interest rates for different terms increased throughout the year, in response to central banks’ tighter monetary policy stances.
They noted that, in the case of the US Federal Reserve, in its September meeting, it cut the target range of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
Another member argued that this scenario is expected to have adverse effects on the economic performance of these countries and, more markedly, on those economies where high levels of both public and private indebtedness, among other vulnerabilities, persist.
He/she pointed out that the monetary adjustment has been transmitted along the entire real yield curve and in market interest rates for the different segments.
One member pointed out that the central banks of Brazil and Chile continued lowering their reference rates, reflecting optimism about their inflation trajectories, while the Central Bank of Colombia has been more moderate about its reference rate cuts.
This, along with idiosyncratic factors, has generated greater uncertainty and volatility in local markets.
He/she noted that the second factor is that there was little monetary stimulus granted in 2020 and it began to be withdrawn in advance in 2021, and, therefore, unlike other countries, Mexico does not have a problem of excess demand.
In addition, most members mentioned the risks of public finances deteriorating or of increases in agricultural, livestock product or energy prices being greater than expected, which could make non-core inflation revert to higher levels.
Some members indicated the possibility of pressures arising from wage adjustments.
He/she considered that it is essential to take firm and forceful actions to restore confidence in the commitment to convergence to the target within the forecast horizon.
They added that inflation is still expected to converge to the target in the second quarter of 2025.
One member pointed out that two thirds of the subsectors that comprise it register negative annual variations.
One member considered that the risk of energy prices being subject to pressures is limited due to the domestic fuel price policy.
Another member noted that the growth outlook for 2019 and 2020 imply negative output gaps in both years similar to those estimated in the latest Quarterly Report.
He/she pointed out that, at the same time, the market foresees inflation levels higher than the central bank's forecasts.
All members mentioned that Mexico's economic activity has continued showing dynamism.
He/she argued that the monetary restriction should also be evaluated in terms of its duration, which is nearing two years and which, he/she considered, will extend throughout the planning horizon.
One member pointed out that this sector has recovered as a result of the reopening of activities and the increase in mobility.
Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S.-in an external environment that it is still subject to risks- and the behavior of slack conditions and cost-related pressures in the economy.
One member pointed out that markets anticipate the first rate increase to take place in the last quarter of consistent with expectations of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), thus both foresee that the monetary stimulus will continue being significant for a long time.
Most members noted a certain improvement in stock markets.
He/she also noted that the situation of the current monetary policy stance should also be considered, as such stance, despite having faced other shocks and their inflationary effects over the last years, and albeit being already in a downward adjustment process, is still at relatively high levels, in an economy that, in face of the COVID-19 pandemic, will suffer a very sizable impact that will lead it to a significant recession.
He/she warned that messages of such nature, or others that give the impression that monetary policy is focused on goals different from inflation, such as stimulating growth, would generate confusion in the markets and would accentuate the credibility challenges.
Some members mentioned that central banks in some emerging economies have started to reduce their monetary stimulus.
Another member deemed that services prices are responding to pressures on input costs and to an increase in demand due to greater mobility.
Regarding the growth outlook, most members pointed out that it has been revised downwards.
One member noted that the forecast for the reference rate for the end of 2019 is already above the Federal Reserve’s long-run estimate.
Most members noted that long-term interest rates on government bond yields rose as a result of the recent episode of higher risk aversion.
In this regard, one member highlighted that in several countries like Australia, Chile, India and Russia, policy rates have already been cut, given the improved outlook in the balance of risks for inflation, in what appears to be the beginning of a new cycle of rate cuts at the global level.
He/she underlined the recent slowdown in industrial production, especially in the manufacturing sectors that have very extended supply chains, which has propitiated multiple bottlenecks in production and adverse effects on prices.
Among short-term risks, he/she mentioned a possible abrupt termination of the monetary stimuli because of persistent inflation increases and the subsequent tightening in international financial conditions, in addition to credit risks derived from high levels of government and corporate indebtedness.
In this regard, one member emphasized that such indicators are expected to remain below their target levels for a prolonged period.
They mentioned that such performance was due to a favorable environment in international financial markets.
Most members pointed out that credit to the private sector continued to perform poorly and highlighted the fall in financing to firms.
He/she mentioned that the interest rate derivatives market exhibited a similar behavior to that of government bonds, with significant increases and high volatility.
One member warned that in recent months these expectations have already started to be revised upwards.
Some members noted that employment growth has coincided with stagnation in labor participation.
Most members highlighted that the economic recovery is expected to continue for the rest of the year.
Some members pointed to the risk of greater cost-related pressures.
He/she highlighted the possibility that the resilience of economic activity continues through the horizon of monetary policy planning, the cyclical position of the economy in positive and increasing territory, that the labor market remains tight and does not show signs of easing, the persistence of core inflation, inflation expectations that are not declining to the required levels, and the procyclical fiscal policy.
Another member warned that if the current monetary policy is relaxed too soon, significant increases in volatility could be observed in domestic financial markets and this could have an impact on financial stability.
They mentioned that this upward adjustment was due to the rise continued decreasing.
In this context, one member considered that there are signs that some pressures on inflation in Mexico have indeed started to moderate.
Some members attributed the improvement in different activity indicators following an easing of mobility restrictions to a lower number of contagions and to greater advance in the vaccination process.
One member considered that a 25-basis point adjustment to the policy rate is insufficient to acknowledge the progress attained in the macroeconomic realm and in mitigating risks in the last months, and that this would mean remaining behind the curve already anticipated by the market.
Another member highlighted the predominance of domestic sources of financing over external ones and the increase in financing to the public sector.
Some members expressed concerns about Pemex's financial situation.
Another member considered that, looking ahead, the strength of the labor market is expected to further diminish, considering a growth of economic activity lower than expected some months ago.
Most members mentioned that core inflation has been affected by the indirect effects of pressures on energy prices and that, within it, the higher rates of change of food merchandise and services prices are noteworthy.
Given the complex environment, he/she considered it essential that monetary policy is conducted prudently and cautiously, in order to promote an orderly adjustment of financial markets and the sustained convergence of inflation to the 3% target.
All members highlighted the impact of the geopolitical conflict on world inflation.
They also noted that, given the availability of close substitutes, they have a high price elasticity of demand, and thus economic agents that use them as inputs can, to a certain extent, substitute them for other alternatives.
Finally, another member stated that capital inflows from foreign investors have been negative with regard to those channeled to fixed income instruments, although their holdings maintain a balance similar to that observed in previous years, while inflows destined to equity instruments were positive.
Most members mentioned services inflation resistance to decline.
In this regard, one member noted the lower job creation.
Some members underlined that it exceeded the upper limit of the variability interval.
One member added that the risk of potential losses for banks and brokerage firms due to interest rate increases has decreased.
Such member stated that having a sound macroeconomic policy contributes to an orderly adjustment of the economy and to the attainment of the inflation target, and provides the necessary room to adopt the required actions to foster greater certainty and confidence.
Some members noted that domestic financial markets performed favorably, sustaining, and in some cases, extending the gains registered since May 2020.
They particularly highlighted the strength of public construction associated with railway works, and, to a lesser extent, of private construction of industrial, commercial, and service buildings associated with the infrastructure projects in the southern part of Mexico.
Although one member acknowledged that expectations of additional actions by rating agencies have been delayed temporarily, another member argued that one rating agency has stated that significant increases of Pemex’s net debt, an operational performance below forecasts, and a decline of crude oil reserves or of their expected duration, may lead to a downgrading of Pemex’s rating, which would bring about the loss of its investment grade.
One member pointed out that, if monetary normalization in the United States begins earlier than expected, there could be episodes of volatility that could generate exchange rate pressures or wider spreads in the yield curve with respect to external government interest rates.
One member pointed out that the above can be observed in indexes that measure supply-chain pressures, in pending orders, in delivery times, in input prices and freight shipments.
One member added that these conditions have been gradually improving.
He/she expressed that this is feasible since: i) the volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States is one of the highest among emerging economies; ii) the Mexican peso stands out for its good performance and low volatility; iii) the Federal Reserve's policy stance is an important factor to consider, but Mexico’s monetary policy stance should rely more on the evolution of domestic variables and on the absolute policy stance; iv) Mexico started the hiking cycle earlier, and with a 75-basis point increase the policy stance would be situated in restrictive territory; v) unlike the United States, Mexico does not seem to face inflationary pressures from demand or the labor market; and vi) inflation in Mexico is closer to its target than the United States and other countries.
He/she stressed that fiscal discipline was maintained throughout the year, a preliminary trade agreement was reached with the US Congress, and Pemex's rating has been maintained.
He/she also pointed out that, in the presence of different adverse shocks, the Mexican economy has had to adjust to a lesser availability of external financial resources.
One member highlighted that although the monetary policy target rate has increased by 100 basis points throughout the year, with the increase of more than practically unchanged between May and November.
One member underlined that, in some economies, core inflation even continues trending upwards.
For the moment, we need a bit more time to confirm the trend the current positive signals seem to suggest as well as to assess if we need to adjust our reaction function given the global cyclical and monetary conditions we will face in the coming months.
He/she added that the reallocation of spending generated an increase in mobile phone and internet services’ prices.
Another member highlighted that, at this monetary policy meeting, it is important to consider that, while core inflation has exhibited a favorable behavior, the risks of a rebound in the non-core component, which would take it to levels closer to its historical average, have started to materialize to such an extent that it more than compensates for the decline that core inflation continues exhibiting.
The majority noted that this behavior is in line with that observed in other emerging markets.
Most members stressed that it is particularly important, in addition to maintaining a prudent and firm monetary policy, to promote the adoption of measures to foster an environment of confidence and certainty for investment and higher productivity, and to consolidate public finances in a sustainable way.
Most members mentioned that the country’s economic performance was a consequence of the slowdown of the world economy, of some weakness in domestic demand, and of some transitory factors, such as the fuel distribution problems and the blocking of railways, which could have affected growth during the first quarter of the year.
He/she pointed out that this implies not only slowing down the pace of monetary policy easing, but also acknowledging that the margins of maneuver for additional easing have probably already been exhausted, which underlines the convenience of beginning a pause after this decision, although he/she recognized that this will depend on the evolution of inflation and its expectations.
He/she added that the short-term ex-ante real interest rate is at a clearly restrictive level.
He/she mentioned that the IMF recommends lowering interest rates to the extent possible and emphasizing forward guidance on the expected pattern of monetary policy.
The majority of members stated that, although the magnitude and duration of the effects of the pandemic are still unknown, these are expected to intensify during the second quarter.
Some members added the lower availability of financing to households and businesses, although one mentioned that remittances have grown, thus supporting domestic spending.
He/she added that services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, keeps showing a resistance to decline and remains at high levels.
Most members pointed out that domestic economic activity has shown resilience in a complex external environment.
One member noted that employment has increased at a faster pace than the labor participation rate.
One member argued that, in the environment of uncertainty associated with the disinflationary process, central banks’ actions must seek an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets, and that for this reason abrupt adjustments in interest rates or an excessively data-dependent strategy could contribute to generating even greater volatility.
He/she underlined that the headline inflation forecast for said quarter was revised upwards by over 100 basis points.
He/she considered that there are some mixed signals of lower external pressures and increasing domestic pressures.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%.
One member mentioned that this could lead to higher volatility in domestic financial markets, undo the progress achieved in granting higher real wages and even foster a less favorable macroeconomic environment for sustained economic growth.
Some members mentioned that pressures have continued to intensify both on food and non-food merchandise.
Some members noted that stock markets in emerging economies registered gains, in part, due to the undervaluation they registered during the previous months.
However, another member underlined that said tight conditions are expected to fade gradually, although it will be important to remain vigilant over the implications for the economy’s price formation process.
He/she stated that this was because such decline was attributed to the decrease in non-core inflation, while the core component continued increasing.
Some members emphasized that this component is characterized by its high volatility.
As to the labor market, one member argued that it has presented a lower rate of job creation, thus the unemployment gaps have eased somewhat with respect to the levels reached in 2018.
In this respect, the member added that the recent deterioration of financial markets has resulted in an increase in the cost of financing for the government, reducing even more the scope of action.
In this regard, he/she stated that Mexico is a small and open economy with a high level of financial and commercial integration with the United States and, therefore, it is normal for the Federal Reserve’s actions to have repercussions on the Mexican economy.
With regards to the absolute policy stance, he/she noted that low economic activity and reduced risk aversion open space for further easing, although the temporary increase in inflation could reduce this margin for a few months.
One member added that the vaccination phase will extend for a relatively long period and that it is subject to risks, and that for this reason it is difficult to anticipate a rapid rebound in consumption and investment.
Some members pointed out that such contraction would have its origins in the uncertainty related to domestic factors, such as governance problems and public expenditure below the programmed, and to external factors, such as the USMCA ratification process.
He/she considered that the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside.
He/she mentioned that the fundamental role of monetary policy is to stop the inflationary inertia that has developed over the last year, and that it is therefore necessary to act in a timely and decisive manner.
One member indicated that inflation levels above those anticipated contributed to the increase in inflation expectations for this year and the next one.
Another member underlined that private investment has fallen 25% since 2018, while public investment has contracted 54% since Most members highlighted that consumption has been recovering gradually, although still lagging considerably with respect to pre-pandemic levels.
He/she added that the economic recovery would be gradual, while another member specified that it would be heterogeneous across regions.
He/she added that long-term expectations have remained anchored for some time at levels above the target.
Regarding investment, most members highlighted the downward trajectory of both private and public sector investment.
One member added that this confirmed the negative trend that this indicator has been exhibiting.
This member also mentioned that this could suggest that, although the market recognizes some degree of volatility surrounding the country’s elections, it assumes that in the medium-and long terms the peso’s foreign exchange will return to the levels observed at the beginning of 2018, thus implying that the prevailing macroeconomic conditions are expected to continue.
Some members underlined that in its communications the US Federal Reserve made it clear that this adjustment does not imply the beginning of an easing cycle, although the possibility of future adjustments, if required, was not ruled out.
Another member added that this change in trend is a risk to inflation given that the depressed demand so far has contributed to contain price increases in this item.
One member added that other risk factors to inflation persist, including: i) a faster rate of increase of U.S. inflation; ii) a continuation of the upward trend in the prices of commodities; and, iii) problems in some emerging economies that have external or fiscal imbalances.
One member stated that the latter contributes to an orderly adjustment of Mexican financial markets and of the economy as a whole.
First, they highlighted the downward pressures caused by the widening of the negative output gap and, in the short term, by lower energy prices.
Another member emphasized that the re-imposition of sanctions on Iran recently announced by the United States, has contributed to the spike in international oil prices to levels unseen since the end of 2014, and that this could have relevant implications for economic activity and inflation in several developed and emerging economies.
He/she added that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate of this component has decreased after having averaged 8.35% in 2022, so that it averaged Despite its decrease, most members emphasized that core inflation still remains at high levels.
One member pointed out that periods of more severe exchange rate volatility than those observed recently cannot be ruled out, with greater and more lasting effects on the exchange rate, which could particularly affect merchandise prices.
Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%.
He/she explained that this suggests that the pace and scale of possible adjustments in the monetary policy stance should continue to be gradual to ensure the transmission to less sensitive components without causing disorderly deviations in those that are more reactive to different transmission channels.
Thus, he/she pointed out that the convergence of the core component will depend on the absence of additional shocks, which he/she considered is a strong assumption given the high levels of oil, commodities, sea freight and food prices.
One member pointed out that the growth of non-automotive manufacturing exports moderated recently.
Another member said that these effects are largely transmitted through tradable goods, including final goods, intermediate goods, and raw materials.
One member considered that domestic factors, such as the agreement of the federal government with the firms operating gas pipelines, Pemex’s bond repurchase and refinancing, and the presentation of the 2020 Economic Package, contributed to the favorable performance displayed by domestic financial markets in September.
The same member stated that the intention of the authorities to announce shortly a set of measures to face these challenges is highly relevant, given that greater hardships faced by Pemex would significantly affect public finances and, in general, the overall economy.
He/she stated that monetary policy operates with a lag, and thus its effects will be more evident over the following months.
disinflationary process continued advancing at the global level.
Regarding domestic demand, all members mentioned that consumption continued trending upwards during the fourth quarter of 2023.
Some members highlighted the risk of pressures on energy prices due to the escalation of geopolitical conflicts.
Nevertheless, he/she specified that, in the 1224-month forecast horizon, both headline and core inflation are expected to lay around 3%.
He/she warned that this problem could worsen due to the economic slowdown and to lower tax revenues derived from the support measures for Pemex.
Given the limited fiscal space, most members considered that efforts should be directed to a reallocation of the budget according to efficiency reallocation should be directed towards spending with an effect on the labor market in the short term.
In this regard, he/she underlined the importance of pointing out that monetary policy will be implemented in a prudent manner, with pragmatism and flexibility, based on incoming information in each meeting, with the goal of attaining the convergence of inflation to its target within the period of monetary policy influence.
One member pointed out that credit card and debit card expenditure remained stagnant.
He/she estimated that during the upcoming monetary policy decision it will be determined whether the evolution of data allows to confirm the level of 11.25% as the terminal rate or if an additional adjustment is required.
He/she considered that forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for an extended period.
He/she recalled that inflation came to exhibit a marked upward trend due to the shocks of the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine.
Most members noted that there was a reactivation in the services sector albeit with heterogeneity.
They also considered that this could lead to a sharper economic deceleration.
Given the expectation of a fragile, difficult and prolonged economic recovery, it is necessary to adopt, as practically in the rest of the world, a highly accommodative stance, and to point out that it will remain so for a long period.
Most members stated that, in view of greater- than-anticipated inflationary shocks and an outlook for their effects lasting longer than anticipated, forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards for the entire forecast horizon.
Another member pointed out that a certain reversal in said rates has been observed in recent days.
The majority considered that investors' confidence on the domestic economy has deteriorated as a consequence of the abovementioned.
One member considered that, in light of the deterioration in trading conditions, the proper functioning of the foreign exchange market should be monitored, and underlined that this does not imply that there is a specific target level.
Most members noted that short-, medium-, and long-term headline inflation expectations have remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above 3%, while core inflation expectations for the same terms were revised upwards.
Another member added that its annualized monthly rate has followed an upward trend, shifting from 3% in January 2021 to 8.56% in April 2022.
He/she stated that, from the first increase to date, short-term inflation expectations have only increased, so that the intended objective of the supposed reinforcement of monetary policy seems to have had very low effectiveness.
He/she indicated that the international reference has declined by a greater percentage than the exchange rate depreciation, and thus the price of gasoline in Mexican pesos should decrease.
One member highlighted that another problem that Pemex faces is the possibility of observing a lower oil platform than expected due to both the low levels of investment and the cancellation of private participation in new developments that may allow an increase of crude oil production.
One member noted that slack is expected to diminish gradually.
One member pointed out that it will be necessary to assure that the government actions, the multiannual projects considered and the assumptions used mainly on the estimates for economic growth and oil production, are consistent with the soundness of public finances in the medium and long terms.
Such members added that this company has structural problems and that it is essential not only that it submits a credible and functional business plan, which does not jeopardize the federal government’s fragile fiscal balance, but also that it offers a permanent solution.
One of the members stated that given both the current U.S. business cycle and the timing of the fiscal stimulus, the U.S. economy is expected to continue growing at a robust rate, not only for the remainder of 2018, but also during 2019.
Thus, the number of shocks increased during the second half of the year, mainly due to supply effects that are not permanent.
Another member pointed out that inflation has been marginally above the central bank’s point target.
He/she argued that, if it continues, this trend would represent a deterioration of long-term inflation expectations, since it would imply a stronger anchoring of such expectations at levels above the target.
Most pressures on headline inflation have started to diminish.
He/she pointed out that, due to the accumulated increases and considering the clearly restrictive levels of the ex-ante real interest rate, the attained monetary policy is solid and consistent with the disinflationary process.
All members underlined the decline in the international prices of some commodities, volatility.
To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board closely follows the development of inflation vis-a-vis its anticipated trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the horizon in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of risks to such factors.
The majority of members mentioned economies have already started to withdraw their monetary stimuli.
Another member attributed this situation to the implementation of fiscal stimuli programs in several countries, while one member emphasized the lack of government guarantees for bank credit.
One member mentioned that, however, real wages in almost all advanced economies have started to register real negative variations, which anticipates future adjustments in private consumption.
In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to attain the convergence of inflation to its 3% target, and to firmly anchor medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target.
Most members United States.
One member added that the inflationary environment could worsen as a result of the lockdown measures adopted in some regions of China.
One member pointed out that this, together with financial stability conditions, minimizes the possible harmful effect of higher interest rates on households and firms.
Fourth, he/she mentioned that the date of inflation’s convergence to the target continues to be postponed, and that both analysts’ inflation expectations and their incompatibility with the adjustments in the reference rate anticipated by many of them highlight the credibility challenges faced by the Central Bank.
He/she pointed out that, instead, it will be important to maintain caution when discussing the desirable timing to initiate a normalization cycle and underlined that the environment is still complex and fragile.
One member added that the latter was mainly observed in short-term interest rates and, hence, the yield curve remained relatively flat.
One member added that capital flows to emerging economies had a divergent behavior by asset class, with outflows in fixed-income assets and historically high inflows in equity assets.
Another member pointed out that, in an environment where slack conditions are widening, the expected rate of return on capital is lower, and, to avoid distortions in the credit market, it is convenient that the rate at which investment projects are financed is adjusted downwards, which calls for easing monetary policy.
He/she argued that, given the increase in the ex-ante real interest rate and the tighter monetary conditions, which are reflected in the real exchange rate and in market instruments, it would be possible to evaluate, later on, whether the observed and anticipated disinflationary process are compatible with lower nominal interest rate levels.
As to fixed income markets, the majority of members mentioned that, after having increased securities have decreased, although they still remain volatile.
One member recalled that, in this episode, both components reached their highest levels since the inflation targeting regime was adopted in Mexico.
One member added that the Fed pointed out that supply-related issues and the reopening of the economy have exerted pressure on prices.
Some members highlighted the flattening of the US yield curve.
In order to avoid such risks, they deemed necessary to reinforce the monetary policy stance by adjusting it to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon.
Most members of Banco de México’s Governing Board pointed out that, due to the variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which the shocks have affected inflation, they may pose a risk to the price formation process.
However, he/she indicated that this sector has not shown a clear trend since mid-2023.
Such members also noted that a significant impact on domestic demand is anticipated, in particular, on consumption and investment.
The same member warned that the fact that minimum wages have been below extreme poverty levels makes it more urgent to create an effective policy to promote competition.
All members mentioned that global inflationary continue affecting headline and core inflation.
He/she added that in order to consolidate an orderly adjustment of the national economy and maintain low and stable inflation, the well-functioning of domestic financial markets is required.
He/she pointed out that there are also domestic pressures.
One member argued that, even if the depreciation persists, it would occur in a context of economic contraction.
The majority pointed out that yields on government securities decreased for all terms.
He/she argued that this is supported by the good performance of inflation, the stability of financial markets, and expectations of a long period in which the economy will remain depressed.
One member highlighted the risks associated with the weakening of public finances, Pemex’s fragile situation, uncertainty about domestic policies, and possible non-compliance with the USMCA, as well as the 2021 electoral process.
One member highlighted that the contribution of additional stimuli to address the economic slowdown is increasingly smaller.
He/she added that, given the complexity of the environment, characterized by tighter global financial conditions and high uncertainty, it is the central bank's responsibility to take the necessary measures to comply with its constitutional mandate, which increases the importance of decisively raising the reference rate in the present decision.
All members agreed that the balance of risks for growth remains biased to the downside.
He/she mentioned that, the above, together with changes in the composition of government expenditures, implies substantial challenges for the fiscal consolidation foreseen for 2025.
One member stated that, despite the volatility of the latter, given the world economic deceleration there are likely to be lower pressures on the prices of energy products and, consequently, on non-core inflation.
He/she mentioned that short-term interest rates also moved downwards, although in a differentiated manner, given the varied expectations of the trajectory of each economy’s monetary policy.
He/she pointed out that this new opportunity must now be leveraged to avoid sending the message of complacency as in the past, by prematurely and automatically confirming a ratecutting cycle.
He/she pointed out an increase in inflation, a steepening of the yield curve, a greater depreciation of the Mexican peso, an increase in risk aversion, certain impacts on macrofinancial stability, and the possibility of more external shocks of a financial nature.
Some members highlighted the high labor force participation rate and the fact that the unemployment rate remains at historic lows.
He/she mentioned that domestic demand remains weak, while external demand has recovered rapidly and that this difference is due to the fact that the former is directly affected by domestic monetary policy, which still remains restrictive in relation to the economic conditions, while the latter is benefited by the fiscal and monetary stimuli in other economies.
He/she noted that monetary policy still has room to contribute to improve financing conditions without jeopardizing other aspects of the economy.
Second, monetary policy actions have not achieved the desired effect on the real interest rate.
Another member added that these measures’ intent is for households and firms to be able to face their temporarily lower incomes as a result of the pandemic, as well as to avoid a credit contraction.
Among the medium- and long-term risks to potential growth, another member noted the possible modification of the fiscal policy stance by the incoming administration, as well as the deterioration of Mexico’s conditions of access to international trade.
One member added that at times it exhibits a significant downward trend, improving headline inflation’s performance, but at other times it exerts an upward influence.
In this regard, one member mentioned the imposition of tariffs between these countries, as well as restrictions to trade in technology and to investment, while another member added that other idiosyncratic factors have also contributed to the economic slowdown.
As for growth in the medium and long term, one member argued that: i) strengthening the rule of law; ii) increasing economic productivity; and, iii) promoting actions that improve confidence and investment expectations are essential.
One member highlighted the Brexit, where not only significant delays have materialized, but also that the probability of an agreement on terms reasonable for both the United Kingdom and the European Union has diminished.
One member mentioned that, measured through the foreign trade flows of these economies, their direct ties and the destination of their products, the impact could concentrate mostly in Eastern Europe and euro area countries, as well as in China, although he/she considered that, given the importance of the economies involved, as suppliers of metals and commodities and as producers of fertilizers, global economic activity could be affected.
Such member expressed his/her view that starting out with a persistent environment of caution for investment in addition to the direct and indirect effects originated by the aforementioned developments, a stronger emotional constraint must also be considered.
One member pointed out that their growth is due to an increase in both the price and volume of exports.
He/she pointed out that any eventual adjustments would be implemented in order to maintain the ex-ante real interest rate in a March decision, such rate has increased by 12 basis points, thus laying towards the middle of said range.
Another member argued that supply and demand shocks, and the behavior of the exchange rate, are reflected in both the divergent evolution of merchandise and services’ prices and in the contrasting price increases of different items of the CPI basket.
It will consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures.
Another member mentioned that, in recent days, risk appetite increased, driven by the relatively optimistic tone of the Federal Reserve regarding the expected performance of the US economy.
One member noted that recent indicators suggest that the weakening of economic activity during the fourth quarter of 2018 may extend to the beginning of 2019.
He/she warned about the risks of a possible excessive monetary tightening and a global recession for international financial markets.
Some members added that agricultural and livestock product prices registered smaller variations at the margin.
All members highlighted that the Mexican peso appreciated.
He/she considered that the recovery should be taken with caution and added that the IMF announced a Special Drawing Rights (SDR) allocation of USD 650 billion to member states.
Most members highlighted that the disinflation members pointed out that headline inflation has continued decreasing in most advanced economies.
Including the above into the statement would convey a clearer and more credible message, which would be in line with maintaining a restrictive policy stance in absolute and relative terms for as long as necessary, but not as restrictive as the current one.
He/she argued that given Mexico's high degree of financial and trade integration with the rest of the world and its exposure to various types of external shocks, it is necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic stance at all times.
Some members pointed out that growth is expected to run close to potential for the rest of 2018 and for 2019, thus maintaining the output gap close to zero.
Another member noted his/her concern that such cost pressures are being observed in the overall economy and, especially, in the manufacturing sector.
He/she added that in view of the more complex outlook, forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for a more extended period than the previously foreseen.
As to emerging economies, one member mentioned that their economic growth exhibits significant differences and has weakened.
One member considered that the performance of labor markets could contribute to attain their inflation targets, but he/she also stated that this is still subject to uncertainty, given the moderate increases in labor costs and the risks for global economic activity.
Another member pointed out that the date on which the first downward adjustment is expected to take place has been postponed.
Another member mentioned that in an adverse environment like the one currently faced by the Mexican economy, the optimal macroeconomic response would be to adjust both fiscal and monetary policies.
One member pointed out that this could lead to capital outflows from emerging economies.
One member highlighted that such measures are necessary given the volatility registered by domestic financial markets.
In this regard, he/she indicated that the persistence of food and non-food merchandise increased significantly and that, in the disinflation phase, it has been decreasing, approaching its historical norm.
He/she pointed out that, under these two axes, the monetary policy stance is expected to continue operating through its different channels.
He/she pointed out that, in contrast, both services consumption and consumption of domestic durable goods still show a strong contraction.
Another member pointed out that, although gross fixed investment rebounded in January, it declined again in February.
He/she pointed out that in the 12-to-24 month forecast horizon, headline and core inflation are anticipated to be around 3%.
In this regard, he/she recalled that between basis points to a level of 8.25% and it was at that point when gross private investment reached its peak, while from that time up to now it has contracted policy’s room for maneuver to boost consumption is limited in the absence of fiscal support to avoid the closing of companies, job losses and the consequent decrease in credit to households and firms, especially SMEs, due to the increase in risk perception of financial institutions.
He/she mentioned that there is also an inertia of increases in the prices of non-tradable goods that will not be easy to control.
Most members added that, given the lower demand and a practically nil storage capacity, even negative figures were registered in the futures’ contracts to be settled next month.
One member indicated that, despite the above, upward risks have increased.
One member mentioned that he/she foresees that it will close below target, and be the second lowest annual inflation of the current century.
He/she highlighted that core inflation rates for May, June and July were the highest for similar months since 1999.
Another member added that since the last monetary policy decision, advanced economies’ interest rates increased moderately and the US dollar registered a generalized depreciation.
However, another member considered that the latter have been recovering after the decline observed at the end of 2022.
However, he/she considered that, given the significant adjustment to the forecasts, the proposed increase in the interest rate, and the notably restrictive level attained by the ex-ante real interest rate, the balance of risks for inflation will be compatible with a slower pace of adjustments in future monetary policy decisions.
He/she pointed out that such adjustments have led to increases in core inflation and, in the case of non-core inflation, some comparison base effects are expected on energy prices.
He/she added that the National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its acronym in Spanish) suggests that there has been a reallocation of resources towards lower income deciles, which have a higher marginal propensity to consume, possibly contributing to a higher-than-expected growth in domestic spending.
One member mentioned that non-food merchandise inflation is also highly correlated with that of the United States, which generates a process of imported inflation which would explain the dynamics of higher inflation in the Northern and North-Central regions of Mexico.
One member highlighted the case of the United States.
Some members indicated that expectations implied by market instruments for the end of 2024 point to a greater decline in the federal funds rate than the Federal Reserve's projections.
In this regard, he/she stated that the central bank conducts its monetary policy considering all inflation determinants and its expectations, including the actions taken by the Federal Reserve.
Some members considered that the balance of risks around the projected trajectory of inflation remains uncertain.
Second, he/she added that upwards risks to inflation have intensified and that the most important one stems from the proposed reform to Banco de México’s Law.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
In relation to the monetary policy decision, considering that the lower levels recorded by headline inflation, as well as the ample slack conditions in the economy and the recent behavior of the external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, the majority considered adequate to reduce by 25-basis points the overnight interbank interest rate to a level of 7.50%.
However, he/she noted that its rebound has been lower than expected.
One member indicated that it will be necessary to assess the possible implications of exchange rate adjustments on inflation dynamics.
Another member noted that the currencies of emerging economies appreciated, their stock markets registered gains, their risk premia decreased and their interest rates exhibited mixed, albeit narrow, adjustments.
He/she therefore stated the need for a monetary support such as domestic and external financial conditions allow.
Most members pointed out that, in its latest reading, services inflation decreased.
As for public finance consolidation, most members stressed that the 2019 Economic Package submitted by the Ministry of Finance strengthening required in this matter and that it was prepared considering a macroeconomic scenario based on realistic assumptions.
One member added that said balance has not deteriorated.
Some members commented that those for the next twelve months declined.
However, he/she warned that the effects of such transmission are not symmetrical across inflation components, resulting in differentiated lags in price adjustments between goods and services.
The same member mentioned that the unavoidable government expenditures must be considered, which include transfers to the states, pension payments, and the cost of public debt.
Another member stated that from June onwards, sovereign credit risk indicators registered increases, albeit smaller than in other stress episodes.
Another member mentioned that sovereign credit default swaps (CDS) are at nearly half the level observed at the end of 2018.
He/she expressed that the most effective defense for lower-income groups is to protect their purchasing power and to mitigate the impact on employment.
Most members highlighted that 555,000 formal IMSS-insured jobs were lost in April.
As to economic activity in advanced economies, some members agreed that industrial production showed weakness.
One member recalled how the impossibility of having a sufficiently low real interest rate during the financial crisis of 2008-09 led to a slower-thandesirable recovery of the US economy.
In particular, he/she mentioned that for a relatively small and open emerging economy, the process for determining the monetary policy stance should consider both the economy’s cyclical position and its influence on inflation, as well as the financial conditions that are being faced and its role in macroeconomic stability, including maintaining low and stable inflation.
He/she pointed out that, although there are risks associated with this legislative process, it is key to address said challenges without jeopardizing the Central Bank’s autonomy, which has been a cornerstone of Mexico’s macroeconomic stability and the main strength behind the country’s credit profile.
Regarding construction, most members stressed that its decline intensified during the year.
He/she considered that it is difficult to estimate the output gap in the two-year horizon in which monetary policy has an effect, given the environment of uncertainty and the possibility that the potential growth of the economy is below the estimated figure.
Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures of various nature.
He/she pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase would achieve this objective and would reflect the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate, in a context of significant inflationary pressures.
One member mentioned that the anchoring of medium and long run inflation expectations makes it clear that Banco de México’s monetary policy actions have prevented the emergence of second-round effects from the different shocks that have affected prices.
As for the risk related to political and geopolitical factors, some members stated that in the Eurozone some vulnerabilities associated with domestic turmoil and political differences have increased, stating as an example those related to the approval of the budgetary process in Italy, the Brexit, the U.S. midterm elections in November, and Brazil’s presidential elections.
One member highlighted that practically all central banks have emphasized in their statements the need to intensify the monetary stimulus to speed up the economic recovery process.
He/she considered that signaling that the downward cycle will continue in order to support economic activity may be very risky.
Another member pointed out that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments for the 6- to 10-year average remain at Most members stated that, in view of greater- forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards up to the second and the third convergence to the 3% target during the first quarter of 2024 is maintained.
He/she stated that this shows how the signals sent by central banks can be equally or more relevant than the policy decisions regarding the interest rate.
Most members mentioned that inflationary pressures have been generalized and persistent.
The majority of members noted that the economic recovery will take place at a moderate pace.
Most members mentioned that world economic growth moderated during the fourth quarter of 2022.
They noted that, in some cases, inflation reached its highest level in decades.
Some members stressed the Federal Reserve's decision to maintain its range for the federal funds rate at 0-0.25%.
Most members highlighted that, in said context, the Mexican peso exhibited volatility and an appreciation.
On the supply side, most members underlined the heterogeneous recovery across different sectors.
Most members highlighted that in the foreseeable future all factors and elements that have an impact on both inflation and its outlook should be followed, and the necessary actions be taken, so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
One member stated that the oil revenue target assumes a production of 1.8 million barrels per day, compared to the 1.6 million currently produced.
One member underlined that labor force participation rates are at levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
All members agreed that the message of Banco de México should be that of its commitment to reach the inflation target.
Most members pointed out that domestic financial markets have reflected the effects of lower interest rates for all terms in the main advanced economies, as well as episodes of volatility with exchange rate adjustments, although these have diminished over the last weeks.
One member indicated that, despite expectations of headline inflation converging to its target, the trajectory depends on core inflation’s persistence easing and on non-core inflation converging to levels close to the inflation target.
He/she added that when macroeconomic conditions allow for additional adjustments, these would be gradual.
One member pointed out that the implied volatility in exchange rate options exhibited overall increases in all maturities and remains high as compared to the levels observed in other emerging economies’ currencies, particularly for expiration dates close to July 1, when elections in Mexico will take place.
One member highlighted the faster increase in domestic gas prices.
He/she stated that the prevailing level of monetary restriction should be weighed against the evolution of inflation and its components, as well as its outlook, considering that the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained as well as the one prevailing in the future will impact the inflation outlook over the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
For this reason, it is necessary to be more analytic and careful of the current circumstances and of its implications for monetary policy.
This would signal that we are nearing the cycle’s terminal rate and would also be consistent with the current balance of risks.
Another member noted that the negative output gap continues to be above 4% and is not expected to close before 2023.
Some members highlighted the sluggishness in manufacturing.
He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions become less important, until inflation is under control.
One member added that, although this sector had reactivated to some extent in December, it partially reversed such progress in January, and thus, from a medium-term perspective, it seems stagnant.
One member stated that foreign participants showed interest in short-term instruments.
Another member noted that, given the elevated inflation levels and the risk of expectations becoming unanchored, emerging economies central banks’ decision to accelerate monetary tightening reflects their priority to control inflation.
He/she highlighted that, given the complex and uncertain inflationary outlook, this central bank needs to remain vigilant and persevere in its efforts to ensure the stability of the purchasing power of the national currency.
Another member highlighted that none of the inflation determinants have deteriorated significantly to the point of expecting upward pressures on prices given that: i) ample slack conditions persist; ii) the peso exchange rate has withstood episodes of volatility and has depreciated only moderately; and iii) despite the increases in international oil prices, their impact on domestic prices is expected to be partially mitigated by the federal government's pricing policy.
This, considering the unfounded optimism that prevails at the global level, including in Mexico, claiming it is possible to return to the inflation target with lower rates.
He/she indicated that the implied expectations for the trajectory of the reference rate in TIIE swaps discount with a higher probability that the next reference rate cut will occur only until the November policy decision, and that the reference rate will close the year at 10.60%.
He/she added that, when the underemployed are included in the extended unemployment, the concept of labor gap is attained, which registered 40% in June, twice as large as the figure of March, but below the 53% recorded in May, which indicates that it has already bottomed out.
Some members underlined the importance of having more timely data to monitor which scenarios will materialize.
Therefore, he/she stated that, looking ahead, the process of convergence could face significant challenges.
In this context, one member noted that Pemex remains the main domestic risk factor given its dependence on the federal government’s financial support.
However, one member noted that stock markets exhibited a heterogeneous behavior.
One member argued that, while some indicators associated with financial markets seem to anticipate an economic recession, the employment data appears to be more consistent with a slowdown, rather than a long and lasting contraction.
Most members considered that the balance of risks with regards to the expected path of inflation continues to be biased to the upside, in an environment of marked uncertainty.
Some members highlighted that the Mexican peso has a high level of sensitivity due to its use as a hedge currency and, therefore, it should be taken into account that lowering short-term interest rates in Mexico reduces the cost of this type of transactions.
Some members mentioned that this was due to both international and idiosyncratic factors.
Another one added that such forecasts are in line with the adjustments made by international organizations and analysts.
One member considered that the degree of uncertainty regarding the evolution of the main macroeconomic aggregates, of financial markets and the external environment, and thus of inflation, is unusually high.
One member added that, although it is in negative territory, it is not statistically different from zero.
One member expressed that the output gap estimates are generally not statistically different from zero.
One member also underlined the increase in mortgage lending.
One member added that, although a rapid fall in headline and core inflation is projected as of the third quarter of this year, it may not occur, even after the monetary tightening attained, due to the persistence of inflation that has been observed.
This, considering the inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target.
Another member noted that this decline is due to the better functioning of global supply chains and to the moderation of price pressures on various inputs.
Another member stated that non-core inflation has almost reached its highest level in twenty years.
He/she added that, in the absence of further shocks, discussions could begin regarding the level of reference rate cuts.
He/she pointed out that growth of formal employment has decelerated since mid2023.
The majority of members pointed out that both headline and core inflation are expected to follow a downward trend in the following months.