I believe that the combination of an exchange rate close to 19 pesos per US dollar, an annual inflation below target, the significant reduction of external and domestic risks, and null economic growth could fully justify opting for a more decisive policy action.
One member noted that research on the lighthouse effect of the minimum wage concludes that the impact should be marginal.
He/she added that the surplus observed in the balance of payments’ current account has served to accommodate the outflows, while the banking sector has absorbed the reduction in foreigners' holdings due to the search for investment options to replace the lower credit placement.
Most members stated that, although investment and consumption have improved, they still remain below their pre-pandemic levels.
Banco de México's Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy.
One member acknowledged that there is a certain effect of labor market dynamics, but he/she stated that their magnitude does not seem to be such as to explain the levels reached by services inflation.
He/she added that the deterioration in the global economic environment, geopolitical conflicts, uncertainty about the reestablishment of supply chains, and the future path of world inflation, result in an even greater challenge for the conduction of monetary policy, and that the start of a period of elevated interest rates and economic weakness may be witnessed.
He/she affirmed that monetary policy decisions should remain independent of the decisions made by the Federal Reserve and that it is not possible to compare Mexico’s interest rate spreads with those of other countries since the target rates respond to contexts and needs that are not entirely comparable.
He/she pointed out that it is necessary to remember the highly accommodative nature of the new monetary policy strategy adopted by the Federal Reserve.
Some members stated that the external sources of financing have become negative.
He/she delved into the information suggested by the central bank’s forecast, by reiterating, on the one hand, that the revision to headline inflation is attributed to supply shocks, with the convergence timeline remaining unchanged, and, on the other hand, that core inflation is anticipated to continue decreasing.
As for the balance of risks to global growth, most members stated that it is significantly biased to the downside and one pointed out that it has deteriorated.
He/she emphasized that Banco de México must continue with the cautious approach that has guided its decisions.
Another member added that growth forecasts for these years already incorporate the effects of the tax reform and that they remain stable at 2.8% and some members mentioned the possibility of the effects of the tax incentives gradually fading in the following years.
One member mentioned the possibility of complications in the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union.
Another member added the lower credit risk premia and the improvement in the country-risk perception, as well as the stability of public finances and the lower uncertainty regarding international trade.
He/she stated that, despite the low level of development of the financial system, when credit fluctuations are very pronounced, such as in the current juncture, their impact on aggregate activity is significant despite the fact that only a fraction of the economy operates with bank credit.
In the same regard, he/she mentioned that the higher risk premia observed does not limit the margin for lowering the monetary policy rate and rather constitutes an additional reason for continuing to do so, as a substantial reduction would allow to offset the effect of the higher risk premia by maintaining or even lowering the cost of credit to firms.
Most members noted that the Federal Reserve indicated that it could start reducing its asset purchase program this year and that the program would end in mid-2022.
Some members pointed out that it has been below the central bank's forecasts.
As to sovereign risk premia, most members highlighted that they remained at high levels similar to those observed in the latest monetary policy decision while one member stated that they registered a decrease.
He/she mentioned that in the case of Mexico this would allow for the recovery of consumption and investment, which are the most affected aggregate demand components.
Some members noted that the balance of risks for world economic growth is biased to the downside and is subject to high uncertainty, mainly for European economies.
As for the US Federal Reserve, all members indicated that in its July meeting it cut its target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points (bps) and brought forward the end of its balance sheet reduction.
The Board added that with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member indicated that, while it should always be kept in mind that the inflation target refers to headline inflation, when conducting monetary policy, it should be considered that the non-core component is highly volatile and that core inflation better reflects the trend in inflation.
Some members argued that headline inflation expectations drawn from surveys remain above Banco de México's forecasts.
He/she mentioned that, although no liquidity problems are foreseen in the Mexican banking system, a temporary increase in the cost of financing cannot be ruled out.
In this context, he/she considered that in small open emerging economies, which need to supplement their domestic savings with external sources of financing, it is even more important to maintain a solid macroeconomic environment that attracts capital and fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy.
Most members stressed that, in the opinion of economic analysts surveyed by Banco de México, the current juncture to make investments is going through difficult times.
With regard to the US economy, some members highlighted the moderation of its growth rate and the weakening of investment.
One member mentioned that the fall in core inflation is particularly relevant, since this component better reflects the medium-term trend of headline inflation.
One member pointed out that expectations measured through compensation for inflation and inflation risk in 10-year bonds reached a historical high, and that the 10-year inflation risk premium remains at levels similar to those registered during other stress periods.
Some members highlighted that said institution acknowledged that the risks to the fulfillment of its employment and price stability mandates are moving towards a better balance.
The majority noted that lower rates of change in the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex, as observed in the case of energy goods due to the greater weakness exhibited by the world economy, would also contribute to reduce core inflation.
One member considered that this reduces the vulnerability of the peso.
Such member pointed out that in September 2018, headline inflation was 5.02%, which implies that in a year inflation decreased slightly more than 200 basis points.
Some members noted that gains in asset price valuations have reverted.
Some members added labor market pressures and higher transportation costs.
In contrast, one of the members stated that most financial assets in advanced economies exhibited marginal changes.
He/she pointed out that in August investment registered an annual contraction of 16.64% as a result of the impact of the pandemic and an environment that is not conducive to investment.
All Governing Board members highlighted that the lower dynamism of global economic activity has been reflected in expectations of a slower monetary policy normalization by the major central banks, and in lower short- and long-term interest rates in the United States.
On the other hand, he/she mentioned that, in emerging economies, and in Mexico in particular, price formation can become rapidly contaminated by the shocks that have affected inflation.
He/she added that TIIE swaps decreased in all of their nodes.
He/she stated that the effects of the external environment on the relative monetary policy stance are yet to be defined.
Some members emphasized that given the nature of the shocks and the fact that their effects concentrated in few CPI items, these did not lead to a generalized increase in prices.
Most members mentioned that between April and the first fortnight of June 2019, headline inflation decreased from 4.41 to 4.00%.
The same member also stated the existence of prevailing concerns about the situation of Italy's public finances and financing in the short and medium terms and the sanctions the European Union authorities may impose on that country.
Nevertheless, the same member noted that this process will be faster in the United States than in other countries.
Another member highlighted the role of the pandemic in inflationary pressures, which can be divided in two stages.
Some members mentioned other additional risks to growth, such as the tightening of international monetary and financial conditions, a faster-than-expected normalization of U.S. monetary policy, and/or unexpected changes in the aforementioned normalization process.
He/she recalled that, during the second half of 2022, although headline inflation was already decreasing, the hiking cycle continued.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that, although the balance of risks remains biased upwards, it is less adverse than the one prevailing at the start of 2023.
Another member highlighted a greater reduction of public revenues.
Another member argued that economies that registered inflation levels consistently above their targets during the health crisis, face greater restrictions and must act rapidly and decisively to attain the convergence of inflation to its target and to preserve their credibility.
Most members stated that timely indicators suggest that world economic activity continued decelerating during the third quarter.
Another member argued that, considering the number of businesses that have closed down permanently, based on the number of those that have withdrawn their registration at the IMSS, it can be concluded that a large part of the current unemployment is permanent, since these are not jobs that may be regained during the reactivation of the economy.
Thus, some members underlined that the outlook of a continuing disinflationary process is maintained.
He/she noted that this contraction confirms the expectation of a tightening in credit approval for the first quarter of 2021 that was observed in Banco de México’s Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish acronym).
Some members added that the positive outlook on the nearshoring process has also contributed to the above.
However, the same member emphasized that, as risk appetite normalizes, interest rate spreads may be more relevant.
Some members noted that this was due to a greater risk appetite among international investors.
They mentioned that Mexican banks exceed capitalization.
Another member stated that the dynamics within the components of inflation has led to an upward adjustment of forecasts.
One member noted that although a lower deficit than the one approved is expected for 2023, a public balance deficit of 4.9% of GDP is anticipated for 2024.
In this regard, another member added that although long-term interest rates decreased in Mexico, they did so to a lesser extent than in other emerging economies.
They also pointed out that there are factors that could contribute to episodes of risk aversion, such as those already mentioned for world economic All members agreed that economic activity in Mexico has remained stagnant for several quarters.
Most members mentioned that financial markets positively, highlighting the increase in capital inflows.
Most continued registering weakness, with levels lower than those prior to the pandemic, as well as a heterogeneous behavior among subsectors.
He/she indicated that the Bank’s forecasts suggest that this process will continue, while inflation expectations remain anchored and moving slowly towards their historical averages.
Most members noted that the balance of risks for global economic activity is biased to the All members highlighted the high levels that world inflation has registered.
In this regard, he/she highlighted that so far this year short- and long-term interest rates in Mexico have adjusted downwards significantly as compared to other emerging economies, which, despite having lower short-term interest rates, have been subject to pressures on long-term ones.
Some members noted that it will also result from a lower core inflation.
He/she added that this could imply higher inflation expectations for the short term, as well as a higher inflation risk premium.
Some members highlighted that, since the previous monetary policy decision, the inflation trajectory for the following eight quarters has been revised significantly upwards.
They mentioned that the above have been affected by an outlook of more restrictive monetary policies in the main advanced economies and by a lower global growth outlook.
He/she argued that remittances have registered the best performance of the last 18 years, although significant challenges are anticipated in the future, given the lower levels of economic growth in the United States, the decreased fiscal stimuli, and the level of employment of Mexican migrants in said country that has already surpassed its pre-pandemic levels.
Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
Another member argued that the lower dynamism of consumption and investment is accounted for by the fact that their determinants remain highly deteriorated.
Some members stated that in their last policy meetings most central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged once again.
One member pointed out that, during the first 7 months of the year, remittances increased by 23.5% as compared to the same period of 2020, and that in July the wage bill exceeded the levels registered in February 2020.
looking ahead, commitment to the primary goal must be strengthened and that a forward-looking and datadependent approach should be prioritized, avoiding any premature adjustments.
My vote for a 25 basis-point reduction is a reiteration of my voting and viewpoint in the past monetary policy decision.
He/she considered that, although limited available information and high uncertainty make an accurate analysis of the recent performance of economic activity difficult, different indicators show a smaller contraction, or even a slight recovery, at the beginning of May, although starting from very low levels, mainly as a result of the gradual reopening of the economy.
Some members pointed out that face- to-face services continue to be significantly affected.
In this regard, he/she highlighted the reduction of inflation in the United States and other countries.
He/she pointed out that in addition to further surprises and shocks, monetary policy adjustments have been insufficient to counter the deterioration of price formation and have had a limited impact on the real interest rate, which remains below the required level.
Another member added the upward revision in inflation expectations, the greater inflationary uncertainty, and even a possible upward bias in inflation as other factors leading to increases in U.S. interest rates.
He/she considered that if inflation and its expectations do not decrease in a clear and continuous manner in the coming months, the target rate should not be lowered.
Most members also underlined the risk that public finances deteriorate.
Similarly, the same member mentioned that an escalation of trade tensions between China and the U.S. may benefit Mexico, as a result of the natural redirectioning of certain bilateral trade flows between those countries.
This implies that we have already taken steps forward in addressing this issue.
He/she argued that the observed tightening in financial conditions, despite the reduction in the reference rate and weak fiscal support, reduces the room for maneuver for monetary policy.
Most members mentioned that the lesser risk aversion was reflected in gains in the main stock market indices.
Some members highlighted the contraction of imports of final goods and of machinery and equipment.
He/she added that this is essential given the outlook of a further monetary tightening worldwide.
The majority mentioned that global economic activity continued to recover during the third heterogeneously across countries, associated with the evolution of the pandemic and with spending programs.
One member highlighted that, based on the opinion of business owners and economic forecasters, among the obstacles to economic activity in Mexico, the factors related to governance problems (public insecurity, political instability, impunity and corruption) and uncertainty in domestic economic conditions stand out.
and that it also announced a decrease in the rate of reduction of its balance sheet starting in June.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that the foreseen trajectory for core inflation remains highly uncertain, given that the impact on the composition of expenditure may persist to the extent that the pandemic continues and mobility restrictions are maintained.
Third, a balance of risks to inflation that is clearly biased to the upside.
Regarding growth expectations for 2020, another member pointed out that these have been adjusted downwards from April 2018 to April 2019.
Some members highlighted the reduction in credit to consumers and small- and medium-sized firms.
He/she added that, naturally, the contraction of employment has been more marked in certain regions of the country, such as the northern border zone, where greater wage adjustments have been observed, even showing a sharp contrast with the neighboring municipalities that have not been affected by such adjustments.
Most members considered important to continue implementing measures to strengthen the credit provision channels, provide liquidity and foster the well-functioning of the financial system.
One member considered that public policies that incentivize the supply and demand of credit should be strengthened.
All members mentioned that in the fourth quarter of 2023, the Mexican economy registered a greater-than-expected slowdown.
Headline inflation has behaved better than expected and is already at levels close to Banco de México’s target.
All members underlined that in its October meeting, the US Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
One member stated that this risk is not minor, as adverse weather conditions are becoming more frequent with deeper and longer-lasting effects.
He/she delved into the fact that the effective, sustained, and coherent communication strategy followed by the Federal Reserve has contributed to the assimilation of its new monetary policy strategy’s highly accommodative tone by market participants, allowing news about the asset purchase program to have a limited impact on financial markets.
All members cautioned that monetary policy faces a more adverse scenario and with greater uncertainty.
Such member stated that this has required a significant depreciation of the real exchange rate and a further strengthening of macroeconomic policy.
Another member noted the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in light of episodes of international financial volatility.
He/she added that, given the magnitude of the wage increase, it is foreseeable that a significant number of micro and small enterprises, which group the largest number of workers earning the minimum wage, will have to pass-through such adjustments to the prices of their products, cut their number of employees, or, in the worst case, abandon formality.
One member added that headline inflation has been affected by significant adjustments stemming from both the exchange rate and from pressures to non-core inflation, particularly energy prices.
He/she added that it will be necessary to take into account that inflation, while remaining above target, has declined considerably.
He/she pointed out that it turns out to be even higher when considering the lower exchange risk, the greater risk appetite, and that no changes are expected in the accommodative monetary policies worldwide.
He/she argued that, considering the features of the inflation outlook mentioned above, the policy stance can be strengthened in lesser magnitude than as in the February meeting.
One member noted that an improvement was observed in both the oil trade balance and the total trade balance.
In this regard, he/she added that the direction of adjustments of the target rate is an even stronger signal than the level of the reference rate per se.
He/she stated that, looking ahead, the Governing Board will continue to work together to find the best strategy to meet Banco de México's primary mandate in the current complex environment.
Under the current conditions, there is room to lower the monetary policy rate and still keep its restrictive character given: that the negative output gap is still widening; a smaller deviation of inflation from its target; global risk aversion has diminished and accommodative monetary policies continue to prevail in most economies.
Some members mentioned that an estimate of the nonoccupied population who is available for employment has decreased significantly.
I deem it responsible to reflect in depth about the appropriate level of monetary restriction in the current context, characterized by the evident progress in the inflation outlook and prospects of greater slack conditions.
Another member pointed out that the macroprudential policies implemented in Mexico over the last two decades have so far allowed the Mexican financial system to be sufficiently resilient to avoid contagions as well as to contain any signs of instability.
He/she stated that these two components accounted for 64% of the most recent inflation figure.
Thus, some members argued that the effect on core inflation of the shocks that non-core inflation is currently experiencing would be limited.
Another member attributed the stability of long-term expectations to the credibility of the central bank.
responded mainly to inflationary pressures from abroad on energy and food prices, and to higher production costs.
Such member acknowledged that the economy has also been affected by uncertainty about the trade relationship with North America, the process of monetary policy normalization in the United States and other idiosyncratic factors.
As for world inflation, most members pointed out that there is also some divergence in the behavior of inflation and its expectations in advanced economies.
One member considered that this assumes a small slope in the Phillips curve.
He/she stated that the degree of monetary restriction attained resulted from the atypical nature of the shocks and risks confronted and reiterated that both have mitigated significantly.
Another member pointed out that domestic and external financing sources continued to increase during the third quarter.
One member argued that this is due to the difficulty to find employment amid lockdown policies.
Another member pointed out that, although trading conditions have improved, they have still not returned to those observed prior to the pandemic.
He/she highlighted that those core inflation items that are more susceptible to the exchange rate and energy prices could continue registering larger increases.
He/she pointed out that the ten CPI items with the highest variation in the first fortnight of April, corresponding to the fruits and vegetables subcomponent, contributed with nearly 60 basis points to headline inflation.
He/she added that indicators related to world trade volume have already shown certain signs of weakness, while timely indicators of manufacturing and services show a differentiated behavior, with the latter displaying greater dynamism.
One member noted that the global economic slowdown has contributed to the above.
He/she highlighted that it is essential to send clear signals of commitment to the primary mandate in order to preserve the institution’s credibility.
One member added that a healthy and wellcapitalized financial system must be maintained, in addition to reducing both Mexico’s sovereign and Pemex’s credit risk.
The majority indicated that despite the reduction in core inflation from 3.73% in October to decline due to the aforementioned shocks and also to structural factors.
The same member noted that there is an exceptional contrast with business confidence, which has not really changed in the past months.
First, credit to households and firms continues contracting.
One member mentioned that the output and unemployment gaps, along with other slack indicators, suggest the presence of demandrelated inflationary pressures.
Most members mentioned that this has led to a depreciation of their currencies and to volatility in their foreign exchange markets, as well as to pressures on stock indices and interest rates.
He/she delved into the shortage of inputs slowing down production in certain sectors, which is uncommon during an early upward stage of the economic cycle.
One member expressed that certain advanced economies, by having a reserve currency and well-developed institutions, have managed to promote a significant and broad range of relief measures for employment and guarantee programs for businesses and households.
Another member noted that inflation forecasts have continued to be revised upwards since the current tightening cycle began in June to reach its highest point in the first quarter of 2022, as the inflationary shocks that were observed in the same period of the previous year begin to fade.
They highlighted that after the last policy meeting, the Mexican peso depreciated.
He/she underlined that, in his/her opinion, it is evident that the adjustments implemented in the monetary policy stance have been insufficient to counteract the deterioration in the price formation process and the increase in inflation expectations, and therefore he/she considered it absolutely necessary to bring the real interest rate to restrictive territory.
Another member mentioned that the new shocks have shaped inflation dynamics, offsetting the reductions stemming from arithmetic effects.
As for inflation expectations derived from market instruments, one member mentioned that these have remained unchanged for three consecutive months, while another stated that the differentials between nominal and real yields continue suggesting upward risks for inflation in the long run.
Another member mentioned that although an increase in energy prices was observed in January, the federal government’s price policy for these goods will contribute to keep inflation under control in the following months.
Most members noted that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2020 remain at levels near the target, and those for the medium and long terms have remained relatively stable, although at levels above 3%.
He/she pointed out that the outcome will depend on the intensity of each of the abovementioned pressures, as well as on the interaction among them.
In this regard, he/she pointed out that these increases created the expectation of a more permanent inflation, and therefore did not affect the real interest rate.
If the aforementioned prevails, it would be a factor of concern that could be considered as a second-round effect on prices.
One member highlighted that non-core inflation accumulated during the first seven months of the year was -3.82%, the lowest figure in the last that it has remained persistent around 3.8%.
However, most members noted that industrial activity has lost momentum in recent months.
They added that this constitutes a risk for the sovereign rating and highlighted the possibility that the state company may require additional fiscal support, which could affect public finances.
This poses greater risks to the price formation process and to inflation expectations.
Thus, he/she indicated that in this meeting the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25%.
One member stated that, in seasonally adjusted terms, at the end of 2020 IMSS-insured jobs were 786,693 below those registered in February.
He/she highlighted that this period will also allow us to analyze the effects of the shocks associated with the global inflationary episode on how the economy operates, not only in the short term, but also its possible impact in the long term.
One of them elaborated on the different factors that have kept inflation structurally low in advanced economies.
Some members highlighted the asset purchase programs implemented by these authorities.
They specified that in January both food and non-food inflation registered 5.54 and although food merchandise inflation still remains at high levels, it has declined considerably.
He/she also pointed out that the package includes measures to strengthen the credit channels and the programs carried out jointly with the Ministry of Finance to ensure the proper functioning of the bond market, in order to improve the banking sector’s positioning given the large amount of capital outflows.
Most members highlighted that the financial authorities of the referred countries have confidence in their banking sectors, such as liquidity provision and increasing bank deposit insurance.
Most members expressed that recently, once risk aversion in international markets decreased, the peso reversed part of the The majority noted that, since the previous policy meeting, interest rates on government securities increased for all terms.
In this regard, another member stressed that, given the intensification or materialization of some of these risks, the main economies’ central banks may be expected to take action to improve global financial conditions, just as it has happened during 2019.
One member added that the central banks of Canada, the euro area, England and Japan did not adjust their policy rates in their March meetings either, and that they emphasized that the economic deceleration has been greater than expected.
Another member highlighted that the primary sector continued to grow.
He/she highlighted that the monetary restriction contributes to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, hence preventing inflation from persisting at high levels even after the shocks dissipate.
He/she stated that, on the one hand, risks to non-core inflation are more symmetrical; that is, their occurrence may either favor or harm their dynamics, and they are also not affected by monetary policy; on the other hand, risks to core inflation are more asymmetrical and, in principle, susceptible to monetary policy actions.
He/she explained that a reference rate of 4.50% is still an expansionary policy stance and lays below headline and core inflation figures.
In this regard, one member stressed that there are strong concerns about the future of Pemex and the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE, for its acronym in Spanish), while another member argued that obtaining a higher confidence could require additional efforts in different fronts and would also take a long time.
All members noted that interest rates on medium- and long-term government bonds increased idiosyncratic factors.
He/she mentioned the risk of price-related pressures on agricultural and livestock products due to the impact of the "El Niño" meteorological phenomenon.
In this context, considering the lower levels registered by headline inflation, its outlook within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, the more ample slack in the economy, as well as the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.25%.
It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will dissipate over the next quarters.
Regarding the balance of risks to global economic activity, one member considered that it remains biased to the downside.
He/she stated that global market conditions and the continuation of accommodative policy stances in the main central banks have opened a space for patience.
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at We need to be patient in order for the current monetary policy stance to have the desired effect on the persistence in services inflation.
As to the forecasts for non-core inflation, some members mentioned that, despite its recent decline, some of its components, particularly energy prices, are expected to exert upward pressure on this subindex in the following months.
One member pointed out that breakeven inflation rates increased marginally for the term remained at 3.34%, still below their historic average figures.
Some members pointed out that domestic financing also continued growing.
He/she underlined that, looking ahead, the expected trajectory of inflation is similar to that already anticipated during the previous monetary policy decision.
He/she underlined that shorter-term ones have already stabilized, while longer-term ones, which affect the price formation process to a greater degree, have remained anchored.
All members stated that forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards.
One member mentioned that timely information allows to anticipate that investment will continue declining.
They highlighted that the foreign exchange market continues operating in an orderly manner, in a context where markets and most analysts expect a downward adjustment in the interest rate differential between Mexico and the United States.
The same member argued that, in the best case, implementing some of these measures would generate a greater inflationary bias, besides the one the Mexican economy already has, and, in the worst case, it would be a return to policies that have already been tried and have failed, and that would imply returning to times of recurring financial and balance of payments crises.
In this context, most members stated that operating conditions in the foreign exchange market deteriorated, although one member considered that they remain at adequate levels.
He/she pointed out that the most recent readings have been below the anticipated level.
Some members also mentioned the weakness in the mining sector.
He/she added that with a 50 basis point reduction to the policy rate in Mexico, the interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States would still be very much above the spreads of all emerging economies within the same group of assets.
Most members noted that market instruments are pricing in interest rate cuts during the second half of 2023.
Another member explained that the new level of the policy rate allows for reducing the level of monetary restriction to facilitate the efficient convergence of inflation to its target and maintain the relative monetary policy stance in order to avoid an unnecessarily widening of the spread between short-term instruments denominated in Mexican pesos and in US dollars.
The majority of members warned about the vulnerabilities that persist in some of these economies.
First, such member reflected upon different commentator’s opinions regarding the objectives that a central bank ought to have.
He/she mentioned that given the described outlook and considering the lag with which monetary policy operates, it is imperative to lower the reference rate.
He/she argued that, in this context, rating agencies have downgraded several sovereign and corporate credit ratings, thus contributing to reinforce the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank rate by 25 basis points to 7.75%.
One member stated that the exchange rate adjustment occurred through a reduction in long positions and an increased demand for currency hedging in light of the risk of a greater depreciation, which were partially offset by increased positions on short- and medium-term government securities.
They added that the accommodative monetary policy stances have also contributed to the favorable performance of said markets.
Regarding the monetary policy statement, he/she added that it is necessary to highlight the deteriorated inflationary dynamics, especially the resistance of the core component to decline, the balance of risks to the upside, the upward revision in inflation forecasts, and the still high level of inflation expectations.
However, some members highlighted that the expected growth rate for the United States have been revised upwards.
He/she added that the persistence of monthly inflation has been reduced to less than half the level of 2009, thus contributing to prevent expectations from being contaminated.
One member pointed out that this negative performance is expected to continue during the following months and underlined the high levels of the VIX index.
All members mentioned that in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points and anticipated future adjustments.
They pointed out that the differences in the recovery are partly associated with the implemented policies.
One member added that in these economies, the trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation shows a downward trend.
He/she also pointed out that although the financial system overall maintains a sound position, it is necessary to ensure that financial authorities are able respond adequately to the potential challenges faced.
Some members stated that, regarding core inflation components, services’ prices remained subject to significant pressures.
One member stated that expectations for the end of 2022 are at a level close to the average observed in other inflationary episodes.
The majority noted that some central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged, while others lowered them.
Another member noted that the monetary policy normalization process of the U.S. Federal Reserve has also implied a depreciation of emerging economies’ currencies of between 1% and 4%.
The majority pointed out that markets anticipate the first interest rate increase in 2022.
He/she stated that the favorable performance of private consumption is evidence of demand-related pressures.
One member stated that, according to an analysis of the inflationary process, pressures on the core component have tended to intensify, even after discounting the base effect.
One member stated that growth rates are expected to be higher than those for 2017 and to be above potential.
One member added to the above some idiosyncratic factors, such as those associated with insecurity, water scarcity, and climate-related phenomena.
He/she also cautioned against comparing the current monetary policy stance with that of other episodes as each has its own difficulties, circumstances, and causes.
Some members noted that economic activity has deviated about 10% from the trend that it would have followed in the absence of the pandemic.
It must be credible and feasible, without putting the central bank’s reputation at risk and without undermining the effectiveness of communication with markets.
In this regard, he/she emphasized that in face of the global and domestic uncertainty no scenario, neither benign nor of additional deterioration, can be ruled out; thus, monetary policy should be conducted with extreme caution, continuing with a gradual approach, monitoring the latest information to update forecasts and maintain room for maneuver to take the necessary actions in a timely and prudent manner.
He/she mentioned that with an increase of 75 basis points, the target rate would decidedly lay in restrictive territory and that it is time to evaluate up to when and to what extent the policy stance will be tightened, and what will be the response to additional hikes by the Federal Reserve.
Therefore, he/she stated that the monetary policy stance must remain sufficiently restrictive to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process.
Most members highlighted that a slight improvement in economic activity is anticipated for the July– September period, although one member considered that currently there is scant information available to assess the evolution of the economy during this period.
Most members stated that for the next meeting, analysts and market participants foresee a pause.
Most members pointed out that the forecasts for global economic activity have been revised downwards and, for this reason, global economic activity is expected to grow at a more moderate rate.
He/she indicated that minimum wage increases seem to be affecting wage negotiations in other sectors of the labor market.
All members emphasized that stagnation of economic activity reflects a greater weakness in most components of aggregate demand, standing out among those the slowdown of consumption and lackluster investment.
Another member considered that the rise in virus infections and the challenges related to the vaccination process have contributed to episodes of volatility.
The majority commented that volatility in international financial markets eased in the last few weeks.
Another member considered that the balance for financial risks is biased to the downside.
One member considered the stability of these expectations to be consistent with the transitory nature of current inflationary pressures.
Among risks to the global economy, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic, the intensification of geopolitical tensions, and tighter monetary and financial conditions.
One member stated that sudden increases in non-core inflation cannot be ruled out, given the volatility exhibited by most of its components.
Regarding the second element, he/she restated that during this inflationary period Banco de México has acted in a timely and forceful manner.
In this context, considering that the current monetary policy is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 8.25%.
One member highlighted that the Mexican peso performed better than other Latin American currencies, some of which have been more exposed to political and social risks, either directly or by contagion.
Nevertheless, in the proposal for the adjustment of the policy rate, he/she considered attaining a greater consensus in order to send a much clearer signal.
Another member argued that, while formal jobs susceptible to social interaction continue to be highly affected, those that are more related to external demand have exceeded their pre-pandemic levels.
However, one member emphasized that it is still below the Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), and that, for this reason, its increase does not imply the presence of slack.
The same member also warned of the possibility of an adverse inflationary surprise in the United States, despite considerations of a structural flattening of the Phillips curve in that country, which could have serious consequences for international financial markets.
could be influencing the decline in non-food merchandise prices.
He/she added that monetary policy has also contributed to the resilient performance of the Mexican peso, in an environment of tight global monetary conditions.
One member added idiosyncratic risks, especially in emerging economies.
As to capital flows to these economies, some members emphasized that, although investment flows to their debt markets continue registering inflows, stock markets have been accumulating outflows for 16 consecutive weeks.
He/she added that if such pressures were present, these would already be addressed with the monetary restriction achieved.
Some members noted that, despite the tightening in labor markets, the impact on wages and inflation has been moderate in said economies.
Some members highlighted that the sound macroeconomic fundamentals have contributed to the relatively favorable performance of domestic financial markets, particularly of the foreign exchange market.
One member stated that such increase responds to the disinflationary process and the stabilization of nominal wages.
He/she argued that this differentiated dynamics between consumption of goods and that of services is observed in an environment of a more limited access to credit due to high interest rates, lower excess savings, and greater caution by consumers given the recent evolution of the labor market.
One member noted that this is in line with the transitory nature of the recent increase in inflation.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member highlighted that it is essential to continue with a very cautious approach, carefully assessing the outlook for inflation and its determinants.
Some members mentioned additional cost- related pressures.
One member mentioned that, as a result, the latter has continued to operate below its installed capacity.
Some members attributed the currency´s recent performance to the ample interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States as well as to Mexico’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals.
Considering all of the above, he/she stated that it is necessary to identify the different challenges and dilemmas that monetary policy faces, assess the scenarios that materialize, and based on these elements define the most convenient adjustments to the monetary policy stance.
Another member recalled that inflation in said country has been persistently low in recent years, and that thus it is still to be seen if, on this occasion, the economic recovery will have a sustained effect on prices.
He/she considered that the materialization of these risks could require monetary restriction for a longer period.
Similarly, he/she noted that the open unemployment rate could be an inadequate indicator to illustrate a labor imbalance.
He/she added that, on the contrary, inducing more restrictive monetary conditions in a timely manner would avoid a greater impact on price formation and would favor a more orderly adjustment in the economy as a whole, which would lead to better conditions to face episodes of volatility.
With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
Some members noted that, in the United States, several indicators have deteriorated.
He/she indicated that said shocks would materialize in a situation characterized by an inflation rate and its short- and long-term expectations above target, as well as by a weak economy.
One member detailed that the latter is associated with lower food inflation.
Looking ahead, the Board expects that the inflationary environment will allow further reference rate adjustments.
He/she stressed that although it is true that some central banks of these countries have recently raised their reference rates, the idiosyncratic character of these decisions needs to be highlighted, and therefore no simplistic extrapolations of these episodes should be made.
One member noted that foreign exchange markets showed a heterogeneous behavior by region, with Latin American currencies appreciating the most.
He/she added that the risks to which domestic financial markets and inflation are subject to have increased.
Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period.
Some members emphasized the impact of the shortage of semiconductors on the automotive industry.
Some members pointed out that the evolution of the electoral process in the United States also influenced markets.
However, another member mentioned that energy prices registered relatively low annual inflation levels.
However, another member deemed it possible that part of the exchange rate shock may be temporary or may moderate to some extent, which could imply a lower exchange rate pass-through.
They consumption remain at high levels, such as consumer confidence, the total wage bill, and remittances.
He/she added that distortions caused by the lockdown have made the reading of inflation difficult given that CPI’s fixed weights have become obsolete.
In the same direction, this member was concerned that the passthrough to the prices of services may become positive, when it is currently close to zero.
He/she argued that the above indicates that the monetary policy stance has consolidated at a sufficiently high level, even under the most pessimistic scenarios.
Some members highlighted that merchandise inflation is at double-digit levels.
As for growth forecasts, some members pointed out that timely indicators suggest that, in the U.S., GDP will continue growing at a high rate for the remainder of the year.
He/she stated that the behavior of the national currency has also contributed to the disinflationary process.
He/she expressed that this is a necessary condition not only to induce the convergence of inflation to the target, but also to manage the risks associated with such convergence.
One member added that it also reflects the outlook that investment will remain weak in the following quarters.
He/she expressed the need for communication to provide clear signals in a timely manner and to avoid inconsistencies that could damage the central bank's credibility.
Another member considered it important for monetary policy to continue its easing cycle, without ruling out the possibility of reaching a real interest rate close to zero or even negative.
One stressed that it is estimated that the shortage of fuel in some states will have a negative effect on GDP growth in the first quarter of 2019, which will depend on its intensity and duration.
Most members agreed that Banco de México must communicate a clear signal of prudence and commitment to its price stability mandate.
He/she argued that the described phenomenon requires maintaining an adequate monetary restriction given a less adverse risk outlook than that faced in 2023, and thus it does not require keeping the monetary policy stance at historically restrictive levels.
Regarding economic activity, most members pointed out that the outlook for the U.S. economy has strengthened.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
Most members underlined that a recovery is expected during the second half of 2020, which would extend to next year.
Some members noted that in most economies, inflation remains above their respective central bank targets.
Another member pointed out that although the negative output gap forecast should contribute to ease inflationary pressures, there is the risk that supply shocks on inflation and, specifically, the trends that are being observed in wages, lead to a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, especially in an environment of increases in shortterm headline inflation expectations and of a persisting upward trend in long-term core inflation expectations.
The same member pointed out that it is essential to maintain a prudent policy stance until the Bank clearly fulfils its mandate in a more solid manner given that in order to ensure that headline inflation remains around 3%, it is necessary for core inflation to converge to that same level, albeit currently it is not very far from 3%.
He/she considered it necessary to maintain such expectations anchored.
They detailed that the European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada cut their reference rates again by 25 basis points.
It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico.
One member noted that, after the episodes of financial turmoil in the international banking sector, the increase in volatility that had been observed in the foreign exchange market has reversed.
All members of the Governing Board agreed that the downward trajectory followed by inflation can be, to a large extent, attributed to the monetary policy actions adopted by Banco de México.
He/she also deemed necessary not only to monitor whether the balance of risks remains biased to the upside, but also its evolution in response to the mitigation of tail risks, taking into account disruptions in supply chains, supply-related pressures, or if inflation becomes entrenched at elevated levels.
Another member mentioned that both headline inflation and its components continue on an upward trend, despite the wide slack and the exchange rate appreciation.
In this context, one member underlined that political and geopolitical issues in the United Kingdom, Italy, France, and China, as well as idiosyncratic risks of emerging economies, will continue contributing to the environment of high uncertainty.
He/she also stated that the level of restriction attained is sufficiently robust in light of possible adjustments in the stance relative to other economies.
However, he/she detailed that most of them are expected to continue reducing their monetary restriction until they converge to their neutral positions in 2025.
He/she stated that although part of this adjustment may be transitory, the low level of participation of foreign investors in primary auctions of government securities in Mexico stands out.
He/she noted that the current conditions are more similar to those of 2012 than to those of similar to the former.
performance of industrial production to a significant increase in civil engineering construction projects.
Most members added as upside risks a possible exchange rate adjustment, as well as greater-than-expected increases in agricultural and livestock prices.
In this respect, a member emphasized the widespread risk aversion feeling in such markets, as well as the observed strengthening of the U.S. dollar.
Some members pointed out that the unemployment rate increased.
In particular, the assessment must take into consideration the following factors: the possible rebound of inflation due to the core component’s persistence; the potential reversion of the non-core component; the probable rebound of the economy in risks.
Some members indicated that commercial bank credit maintained its dynamism.
Another member noted that the eventual process of monetary normalization at a global level could have implications for the exchange rate and for capital flows, which could present greater outflows than those observed at this point.
Another member noted that the current economic cycle is not a traditional one, with unusual effects for decision making.
All members mentioned that in its May meeting the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, and reiterated its message that it would be patient in making adjustments to the range.
Some members emphasized that the chairman of the US Federal Reserve stated that it will not be appropriate to reduce the target range until there is greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward its target.
Most members attributed the recovery of the global economy to the partial reopening of activities in certain economies.
One member added that this is one of the largest within emerging economies.
Another member pointed out that although tensions in domestic financial markets have moderated, several warning indicators persist.
They stated that among the major risks those that stand out are: i) a further escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and its main trade partners; ii) that the weakness of some of the main economies lasts longer than anticipated; iii) that new episodes of international financial volatility occur; and, iv) that some political and geopolitical risks intensify.
Another member noted that non-core inflation has been below forecasts.
He/she recalled that, given a complex outlook, in the previous monetary policy decision it was determined that for the following meeting an additional increase in the reference rate would be required.
One member noted that, despite equity market inflows, there was a net decrease in this position.
He/she added that the Fed's most recent forecasts show that there could be between two and four 25 basis-point cuts next year.
Most members mentioned that gross fixed investment has shown weakness.
Nevertheless, they indicated that it is still above the central banks’ targets in a large number of these economies.
Another member added that in the first quarter the industrial sector contracted and that manufacturing production decreased, while primary activities increased.
He/she considered that, during such phase, a restrictive monetary policy stance should be maintained with an ex-ante real interest rate of around 7%, considering that the reduction in expected inflation is reflected in increases in the exante real interest rate.
He/she added that emerging economies registered a lower dynamism during the same period compared to the previous quarter.
One member associated the above with the strength of the labor market.
Regarding credit risk, he/she indicated that delinquency levels remain at relatively low and stable levels, despite exhibiting a marginal upward trend.
He/she noted that it must be explained that inflationary shocks demand decisive actions and it must be warned that, if inflation continues to increase, the expansionary policy stance will continue to diminish.
He/she argued that, given the environment of uncertainty surrounding decision-making, monetary policy’s approach should remain prudent, cautious and gradual, in line with the challenges that continue to be faced, in order for inflation to converge to the target, and consistent with seeking an orderly behavior of markets, the financial system, and the economy as a whole.
Such member pointed out that despite such explanations, a high degree of uncertainty persists as to the price formation process in the United States, which increases the probability of inflationary surprises.
Some members agreed that the slowdown of global economic activity has moderated expectations of a faster reduction of the monetary stimulus.
The majority of members agreed that the increase in U.S. government securities’ interest rates has generated episodes of volatility in international financial markets, lower risk appetite, and capital outflows from emerging economies.
He/she mentioned that inflows to equity assets are still being observed in these markets, along with outflows from fixed-income assets.
As for downside risks, the same members mentioned the possibility that the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex could register lower variations and that economic slack could widen more than expected.
For this reason, he/she mentioned that the real interest rate in Mexico is currently the highest among the group of seventeen emerging countries analyzed.
He/she indicated that, despite the shocks that have been observed, this has allowed the ex-ante real interest rate to achieve clearly restrictive levels and the nominal rate to reach levels above both observed and expected inflation, which will contribute to the process of convergence of inflation.
Regarding downward risks, most members highlighted the lower-than- anticipated economic activity.
One member highlighted that fundamental core inflation does not suggest any cyclical pressures on prices.
Some members mentioned that stock indices have registered generalized gains, reaching historic highs.
One member pointed out that, although the acceleration of services inflation is not excessive, the annual variation of this index is consolidating at high levels.
One member added that in these economies inflation remains close, or even below, their central banks’ targets, except for Turkey and Argentina.
One member noted that, unlike the 2019 stagnation, when the greatest impact came from international trade and from manufacturing activity, on this occasion the most significant contraction is anticipated to take place in the non-manufacturing sector, especially in services and commerce, which will have more severe repercussions on employment and occupation.
One member added that it has also reflected a trajectory of wages that has been incompatible with the evolution of productivity.
In view of the environment of high uncertainty and the risks mentioned above, he/she considered it essential to maintain the level of monetary restriction attained.
Some members also underlined that it remains high.
Another member stated that there are some margins for maneuver, such as the reallocation of public spending from controversial large-scale projects to priorities arisen as a result of the pandemic.
Another member underlined that seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly changes of merchandise prices have decreased considerably in recent months.
Another member reflected upon the fact that, while advanced economies, which for many years have had inflation and its expectations below their targets, have more room for maneuver, in emerging economies, particularly in Mexico, price formation can be more easily contaminated.
Another member highlighted that although core inflation has shown resistance to decline, it is starting to follow a downward trend.
One member added that the effects of the pandemic could worsen if the economic policies aimed at mitigating them are insufficient.
One member pointed to the lower costs of maritime transport and decreased scarcity of commodities.
Most members stated that markets expect the first cut in the second quarter of 2024.
However, another member specified that breakeven inflation still remains at levels above 4% for all terms.
He/she pointed out that, since 2018, unit labor costs have increased and productivity has declined, which implies that profit margins have decreased and/or a partial or a total pass-through effect to prices has taken place.
However, one member indicated that economic activity in the euro area remained weak, while in China, industrial production stagnated and fixed investment continued declining.
He/she warned that it is too early to believe that the interest rate cuts which are anticipated by market indicators for the end of 2023 will materialize.
One member considered that the reduction in longer- term interest rates in the United States was due to its favorable inflation figures.
In this regard, one of the members stated that the economy is anticipated to grow even below potential during the next quarters and that the output gap will near zero in 2019.
Most members mentioned that medium- and long-term remained relatively stable, although above the 3% target.
One member pointed out that marginal inflows by foreign investors to the stock market were observed.
They noted that industrial production, particularly manufacturing, has been semiconductors, especially in the automotive sector.
In addition, some members pointed out the risk that non-core inflation registers a reversal to its historic values.
Most members underlined the Federal Reserve’s announcement of shrinking the rate of reduction of its securities holdings starting in May and concluding such process in September 2019.
Some members considered that the economy's cyclical position have not changed significantly since the previous monetary policy decision.
In this context, some members noted that the confidence of economic agents decreased.
As to the core component, some members highlighted that it has shown persistence.
The same member pointed out that the environment for these economies has become more uncertain and that their performance will be determined by idiosyncratic factors and by the soundness of their macroeconomic foundations.
In light of the foreseen implications, with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
However, he/she warned that said estimates should be taken with caution, given that their measurements exhibit a wide range of variability, depending on the methodology used.
Another member stated that in the United States, 2- year inflation expectations have been above 3% over the last weeks.
Such member added that expectations of above-potential-growth rates for this year and 2019 prevail.
Some members mentioned that a reduction in foreign holdings of government bonds was observed.
On the other hand, another member mentioned that fiscal policy has remained prudent and that the proposal for 2020 is cautious and responsible by presenting a primary surplus of 0.7% of GDP.
Another member mentioned that the current outlook is even more challenging as it is optimistic to believe that the effect of the accumulation of supply and demand shocks on inflation will dissipate immediately.
They also mentioned that timely indicators of private demand suggest an uptick in growth during the second quarter and a greater dynamism for the remainder of 2018 and in 2019.
Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, some members pointed out that these have continued to deteriorate.
One member delved into the factors to be considered in the conduct of monetary policy, highlighting that since mid-2015 the economy has been facing an adverse shock to its potential growth, together with a tighter external financing constraint.
One member expressed that the expectation of significant wage increases in 2025 persist.
One member considered that the US labor market continues being strong despite the tightening of monetary conditions.
Another added to the above factors the end of the electoral process in Mexico.
The majority pointed out that in the Federal forecasts for inflation and economic growth increased, as well as the expectations for the federal funds rate.
However, one member warned that, given the global demand and production cuts, this trend could reverse.
Such member stated that, in that member’s opinion, the most relevant matter for the monetary and fiscal authorities at this stage is to evaluate how to safeguard what has already been achieved and how to address the pending issues in a timely manner.
One member underlined that, although agricultural and livestock products’ inflation has declined relative to the levels observed in the third quarter of 2022, it still remains at high levels.
One member stated that inflationary pressures continue increasing and their persistence is not expected to diminish for a long period.
Such persistence, together with perspectives for non-core inflation, makes it unlikely for the current forecast for headline inflation to be attained.
One member indicated that formal employment in the manufacturing and construction industries has lost momentum.
Finally, another member considered that, on balance, the aforementioned factors jeopardize the convergence of inflation to the de México’s latest Quarterly Report.
One member pointed out that the unemployment rate measured by different indicators stabilized at low levels and also that the indicator with national coverage remains below the estimates of its long term level.
Another member mentioned that food merchandise prices have been increasing at double-digit rates for months.
He/she highlighted that, nevertheless, Mexico does not stand out for being the country with the highest levels of headline inflation among other countries that registered similar levels of inflation prior to the pandemic.
Most members considered that slack conditions in the economy loosened towards the end of 2018 and in the early part of 2019, and some members highlighted that this confirms the existence of a negative output gap.
The same member noted that the strong inertia exhibited by both core and fundamental core inflation.
Most members stated that financial conditions remained tight and that international financial markets exhibited volatility.
With the proposed increase, he/she considered that the expected trajectory of inflation, as well as the associated balance of risks, are consistent with slowing the pace of interest rate increases.
He/she noted that in June there were fewer technical shutdowns in assembly plants, although the production of light vehicles has not yet regained its pre-pandemic levels.
He/she added that if the fiscal consolidation process contemplated for 2025 is not achieved, given the challenges that this implies, the consequences for inflationary dynamics could be even greater for that year.
He/she considered that with the referred reduction of 25 basis points, the space for monetary easing has probably been exhausted, which will allow for inducing the trajectory of inflation and its expectations to its 3% target in the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
One member noted that the Mexican peso stood out as the second-best performing currency during the period, only slightly behind the Brazilian real.
He/she pointed out that twelve months later, there are high levels of inflation, unseen in more than 20 years, a generalized inflationary phenomenon which affects a large number of goods and services, and which has shown resistance to decline despite the adjustments in the monetary policy stance, and the most concerning, the beginning of the unanchoring of medium- and long-term expectations.
He/she considered that this situation may change in view of the expected reversal of the current account surplus and the limits of banks' absorption capacity, especially in view of an eventual improvement in credit placement.
Another member stated that headline inflation surprised in November by decreasing 76 basis points, from 4.09% in October to 3.33% in November.
They also noted that unemployment, underemployment and labor participation rates, as well as continued to show progress.
Some members highlighted the contraction in construction and mining, although one member noted that both have exhibited a slight upward trend after having deteriorated for several years.
Likewise, one member pointed out the weakness of the electricity sector.
As for investment, most members underlined that it continued increasing in March, mainly driven by spending on highlighted that construction remains weak.
He/she mentioned that this could be the result of lower tax collection as a consequence of lower economic growth than forecast in the 2019 Economic Package, or from a greater-than-expected decline in the oil production platform.
However, just as the central bank had warned at the time, it was not clear that such downward trend could be sustained in the short term, as proven by the recent increase in inflation.
In addition, one member mentioned that the risk of surprises or unwanted effects of monetary policy actions in advanced economies cannot be ruled out.
Another member mentioned that economic activity in China seems to be responding favorably to the implemented stimuli and stressed that the Chinese authorities have expressed their intention to use the policy tools at their disposal to attain an orderly adjustment of their economy.
To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance and the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors.
In view of the described environment, most members highlighted that central banks in advanced and emerging economies have eased their monetary policy stances.
He/she stated that a 600-basispoint interest rate spread has been maintained between Mexico and the United States, due to the synchronization of the inflationary cycles, and not due to a mechanical relationship.
significant progress has been made in the disinflationary process, an environment of high uncertainty and risks still prevails.
One member added the possibility of lower inflationary pressures at a global level and a new outbreak of the virus lowering the demand for goods and services.
In this context, most members highlighted the recent downgrade of the sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating by three agencies.
Such member underscored that, in a situation as the one described, the risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations exists and, thus, a forceful response from the central bank is needed.
He/she noted that the inflationary outlook has deteriorated during the year to levels not seen in two decades, while the response has remained gradual, cautious and data-dependent.
One member highlighted the possible contagion of the crisis to the financial system and to the sustainability of public finances, in view of the maximum historical levels of sovereign and corporate debts.
In particular, they noted the weak performance of construction.
However, one member added that in view of the deterioration of growth expectations, the prices of commodities, particularly of crude oil, suffered declines, although most recently there was a moderation of these declines.
All members agreed that the balance of risks to growth is significantly biased to the downside.
In particular, one of the members pointed out that interest rates of U.S. 2year Treasury bonds have hit levels above 2.5% and also registered an increase of over 120 basis points since September, while 10- to 30-year Treasury bonds have yields of 2.9% and 3.0%, corresponding to increases of over 80 and 35 basis points, respectively, during the same period.
He/she mentioned that some of the actions of the new package aim at expanding the collateral eligible for accessing liquidity facilities and for widening the coverage to development banks.
He/she noted that, for now, the further tightening of the restrictive stance will continue through passive monetary policy management.
He/she pointed out that, on the contrary, monetary easing so far implemented by Banco de México has had a favorable effect on financial markets, given that the exchange rate has recovered lost ground and remained relatively stable over the last quarter.
Most members mentioned that the European Central Bank adopted diverse measures of monetary policy easing by reducing its key deposit facility rate by 10 basis points and by announcing the implementation of a new asset purchase program for an indefinite period.
Another member highlighted that non-oil imports of intermediate goods and consumer goods are above the levels registered in late 2019, while capital imports are at lower levels.
Some members highlighted that wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering double-digit annual variations.
Some members added the possibility of an exchange rate depreciation.
He/she stated that under the current circumstances, it is difficult to assume that an additional monetary policy easing would result in a significant boost to economic activity.
One member stated that episodes of volatility in US Treasury and mortgage-backed securities’ markets cannot be ruled out, with possible contagion effects on the rest of the financial system.
One member underlined that the unemployment rate increased to 4.65% in April, which represents 2.7 million people.
He/she highlighted that in 2021 fiscal support and transfers to households increased considerably in the United States, generating an increase in the demand for consumer durables worldwide, thus exerting pressure on their prices and generating bottlenecks.
He/she pointed out that these have contributed to raise inflation expectations of business and consumers, as well as expectations implicit in fixed-income markets.
He/she also considered that the observed increase in wages rather obeys a recovery of real wages, which are barely 1.8% above what was registered in the last quarter of 2019.
One member noted that some upward risks to inflation have materialized in recent months, in an adverse external environment with significant factors of domestic uncertainty.
Some members pointed out that data confirms that the subindexes that are more labor intensive and more related to wages, have had the highest increases.
Similarly, one member pointed out that specialists surveyed by the central bank once again revised their growth expectations downwards for the current and following years.
Among upward risks, the majority mentioned the persistence of core inflation, specifically its services component.
Most members stated that the recent moderation in some of the abovementioned risks to the global economy, along with signs of stabilization in certain leading indicators have led to a greater risk appetite in international financial markets.
Most members agreed that the stagnation of economic activity has implied that the negative slack conditions have widened with respect to those observed in the previous quarter.
Finally, one member also mentioned the potential impact of the increase to the tax on flavored drinks and on cigarettes projected on the 2020 budget.
One of the members stated that, given the expectations of more gradual and smaller increases in interest rates in advanced economies, Banco de México would have a slightly wider margin as to its monetary policy decisions.
Most members highlighted that the flash estimate of GDP suggests that the Mexican economy continued growing during the fourth quarter of 2022.
However, one member stated that they remain at relatively high levels.
Among risks to the upside for headline inflation, most members highlighted the possibility that the peso exchange rate comes under pressure stemming from external or domestic factors.
Another member mentioned that inflation pressures are contained in most countries, and underlined that inflation expectations implied by market instruments for the main economies remain below those registered at the beginning of the year.
One member noted that this has been due to the fact that, in an uncertain environment, they have been highly sensitive to economic data.
With respect to financing in the economy, another member stated that in July financing to the nonfinancial private sector continued increasing, albeit at a slower pace than in recent months.
He/she indicated that a more rapid monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve could affect the exchange rate and impose challenges for monetary policy.
Some members pointed out that the underemployment rate is 14%, a figure twice the level normally observed.
One member expressed that service prices have continued with a reversal-to-trend process, which responds to a decline in the number of infections.
One member added that this has deepened the inversion of this curve to historical levels.
Most members noted that external demand exhibited sluggishness.
In the case of the United States, another member considered that the fading of factors that once supported the resilience of its economy, such as the financial position of households, which is already weakening, suggests that some downward risks have gained relevance.
One member noted that the uncertainty is associated to: i) possible changes in consumption patterns and their effects on price formation; ii) the magnitude and duration of shocks; iii) the persistence of adverse conditions in the financial markets; iv) the effects of disruptions in global value chains and a possible shortage of certain goods, and v) possible second round effects in case the exchange rate depreciation is perceived to be permanent.
One member pointed out that with an inflation gap of three percentage points, if the reference rate is not increased, there would be no convergence in the foreseen horizon.
They indicated that this occurred in a context of increased demand from firms and in spite of the tighter monetary conditions.
Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
The majority added that the expected economic slowdown could mitigate the risk of the exchange rate pass-through.
Among the elements of uncertainty that the Mexican economy will continue to face, one of the members underlined the adverse sociopolitical environment that prevails in the country.
He/she pointed out that, within the scope of Banco de México’s attributions, this implies pursuing low and stable inflation and safeguarding the strength of the financial system.
He/she stated that, due to the above, monetary policy must be even more cautious in the following months and, if available information suggests that there is still room for an additional easing, the adjustments should be expected to be more gradual than those observed in recent months.
Some members noted that the projected short-term trajectories for inflation are slightly higher than those published in the Quarterly Report October-December 2020.
Nevertheless, indicators, consumption growth is expected to moderate somewhat towards the second half of the year.
Some members stated that this was due to the expectation of lower fiscal and monetary stimuli, especially in the United States.
He/she stressed that otherwise it will be necessary to reflect more deeply on the scope and speed of the current downward cycle.
Some members highlighted that formal employment showed a slight recovery in August.
In this regard, he/she considered that pressures at the margin on general and core inflation decreased between August and September, while in October some pressure was registered once more due to the decrease in the number of infections and the reactivation of spending.
On the demand side, he/she considered that households’ and firms’ spending and income are being very affected.
Some members mentioned that emerging economies also continued raising their reference rates.
He/she argued that, considering the described disjunctive, although the hiking cycle has to continue, it is necessary to reduce the pace of adjustment, calibrate adequately the next policy decisions, and lower the probability of the described risks materializing.
One member argued that measures of economic slack will gain even more relevance in the coming months.
Some members underlined that exports started to increase in June.
The Board highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Governing Board stated that for the next monetary policy decisions, it will monitor inflationary pressures thoroughly as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
He/she stated that the trajectory of has been better than forecasted in previous months both by the Central Bank and by analysts.
One member stated that, if the deterioration in medium-term expectations is not addressed, these could contaminate long-term expectations.
In this context, some members considered that the uncertainty over the balance of risks for inflation has intensified.
The majority also indicated that during the same period, core inflation expectations for the end of 2019 were adjusted from 3.45% to 3.50%, while those for the end of 2020 increased from 3.33% to long-term headline inflation expectations are still above the permanent 3% target, at levels around expectations (up to four years) were adjusted upwards and that the dispersion of long-term expectations has increased.
He/she warned about the risk that non-food merchandise inflation, as it converges to its mean, may no longer offset the persistence of services inflation, initiating an upward trend in core inflation.
Most members underlined the gains of the the behavior of this market has been in line with that observed across other emerging economies.
In order to consolidate a low and stable inflation, in an environment in which price formation and slack conditions in the economy are subject to risks, the Governing Board will continue to follow closely all factors and elements of uncertainty that have an impact on inflation and its outlook, and will take the required actions based on incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
Some members mentioned that due to the observed shocks and the levels reached by inflation, there is the risk of second-round effects on the price formation process.
Some members added that their annual measures are expected to converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon.
One member added that it is important to increase productivity by adopting new technologies and investing in human capital.
Another member mentioned that in the case of the U.S., considerable downward adjustments have been observed in the yield curve of Treasury bonds in all maturities.
He/she pointed out that, on the one hand, not all measurements of medium-term expectations have been affected, while long-term expectations are stable, which is consistent with the transitory nature of inflationary pressures.