I believe that the combination of an exchange rate close to 19 pesos per US dollar, an annual inflation below target, the significant reduction of external and domestic risks, and null economic growth could fully justify opting for a more decisive policy action.
One member noted that research on the lighthouse effect of the minimum wage concludes that the impact should be marginal.
He/she added that the surplus observed in the balance of payments’ current account has served to accommodate the outflows, while the banking sector has absorbed the reduction in foreigners' holdings due to the search for investment options to replace the lower credit placement.
Most members stated that, although investment and consumption have improved, they still remain below their pre-pandemic levels.
Banco de México's Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy.
One member acknowledged that there is a certain effect of labor market dynamics, but he/she stated that their magnitude does not seem to be such as to explain the levels reached by services inflation.
He/she added that the deterioration in the global economic environment, geopolitical conflicts, uncertainty about the reestablishment of supply chains, and the future path of world inflation, result in an even greater challenge for the conduction of monetary policy, and that the start of a period of elevated interest rates and economic weakness may be witnessed.
He/she affirmed that monetary policy decisions should remain independent of the decisions made by the Federal Reserve and that it is not possible to compare Mexico’s interest rate spreads with those of other countries since the target rates respond to contexts and needs that are not entirely comparable.
He/she pointed out that it is necessary to remember the highly accommodative nature of the new monetary policy strategy adopted by the Federal Reserve.
Some members stated that the external sources of financing have become negative.
He/she delved into the information suggested by the central bank’s forecast, by reiterating, on the one hand, that the revision to headline inflation is attributed to supply shocks, with the convergence timeline remaining unchanged, and, on the other hand, that core inflation is anticipated to continue decreasing.
As for the balance of risks to global growth, most members stated that it is significantly biased to the downside and one pointed out that it has deteriorated.
He/she emphasized that Banco de México must continue with the cautious approach that has guided its decisions.
Another member added that growth forecasts for these years already incorporate the effects of the tax reform and that they remain stable at 2.8% and some members mentioned the possibility of the effects of the tax incentives gradually fading in the following years.
One member mentioned the possibility of complications in the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union.
Another member added the lower credit risk premia and the improvement in the country-risk perception, as well as the stability of public finances and the lower uncertainty regarding international trade.
He/she stated that, despite the low level of development of the financial system, when credit fluctuations are very pronounced, such as in the current juncture, their impact on aggregate activity is significant despite the fact that only a fraction of the economy operates with bank credit.
In the same regard, he/she mentioned that the higher risk premia observed does not limit the margin for lowering the monetary policy rate and rather constitutes an additional reason for continuing to do so, as a substantial reduction would allow to offset the effect of the higher risk premia by maintaining or even lowering the cost of credit to firms.
Most members noted that the Federal Reserve indicated that it could start reducing its asset purchase program this year and that the program would end in mid-2022.
Some members pointed out that it has been below the central bank's forecasts.
As to sovereign risk premia, most members highlighted that they remained at high levels similar to those observed in the latest monetary policy decision while one member stated that they registered a decrease.
He/she mentioned that in the case of Mexico this would allow for the recovery of consumption and investment, which are the most affected aggregate demand components.
Some members noted that the balance of risks for world economic growth is biased to the downside and is subject to high uncertainty, mainly for European economies.
As for the US Federal Reserve, all members indicated that in its July meeting it cut its target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points (bps) and brought forward the end of its balance sheet reduction.
The Board added that with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and One member indicated that, while it should always be kept in mind that the inflation target refers to headline inflation, when conducting monetary policy, it should be considered that the non-core component is highly volatile and that core inflation better reflects the trend in inflation.
Some members argued that headline inflation expectations drawn from surveys remain above Banco de México's forecasts.
He/she mentioned that, although no liquidity problems are foreseen in the Mexican banking system, a temporary increase in the cost of financing cannot be ruled out.
In this context, he/she considered that in small open emerging economies, which need to supplement their domestic savings with external sources of financing, it is even more important to maintain a solid macroeconomic environment that attracts capital and fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy.
Most members stressed that, in the opinion of economic analysts surveyed by Banco de México, the current juncture to make investments is going through difficult times.
With regard to the US economy, some members highlighted the moderation of its growth rate and the weakening of investment.
One member mentioned that the fall in core inflation is particularly relevant, since this component better reflects the medium-term trend of headline inflation.
One member pointed out that expectations measured through compensation for inflation and inflation risk in 10-year bonds reached a historical high, and that the 10-year inflation risk premium remains at levels similar to those registered during other stress periods.
Some members highlighted that said institution acknowledged that the risks to the fulfillment of its employment and price stability mandates are moving towards a better balance.
The majority noted that lower rates of change in the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex, as observed in the case of energy goods due to the greater weakness exhibited by the world economy, would also contribute to reduce core inflation.
One member considered that this reduces the vulnerability of the peso.
Such member pointed out that in September 2018, headline inflation was 5.02%, which implies that in a year inflation decreased slightly more than 200 basis points.
Some members noted that gains in asset price valuations have reverted.
Some members added labor market pressures and higher transportation costs.
In contrast, one of the members stated that most financial assets in advanced economies exhibited marginal changes.
He/she pointed out that in August investment registered an annual contraction of 16.64% as a result of the impact of the pandemic and an environment that is not conducive to investment.
All Governing Board members highlighted that the lower dynamism of global economic activity has been reflected in expectations of a slower monetary policy normalization by the major central banks, and in lower short- and long-term interest rates in the United States.
On the other hand, he/she mentioned that, in emerging economies, and in Mexico in particular, price formation can become rapidly contaminated by the shocks that have affected inflation.
He/she added that TIIE swaps decreased in all of their nodes.
He/she stated that the effects of the external environment on the relative monetary policy stance are yet to be defined.
Some members emphasized that given the nature of the shocks and the fact that their effects concentrated in few CPI items, these did not lead to a generalized increase in prices.
Most members mentioned that between April and the first fortnight of June 2019, headline inflation decreased from 4.41 to 4.00%.
The same member also stated the existence of prevailing concerns about the situation of Italy's public finances and financing in the short and medium terms and the sanctions the European Union authorities may impose on that country.
Nevertheless, the same member noted that this process will be faster in the United States than in other countries.
Another member highlighted the role of the pandemic in inflationary pressures, which can be divided in two stages.
Some members mentioned other additional risks to growth, such as the tightening of international monetary and financial conditions, a faster-than-expected normalization of U.S. monetary policy, and/or unexpected changes in the aforementioned normalization process.
He/she recalled that, during the second half of 2022, although headline inflation was already decreasing, the hiking cycle continued.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that, although the balance of risks remains biased upwards, it is less adverse than the one prevailing at the start of 2023.
Another member highlighted a greater reduction of public revenues.
Another member argued that economies that registered inflation levels consistently above their targets during the health crisis, face greater restrictions and must act rapidly and decisively to attain the convergence of inflation to its target and to preserve their credibility.
Most members stated that timely indicators suggest that world economic activity continued decelerating during the third quarter.
Another member argued that, considering the number of businesses that have closed down permanently, based on the number of those that have withdrawn their registration at the IMSS, it can be concluded that a large part of the current unemployment is permanent, since these are not jobs that may be regained during the reactivation of the economy.
Thus, some members underlined that the outlook of a continuing disinflationary process is maintained.
He/she noted that this contraction confirms the expectation of a tightening in credit approval for the first quarter of 2021 that was observed in Banco de México’s Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish acronym).
Some members added that the positive outlook on the nearshoring process has also contributed to the above.
However, the same member emphasized that, as risk appetite normalizes, interest rate spreads may be more relevant.
Some members noted that this was due to a greater risk appetite among international investors.
They mentioned that Mexican banks exceed capitalization.
Another member stated that the dynamics within the components of inflation has led to an upward adjustment of forecasts.
One member noted that although a lower deficit than the one approved is expected for 2023, a public balance deficit of 4.9% of GDP is anticipated for 2024.
In this regard, another member added that although long-term interest rates decreased in Mexico, they did so to a lesser extent than in other emerging economies.
They also pointed out that there are factors that could contribute to episodes of risk aversion, such as those already mentioned for world economic All members agreed that economic activity in Mexico has remained stagnant for several quarters.
Most members mentioned that financial markets positively, highlighting the increase in capital inflows.
Most continued registering weakness, with levels lower than those prior to the pandemic, as well as a heterogeneous behavior among subsectors.
He/she indicated that the Bank’s forecasts suggest that this process will continue, while inflation expectations remain anchored and moving slowly towards their historical averages.
Most members noted that the balance of risks for global economic activity is biased to the All members highlighted the high levels that world inflation has registered.
In this regard, he/she highlighted that so far this year short- and long-term interest rates in Mexico have adjusted downwards significantly as compared to other emerging economies, which, despite having lower short-term interest rates, have been subject to pressures on long-term ones.
Some members noted that it will also result from a lower core inflation.
He/she added that this could imply higher inflation expectations for the short term, as well as a higher inflation risk premium.
Some members highlighted that, since the previous monetary policy decision, the inflation trajectory for the following eight quarters has been revised significantly upwards.
They mentioned that the above have been affected by an outlook of more restrictive monetary policies in the main advanced economies and by a lower global growth outlook.
He/she argued that remittances have registered the best performance of the last 18 years, although significant challenges are anticipated in the future, given the lower levels of economic growth in the United States, the decreased fiscal stimuli, and the level of employment of Mexican migrants in said country that has already surpassed its pre-pandemic levels.
Based on the above, and considering the monetary policy stance already attained, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
Another member argued that the lower dynamism of consumption and investment is accounted for by the fact that their determinants remain highly deteriorated.
Some members stated that in their last policy meetings most central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged once again.
One member pointed out that, during the first 7 months of the year, remittances increased by 23.5% as compared to the same period of 2020, and that in July the wage bill exceeded the levels registered in February 2020.
looking ahead, commitment to the primary goal must be strengthened and that a forward-looking and datadependent approach should be prioritized, avoiding any premature adjustments.
My vote for a 25 basis-point reduction is a reiteration of my voting and viewpoint in the past monetary policy decision.
He/she considered that, although limited available information and high uncertainty make an accurate analysis of the recent performance of economic activity difficult, different indicators show a smaller contraction, or even a slight recovery, at the beginning of May, although starting from very low levels, mainly as a result of the gradual reopening of the economy.
Some members pointed out that face- to-face services continue to be significantly affected.
In this regard, he/she highlighted the reduction of inflation in the United States and other countries.
He/she pointed out that in addition to further surprises and shocks, monetary policy adjustments have been insufficient to counter the deterioration of price formation and have had a limited impact on the real interest rate, which remains below the required level.
Another member added the upward revision in inflation expectations, the greater inflationary uncertainty, and even a possible upward bias in inflation as other factors leading to increases in U.S. interest rates.
He/she considered that if inflation and its expectations do not decrease in a clear and continuous manner in the coming months, the target rate should not be lowered.
Most members also underlined the risk that public finances deteriorate.
Similarly, the same member mentioned that an escalation of trade tensions between China and the U.S. may benefit Mexico, as a result of the natural redirectioning of certain bilateral trade flows between those countries.
This implies that we have already taken steps forward in addressing this issue.
He/she argued that the observed tightening in financial conditions, despite the reduction in the reference rate and weak fiscal support, reduces the room for maneuver for monetary policy.
Most members mentioned that the lesser risk aversion was reflected in gains in the main stock market indices.
Some members highlighted the contraction of imports of final goods and of machinery and equipment.
He/she added that this is essential given the outlook of a further monetary tightening worldwide.
The majority mentioned that global economic activity continued to recover during the third heterogeneously across countries, associated with the evolution of the pandemic and with spending programs.
One member highlighted that, based on the opinion of business owners and economic forecasters, among the obstacles to economic activity in Mexico, the factors related to governance problems (public insecurity, political instability, impunity and corruption) and uncertainty in domestic economic conditions stand out.
and that it also announced a decrease in the rate of reduction of its balance sheet starting in June.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that the foreseen trajectory for core inflation remains highly uncertain, given that the impact on the composition of expenditure may persist to the extent that the pandemic continues and mobility restrictions are maintained.
Third, a balance of risks to inflation that is clearly biased to the upside.
Regarding growth expectations for 2020, another member pointed out that these have been adjusted downwards from April 2018 to April 2019.
Some members highlighted the reduction in credit to consumers and small- and medium-sized firms.
He/she added that, naturally, the contraction of employment has been more marked in certain regions of the country, such as the northern border zone, where greater wage adjustments have been observed, even showing a sharp contrast with the neighboring municipalities that have not been affected by such adjustments.
Most members considered important to continue implementing measures to strengthen the credit provision channels, provide liquidity and foster the well-functioning of the financial system.
One member considered that public policies that incentivize the supply and demand of credit should be strengthened.
All members mentioned that in the fourth quarter of 2023, the Mexican economy registered a greater-than-expected slowdown.
Headline inflation has behaved better than expected and is already at levels close to Banco de México’s target.
All members underlined that in its October meeting, the US Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
One member stated that this risk is not minor, as adverse weather conditions are becoming more frequent with deeper and longer-lasting effects.
He/she delved into the fact that the effective, sustained, and coherent communication strategy followed by the Federal Reserve has contributed to the assimilation of its new monetary policy strategy’s highly accommodative tone by market participants, allowing news about the asset purchase program to have a limited impact on financial markets.
All members cautioned that monetary policy faces a more adverse scenario and with greater uncertainty.
Such member stated that this has required a significant depreciation of the real exchange rate and a further strengthening of macroeconomic policy.
Another member noted the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in light of episodes of international financial volatility.
He/she added that, given the magnitude of the wage increase, it is foreseeable that a significant number of micro and small enterprises, which group the largest number of workers earning the minimum wage, will have to pass-through such adjustments to the prices of their products, cut their number of employees, or, in the worst case, abandon formality.
One member added that headline inflation has been affected by significant adjustments stemming from both the exchange rate and from pressures to non-core inflation, particularly energy prices.
He/she added that it will be necessary to take into account that inflation, while remaining above target, has declined considerably.
He/she pointed out that it turns out to be even higher when considering the lower exchange risk, the greater risk appetite, and that no changes are expected in the accommodative monetary policies worldwide.
He/she argued that, considering the features of the inflation outlook mentioned above, the policy stance can be strengthened in lesser magnitude than as in the February meeting.
One member noted that an improvement was observed in both the oil trade balance and the total trade balance.
In this regard, he/she added that the direction of adjustments of the target rate is an even stronger signal than the level of the reference rate per se.
He/she stated that, looking ahead, the Governing Board will continue to work together to find the best strategy to meet Banco de México's primary mandate in the current complex environment.
Under the current conditions, there is room to lower the monetary policy rate and still keep its restrictive character given: that the negative output gap is still widening; a smaller deviation of inflation from its target; global risk aversion has diminished and accommodative monetary policies continue to prevail in most economies.
Some members mentioned that an estimate of the nonoccupied population who is available for employment has decreased significantly.
I deem it responsible to reflect in depth about the appropriate level of monetary restriction in the current context, characterized by the evident progress in the inflation outlook and prospects of greater slack conditions.
Another member pointed out that the macroprudential policies implemented in Mexico over the last two decades have so far allowed the Mexican financial system to be sufficiently resilient to avoid contagions as well as to contain any signs of instability.
He/she stated that these two components accounted for 64% of the most recent inflation figure.
Thus, some members argued that the effect on core inflation of the shocks that non-core inflation is currently experiencing would be limited.
Another member attributed the stability of long-term expectations to the credibility of the central bank.
responded mainly to inflationary pressures from abroad on energy and food prices, and to higher production costs.
Such member acknowledged that the economy has also been affected by uncertainty about the trade relationship with North America, the process of monetary policy normalization in the United States and other idiosyncratic factors.
As for world inflation, most members pointed out that there is also some divergence in the behavior of inflation and its expectations in advanced economies.
One member considered that this assumes a small slope in the Phillips curve.
He/she stated that the degree of monetary restriction attained resulted from the atypical nature of the shocks and risks confronted and reiterated that both have mitigated significantly.
Another member pointed out that domestic and external financing sources continued to increase during the third quarter.
One member argued that this is due to the difficulty to find employment amid lockdown policies.
Another member pointed out that, although trading conditions have improved, they have still not returned to those observed prior to the pandemic.
He/she highlighted that those core inflation items that are more susceptible to the exchange rate and energy prices could continue registering larger increases.
He/she pointed out that the ten CPI items with the highest variation in the first fortnight of April, corresponding to the fruits and vegetables subcomponent, contributed with nearly 60 basis points to headline inflation.
He/she added that indicators related to world trade volume have already shown certain signs of weakness, while timely indicators of manufacturing and services show a differentiated behavior, with the latter displaying greater dynamism.
One member noted that the global economic slowdown has contributed to the above.
He/she highlighted that it is essential to send clear signals of commitment to the primary mandate in order to preserve the institution’s credibility.
One member added that a healthy and wellcapitalized financial system must be maintained, in addition to reducing both Mexico’s sovereign and Pemex’s credit risk.
The majority indicated that despite the reduction in core inflation from 3.73% in October to decline due to the aforementioned shocks and also to structural factors.
The same member noted that there is an exceptional contrast with business confidence, which has not really changed in the past months.
First, credit to households and firms continues contracting.
One member mentioned that the output and unemployment gaps, along with other slack indicators, suggest the presence of demandrelated inflationary pressures.
Most members mentioned that this has led to a depreciation of their currencies and to volatility in their foreign exchange markets, as well as to pressures on stock indices and interest rates.
He/she delved into the shortage of inputs slowing down production in certain sectors, which is uncommon during an early upward stage of the economic cycle.
One member expressed that certain advanced economies, by having a reserve currency and well-developed institutions, have managed to promote a significant and broad range of relief measures for employment and guarantee programs for businesses and households.
Another member noted that inflation forecasts have continued to be revised upwards since the current tightening cycle began in June to reach its highest point in the first quarter of 2022, as the inflationary shocks that were observed in the same period of the previous year begin to fade.
They highlighted that after the last policy meeting, the Mexican peso depreciated.
He/she underlined that, in his/her opinion, it is evident that the adjustments implemented in the monetary policy stance have been insufficient to counteract the deterioration in the price formation process and the increase in inflation expectations, and therefore he/she considered it absolutely necessary to bring the real interest rate to restrictive territory.
Another member mentioned that the new shocks have shaped inflation dynamics, offsetting the reductions stemming from arithmetic effects.
As for inflation expectations derived from market instruments, one member mentioned that these have remained unchanged for three consecutive months, while another stated that the differentials between nominal and real yields continue suggesting upward risks for inflation in the long run.
Another member mentioned that although an increase in energy prices was observed in January, the federal government’s price policy for these goods will contribute to keep inflation under control in the following months.
Most members noted that headline inflation expectations for the end of 2020 remain at levels near the target, and those for the medium and long terms have remained relatively stable, although at levels above 3%.
He/she pointed out that the outcome will depend on the intensity of each of the abovementioned pressures, as well as on the interaction among them.
In this regard, he/she pointed out that these increases created the expectation of a more permanent inflation, and therefore did not affect the real interest rate.
If the aforementioned prevails, it would be a factor of concern that could be considered as a second-round effect on prices.
One member highlighted that non-core inflation accumulated during the first seven months of the year was -3.82%, the lowest figure in the last that it has remained persistent around 3.8%.
However, most members noted that industrial activity has lost momentum in recent months.
They added that this constitutes a risk for the sovereign rating and highlighted the possibility that the state company may require additional fiscal support, which could affect public finances.
This poses greater risks to the price formation process and to inflation expectations.
Thus, he/she indicated that in this meeting the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25%.
One member stated that, in seasonally adjusted terms, at the end of 2020 IMSS-insured jobs were 786,693 below those registered in February.
He/she highlighted that this period will also allow us to analyze the effects of the shocks associated with the global inflationary episode on how the economy operates, not only in the short term, but also its possible impact in the long term.
One of them elaborated on the different factors that have kept inflation structurally low in advanced economies.
Some members highlighted the asset purchase programs implemented by these authorities.
They specified that in January both food and non-food inflation registered 5.54 and although food merchandise inflation still remains at high levels, it has declined considerably.
He/she also pointed out that the package includes measures to strengthen the credit channels and the programs carried out jointly with the Ministry of Finance to ensure the proper functioning of the bond market, in order to improve the banking sector’s positioning given the large amount of capital outflows.
Most members highlighted that the financial authorities of the referred countries have confidence in their banking sectors, such as liquidity provision and increasing bank deposit insurance.
Most members expressed that recently, once risk aversion in international markets decreased, the peso reversed part of the The majority noted that, since the previous policy meeting, interest rates on government securities increased for all terms.
In this regard, another member stressed that, given the intensification or materialization of some of these risks, the main economies’ central banks may be expected to take action to improve global financial conditions, just as it has happened during 2019.
One member added that the central banks of Canada, the euro area, England and Japan did not adjust their policy rates in their March meetings either, and that they emphasized that the economic deceleration has been greater than expected.
Another member highlighted that the primary sector continued to grow.
He/she highlighted that the monetary restriction contributes to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, hence preventing inflation from persisting at high levels even after the shocks dissipate.
He/she stated that, on the one hand, risks to non-core inflation are more symmetrical; that is, their occurrence may either favor or harm their dynamics, and they are also not affected by monetary policy; on the other hand, risks to core inflation are more asymmetrical and, in principle, susceptible to monetary policy actions.
He/she explained that a reference rate of 4.50% is still an expansionary policy stance and lays below headline and core inflation figures.
In this regard, one member stressed that there are strong concerns about the future of Pemex and the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE, for its acronym in Spanish), while another member argued that obtaining a higher confidence could require additional efforts in different fronts and would also take a long time.
All members noted that interest rates on medium- and long-term government bonds increased idiosyncratic factors.
He/she mentioned the risk of price-related pressures on agricultural and livestock products due to the impact of the "El Niño" meteorological phenomenon.
In this context, considering the lower levels registered by headline inflation, its outlook within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, the more ample slack in the economy, as well as the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.25%.
It considered the nature of the shocks that have affected the non-core component and the projection that their effects on headline inflation will dissipate over the next quarters.
Regarding the balance of risks to global economic activity, one member considered that it remains biased to the downside.
He/she stated that global market conditions and the continuation of accommodative policy stances in the main central banks have opened a space for patience.
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at We need to be patient in order for the current monetary policy stance to have the desired effect on the persistence in services inflation.
As to the forecasts for non-core inflation, some members mentioned that, despite its recent decline, some of its components, particularly energy prices, are expected to exert upward pressure on this subindex in the following months.
One member pointed out that breakeven inflation rates increased marginally for the term remained at 3.34%, still below their historic average figures.
Some members pointed out that domestic financing also continued growing.
He/she underlined that, looking ahead, the expected trajectory of inflation is similar to that already anticipated during the previous monetary policy decision.
He/she underlined that shorter-term ones have already stabilized, while longer-term ones, which affect the price formation process to a greater degree, have remained anchored.
All members stated that forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards.
One member mentioned that timely information allows to anticipate that investment will continue declining.
They highlighted that the foreign exchange market continues operating in an orderly manner, in a context where markets and most analysts expect a downward adjustment in the interest rate differential between Mexico and the United States.
The same member argued that, in the best case, implementing some of these measures would generate a greater inflationary bias, besides the one the Mexican economy already has, and, in the worst case, it would be a return to policies that have already been tried and have failed, and that would imply returning to times of recurring financial and balance of payments crises.
In this context, most members stated that operating conditions in the foreign exchange market deteriorated, although one member considered that they remain at adequate levels.
He/she pointed out that the most recent readings have been below the anticipated level.
Some members also mentioned the weakness in the mining sector.
He/she added that with a 50 basis point reduction to the policy rate in Mexico, the interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States would still be very much above the spreads of all emerging economies within the same group of assets.
Most members noted that market instruments are pricing in interest rate cuts during the second half of 2023.
Another member explained that the new level of the policy rate allows for reducing the level of monetary restriction to facilitate the efficient convergence of inflation to its target and maintain the relative monetary policy stance in order to avoid an unnecessarily widening of the spread between short-term instruments denominated in Mexican pesos and in US dollars.
The majority of members warned about the vulnerabilities that persist in some of these economies.
First, such member reflected upon different commentator’s opinions regarding the objectives that a central bank ought to have.
He/she mentioned that given the described outlook and considering the lag with which monetary policy operates, it is imperative to lower the reference rate.
He/she argued that, in this context, rating agencies have downgraded several sovereign and corporate credit ratings, thus contributing to reinforce the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight interbank rate by 25 basis points to 7.75%.
One member stated that the exchange rate adjustment occurred through a reduction in long positions and an increased demand for currency hedging in light of the risk of a greater depreciation, which were partially offset by increased positions on short- and medium-term government securities.
They added that the accommodative monetary policy stances have also contributed to the favorable performance of said markets.
Regarding the monetary policy statement, he/she added that it is necessary to highlight the deteriorated inflationary dynamics, especially the resistance of the core component to decline, the balance of risks to the upside, the upward revision in inflation forecasts, and the still high level of inflation expectations.
However, some members highlighted that the expected growth rate for the United States have been revised upwards.
He/she added that the persistence of monthly inflation has been reduced to less than half the level of 2009, thus contributing to prevent expectations from being contaminated.
One member pointed out that this negative performance is expected to continue during the following months and underlined the high levels of the VIX index.
All members mentioned that in its latest monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points and anticipated future adjustments.
They pointed out that the differences in the recovery are partly associated with the implemented policies.
One member added that in these economies, the trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation shows a downward trend.
He/she also pointed out that although the financial system overall maintains a sound position, it is necessary to ensure that financial authorities are able respond adequately to the potential challenges faced.
Some members stated that, regarding core inflation components, services’ prices remained subject to significant pressures.
One member stated that expectations for the end of 2022 are at a level close to the average observed in other inflationary episodes.
The majority noted that some central banks of advanced economies left their reference rates unchanged, while others lowered them.
Another member noted that the monetary policy normalization process of the U.S. Federal Reserve has also implied a depreciation of emerging economies’ currencies of between 1% and 4%.
The majority pointed out that markets anticipate the first interest rate increase in 2022.
He/she stated that the favorable performance of private consumption is evidence of demand-related pressures.
One member stated that, according to an analysis of the inflationary process, pressures on the core component have tended to intensify, even after discounting the base effect.
One member stated that growth rates are expected to be higher than those for 2017 and to be above potential.
One member added to the above some idiosyncratic factors, such as those associated with insecurity, water scarcity, and climate-related phenomena.
He/she also cautioned against comparing the current monetary policy stance with that of other episodes as each has its own difficulties, circumstances, and causes.
Some members noted that economic activity has deviated about 10% from the trend that it would have followed in the absence of the pandemic.
It must be credible and feasible, without putting the central bank’s reputation at risk and without undermining the effectiveness of communication with markets.
In this regard, he/she emphasized that in face of the global and domestic uncertainty no scenario, neither benign nor of additional deterioration, can be ruled out; thus, monetary policy should be conducted with extreme caution, continuing with a gradual approach, monitoring the latest information to update forecasts and maintain room for maneuver to take the necessary actions in a timely and prudent manner.
He/she mentioned that with an increase of 75 basis points, the target rate would decidedly lay in restrictive territory and that it is time to evaluate up to when and to what extent the policy stance will be tightened, and what will be the response to additional hikes by the Federal Reserve.
Therefore, he/she stated that the monetary policy stance must remain sufficiently restrictive to ensure the continuation of the disinflation process.
Most members highlighted that a slight improvement in economic activity is anticipated for the July– September period, although one member considered that currently there is scant information available to assess the evolution of the economy during this period.
Most members stated that for the next meeting, analysts and market participants foresee a pause.
Most members pointed out that the forecasts for global economic activity have been revised downwards and, for this reason, global economic activity is expected to grow at a more moderate rate.
He/she indicated that minimum wage increases seem to be affecting wage negotiations in other sectors of the labor market.
All members emphasized that stagnation of economic activity reflects a greater weakness in most components of aggregate demand, standing out among those the slowdown of consumption and lackluster investment.
Another member considered that the rise in virus infections and the challenges related to the vaccination process have contributed to episodes of volatility.
The majority commented that volatility in international financial markets eased in the last few weeks.
Another member considered that the balance for financial risks is biased to the downside.
One member considered the stability of these expectations to be consistent with the transitory nature of current inflationary pressures.
Among risks to the global economy, most members highlighted those associated with the pandemic, the intensification of geopolitical tensions, and tighter monetary and financial conditions.
One member stated that sudden increases in non-core inflation cannot be ruled out, given the volatility exhibited by most of its components.
Regarding the second element, he/she restated that during this inflationary period Banco de México has acted in a timely and forceful manner.
In this context, considering that the current monetary policy is consistent with the convergence of inflation to its target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 8.25%.
One member highlighted that the Mexican peso performed better than other Latin American currencies, some of which have been more exposed to political and social risks, either directly or by contagion.
Nevertheless, in the proposal for the adjustment of the policy rate, he/she considered attaining a greater consensus in order to send a much clearer signal.
Another member argued that, while formal jobs susceptible to social interaction continue to be highly affected, those that are more related to external demand have exceeded their pre-pandemic levels.
However, one member emphasized that it is still below the Non-Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), and that, for this reason, its increase does not imply the presence of slack.
The same member also warned of the possibility of an adverse inflationary surprise in the United States, despite considerations of a structural flattening of the Phillips curve in that country, which could have serious consequences for international financial markets.
could be influencing the decline in non-food merchandise prices.
He/she added that monetary policy has also contributed to the resilient performance of the Mexican peso, in an environment of tight global monetary conditions.
One member added idiosyncratic risks, especially in emerging economies.
As to capital flows to these economies, some members emphasized that, although investment flows to their debt markets continue registering inflows, stock markets have been accumulating outflows for 16 consecutive weeks.
He/she added that if such pressures were present, these would already be addressed with the monetary restriction achieved.
Some members noted that, despite the tightening in labor markets, the impact on wages and inflation has been moderate in said economies.
Some members highlighted that the sound macroeconomic fundamentals have contributed to the relatively favorable performance of domestic financial markets, particularly of the foreign exchange market.
One member stated that such increase responds to the disinflationary process and the stabilization of nominal wages.
He/she argued that this differentiated dynamics between consumption of goods and that of services is observed in an environment of a more limited access to credit due to high interest rates, lower excess savings, and greater caution by consumers given the recent evolution of the labor market.
One member noted that this is in line with the transitory nature of the recent increase in inflation.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment of low and stable One member highlighted that it is essential to continue with a very cautious approach, carefully assessing the outlook for inflation and its determinants.
Some members mentioned additional cost- related pressures.
One member mentioned that, as a result, the latter has continued to operate below its installed capacity.
Some members attributed the currency´s recent performance to the ample interest rate spread between Mexico and the United States as well as to Mexico’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals.
Considering all of the above, he/she stated that it is necessary to identify the different challenges and dilemmas that monetary policy faces, assess the scenarios that materialize, and based on these elements define the most convenient adjustments to the monetary policy stance.
Another member recalled that inflation in said country has been persistently low in recent years, and that thus it is still to be seen if, on this occasion, the economic recovery will have a sustained effect on prices.
He/she considered that the materialization of these risks could require monetary restriction for a longer period.
Similarly, he/she noted that the open unemployment rate could be an inadequate indicator to illustrate a labor imbalance.
He/she added that, on the contrary, inducing more restrictive monetary conditions in a timely manner would avoid a greater impact on price formation and would favor a more orderly adjustment in the economy as a whole, which would lead to better conditions to face episodes of volatility.
With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
Some members noted that, in the United States, several indicators have deteriorated.
He/she indicated that said shocks would materialize in a situation characterized by an inflation rate and its short- and long-term expectations above target, as well as by a weak economy.
One member detailed that the latter is associated with lower food inflation.
Looking ahead, the Board expects that the inflationary environment will allow further reference rate adjustments.
He/she stressed that although it is true that some central banks of these countries have recently raised their reference rates, the idiosyncratic character of these decisions needs to be highlighted, and therefore no simplistic extrapolations of these episodes should be made.
One member noted that foreign exchange markets showed a heterogeneous behavior by region, with Latin American currencies appreciating the most.
He/she added that the risks to which domestic financial markets and inflation are subject to have increased.
Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the maintain the reference rate at its current level for an extended period.
Some members emphasized the impact of the shortage of semiconductors on the automotive industry.
Some members pointed out that the evolution of the electoral process in the United States also influenced markets.
However, another member mentioned that energy prices registered relatively low annual inflation levels.
However, another member deemed it possible that part of the exchange rate shock may be temporary or may moderate to some extent, which could imply a lower exchange rate pass-through.
They consumption remain at high levels, such as consumer confidence, the total wage bill, and remittances.
He/she added that distortions caused by the lockdown have made the reading of inflation difficult given that CPI’s fixed weights have become obsolete.
In the same direction, this member was concerned that the passthrough to the prices of services may become positive, when it is currently close to zero.
He/she argued that the above indicates that the monetary policy stance has consolidated at a sufficiently high level, even under the most pessimistic scenarios.
Some members highlighted that merchandise inflation is at double-digit levels.
As for growth forecasts, some members pointed out that timely indicators suggest that, in the U.S., GDP will continue growing at a high rate for the remainder of the year.
He/she stated that the behavior of the national currency has also contributed to the disinflationary process.
He/she expressed that this is a necessary condition not only to induce the convergence of inflation to the target, but also to manage the risks associated with such convergence.
One member added that it also reflects the outlook that investment will remain weak in the following quarters.
He/she expressed the need for communication to provide clear signals in a timely manner and to avoid inconsistencies that could damage the central bank's credibility.
Another member considered it important for monetary policy to continue its easing cycle, without ruling out the possibility of reaching a real interest rate close to zero or even negative.
One stressed that it is estimated that the shortage of fuel in some states will have a negative effect on GDP growth in the first quarter of 2019, which will depend on its intensity and duration.
Most members agreed that Banco de México must communicate a clear signal of prudence and commitment to its price stability mandate.
He/she argued that the described phenomenon requires maintaining an adequate monetary restriction given a less adverse risk outlook than that faced in 2023, and thus it does not require keeping the monetary policy stance at historically restrictive levels.
Regarding economic activity, most members pointed out that the outlook for the U.S. economy has strengthened.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
Most members underlined that a recovery is expected during the second half of 2020, which would extend to next year.
Some members noted that in most economies, inflation remains above their respective central bank targets.
Another member pointed out that although the negative output gap forecast should contribute to ease inflationary pressures, there is the risk that supply shocks on inflation and, specifically, the trends that are being observed in wages, lead to a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, especially in an environment of increases in shortterm headline inflation expectations and of a persisting upward trend in long-term core inflation expectations.
The same member pointed out that it is essential to maintain a prudent policy stance until the Bank clearly fulfils its mandate in a more solid manner given that in order to ensure that headline inflation remains around 3%, it is necessary for core inflation to converge to that same level, albeit currently it is not very far from 3%.
He/she considered it necessary to maintain such expectations anchored.
They detailed that the European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada cut their reference rates again by 25 basis points.
It acknowledged the progress of the disinflationary process in Mexico.
One member noted that, after the episodes of financial turmoil in the international banking sector, the increase in volatility that had been observed in the foreign exchange market has reversed.
All members of the Governing Board agreed that the downward trajectory followed by inflation can be, to a large extent, attributed to the monetary policy actions adopted by Banco de México.
He/she also deemed necessary not only to monitor whether the balance of risks remains biased to the upside, but also its evolution in response to the mitigation of tail risks, taking into account disruptions in supply chains, supply-related pressures, or if inflation becomes entrenched at elevated levels.
Another member mentioned that both headline inflation and its components continue on an upward trend, despite the wide slack and the exchange rate appreciation.
In this context, one member underlined that political and geopolitical issues in the United Kingdom, Italy, France, and China, as well as idiosyncratic risks of emerging economies, will continue contributing to the environment of high uncertainty.
He/she also stated that the level of restriction attained is sufficiently robust in light of possible adjustments in the stance relative to other economies.
However, he/she detailed that most of them are expected to continue reducing their monetary restriction until they converge to their neutral positions in 2025.
He/she stated that although part of this adjustment may be transitory, the low level of participation of foreign investors in primary auctions of government securities in Mexico stands out.
He/she noted that the current conditions are more similar to those of 2012 than to those of similar to the former.
performance of industrial production to a significant increase in civil engineering construction projects.
Most members added as upside risks a possible exchange rate adjustment, as well as greater-than-expected increases in agricultural and livestock prices.
In this respect, a member emphasized the widespread risk aversion feeling in such markets, as well as the observed strengthening of the U.S. dollar.
Some members pointed out that the unemployment rate increased.
In particular, the assessment must take into consideration the following factors: the possible rebound of inflation due to the core component’s persistence; the potential reversion of the non-core component; the probable rebound of the economy in risks.
Some members indicated that commercial bank credit maintained its dynamism.
Another member noted that the eventual process of monetary normalization at a global level could have implications for the exchange rate and for capital flows, which could present greater outflows than those observed at this point.
Another member noted that the current economic cycle is not a traditional one, with unusual effects for decision making.
All members mentioned that in its May meeting the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, and reiterated its message that it would be patient in making adjustments to the range.
Some members emphasized that the chairman of the US Federal Reserve stated that it will not be appropriate to reduce the target range until there is greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward its target.
Most members attributed the recovery of the global economy to the partial reopening of activities in certain economies.
One member added that this is one of the largest within emerging economies.
Another member pointed out that although tensions in domestic financial markets have moderated, several warning indicators persist.
They stated that among the major risks those that stand out are: i) a further escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and its main trade partners; ii) that the weakness of some of the main economies lasts longer than anticipated; iii) that new episodes of international financial volatility occur; and, iv) that some political and geopolitical risks intensify.
Another member noted that non-core inflation has been below forecasts.
He/she recalled that, given a complex outlook, in the previous monetary policy decision it was determined that for the following meeting an additional increase in the reference rate would be required.
One member noted that, despite equity market inflows, there was a net decrease in this position.
He/she added that the Fed's most recent forecasts show that there could be between two and four 25 basis-point cuts next year.
Most members mentioned that gross fixed investment has shown weakness.
Nevertheless, they indicated that it is still above the central banks’ targets in a large number of these economies.
Another member added that in the first quarter the industrial sector contracted and that manufacturing production decreased, while primary activities increased.
He/she considered that, during such phase, a restrictive monetary policy stance should be maintained with an ex-ante real interest rate of around 7%, considering that the reduction in expected inflation is reflected in increases in the exante real interest rate.
He/she added that emerging economies registered a lower dynamism during the same period compared to the previous quarter.
One member associated the above with the strength of the labor market.
Regarding credit risk, he/she indicated that delinquency levels remain at relatively low and stable levels, despite exhibiting a marginal upward trend.
He/she noted that it must be explained that inflationary shocks demand decisive actions and it must be warned that, if inflation continues to increase, the expansionary policy stance will continue to diminish.
He/she argued that, given the environment of uncertainty surrounding decision-making, monetary policy’s approach should remain prudent, cautious and gradual, in line with the challenges that continue to be faced, in order for inflation to converge to the target, and consistent with seeking an orderly behavior of markets, the financial system, and the economy as a whole.
Such member pointed out that despite such explanations, a high degree of uncertainty persists as to the price formation process in the United States, which increases the probability of inflationary surprises.
Some members agreed that the slowdown of global economic activity has moderated expectations of a faster reduction of the monetary stimulus.
The majority of members agreed that the increase in U.S. government securities’ interest rates has generated episodes of volatility in international financial markets, lower risk appetite, and capital outflows from emerging economies.
He/she mentioned that inflows to equity assets are still being observed in these markets, along with outflows from fixed-income assets.
As for downside risks, the same members mentioned the possibility that the prices of certain goods included in the non-core subindex could register lower variations and that economic slack could widen more than expected.
For this reason, he/she mentioned that the real interest rate in Mexico is currently the highest among the group of seventeen emerging countries analyzed.
He/she indicated that, despite the shocks that have been observed, this has allowed the ex-ante real interest rate to achieve clearly restrictive levels and the nominal rate to reach levels above both observed and expected inflation, which will contribute to the process of convergence of inflation.
Regarding downward risks, most members highlighted the lower-than- anticipated economic activity.
One member highlighted that fundamental core inflation does not suggest any cyclical pressures on prices.
Some members mentioned that stock indices have registered generalized gains, reaching historic highs.
One member pointed out that, although the acceleration of services inflation is not excessive, the annual variation of this index is consolidating at high levels.
One member added that in these economies inflation remains close, or even below, their central banks’ targets, except for Turkey and Argentina.
One member noted that, unlike the 2019 stagnation, when the greatest impact came from international trade and from manufacturing activity, on this occasion the most significant contraction is anticipated to take place in the non-manufacturing sector, especially in services and commerce, which will have more severe repercussions on employment and occupation.
One member added that it has also reflected a trajectory of wages that has been incompatible with the evolution of productivity.
In view of the environment of high uncertainty and the risks mentioned above, he/she considered it essential to maintain the level of monetary restriction attained.
Some members also underlined that it remains high.
Another member stated that there are some margins for maneuver, such as the reallocation of public spending from controversial large-scale projects to priorities arisen as a result of the pandemic.
Another member underlined that seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly changes of merchandise prices have decreased considerably in recent months.
Another member reflected upon the fact that, while advanced economies, which for many years have had inflation and its expectations below their targets, have more room for maneuver, in emerging economies, particularly in Mexico, price formation can be more easily contaminated.
Another member highlighted that although core inflation has shown resistance to decline, it is starting to follow a downward trend.
One member added that the effects of the pandemic could worsen if the economic policies aimed at mitigating them are insufficient.
One member pointed to the lower costs of maritime transport and decreased scarcity of commodities.
Most members stated that markets expect the first cut in the second quarter of 2024.
However, another member specified that breakeven inflation still remains at levels above 4% for all terms.
He/she pointed out that, since 2018, unit labor costs have increased and productivity has declined, which implies that profit margins have decreased and/or a partial or a total pass-through effect to prices has taken place.
However, one member indicated that economic activity in the euro area remained weak, while in China, industrial production stagnated and fixed investment continued declining.
He/she warned that it is too early to believe that the interest rate cuts which are anticipated by market indicators for the end of 2023 will materialize.
One member considered that the reduction in longer- term interest rates in the United States was due to its favorable inflation figures.
In this regard, one of the members stated that the economy is anticipated to grow even below potential during the next quarters and that the output gap will near zero in 2019.
Most members mentioned that medium- and long-term remained relatively stable, although above the 3% target.
One member pointed out that marginal inflows by foreign investors to the stock market were observed.
They noted that industrial production, particularly manufacturing, has been semiconductors, especially in the automotive sector.
In addition, some members pointed out the risk that non-core inflation registers a reversal to its historic values.
Most members underlined the Federal Reserve’s announcement of shrinking the rate of reduction of its securities holdings starting in May and concluding such process in September 2019.
Some members considered that the economy's cyclical position have not changed significantly since the previous monetary policy decision.
In this context, some members noted that the confidence of economic agents decreased.
As to the core component, some members highlighted that it has shown persistence.
The same member pointed out that the environment for these economies has become more uncertain and that their performance will be determined by idiosyncratic factors and by the soundness of their macroeconomic foundations.
In light of the foreseen implications, with the presence of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to The Governing Board will take the necessary actions on the basis of incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target in the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
However, he/she warned that said estimates should be taken with caution, given that their measurements exhibit a wide range of variability, depending on the methodology used.
Another member stated that in the United States, 2- year inflation expectations have been above 3% over the last weeks.
Such member added that expectations of above-potential-growth rates for this year and 2019 prevail.
Some members mentioned that a reduction in foreign holdings of government bonds was observed.
On the other hand, another member mentioned that fiscal policy has remained prudent and that the proposal for 2020 is cautious and responsible by presenting a primary surplus of 0.7% of GDP.
Another member mentioned that the current outlook is even more challenging as it is optimistic to believe that the effect of the accumulation of supply and demand shocks on inflation will dissipate immediately.
They also mentioned that timely indicators of private demand suggest an uptick in growth during the second quarter and a greater dynamism for the remainder of 2018 and in 2019.
Regarding expectations drawn from market instruments, some members pointed out that these have continued to deteriorate.
One member delved into the factors to be considered in the conduct of monetary policy, highlighting that since mid-2015 the economy has been facing an adverse shock to its potential growth, together with a tighter external financing constraint.
One member expressed that the expectation of significant wage increases in 2025 persist.
One member considered that the US labor market continues being strong despite the tightening of monetary conditions.
Another added to the above factors the end of the electoral process in Mexico.
The majority pointed out that in the Federal forecasts for inflation and economic growth increased, as well as the expectations for the federal funds rate.
However, one member warned that, given the global demand and production cuts, this trend could reverse.
Such member stated that, in that member’s opinion, the most relevant matter for the monetary and fiscal authorities at this stage is to evaluate how to safeguard what has already been achieved and how to address the pending issues in a timely manner.
One member underlined that, although agricultural and livestock products’ inflation has declined relative to the levels observed in the third quarter of 2022, it still remains at high levels.
One member stated that inflationary pressures continue increasing and their persistence is not expected to diminish for a long period.
Such persistence, together with perspectives for non-core inflation, makes it unlikely for the current forecast for headline inflation to be attained.
One member indicated that formal employment in the manufacturing and construction industries has lost momentum.
Finally, another member considered that, on balance, the aforementioned factors jeopardize the convergence of inflation to the de México’s latest Quarterly Report.
One member pointed out that the unemployment rate measured by different indicators stabilized at low levels and also that the indicator with national coverage remains below the estimates of its long term level.
Another member mentioned that food merchandise prices have been increasing at double-digit rates for months.
He/she highlighted that, nevertheless, Mexico does not stand out for being the country with the highest levels of headline inflation among other countries that registered similar levels of inflation prior to the pandemic.
Most members considered that slack conditions in the economy loosened towards the end of 2018 and in the early part of 2019, and some members highlighted that this confirms the existence of a negative output gap.
The same member noted that the strong inertia exhibited by both core and fundamental core inflation.
Most members stated that financial conditions remained tight and that international financial markets exhibited volatility.
With the proposed increase, he/she considered that the expected trajectory of inflation, as well as the associated balance of risks, are consistent with slowing the pace of interest rate increases.
He/she noted that in June there were fewer technical shutdowns in assembly plants, although the production of light vehicles has not yet regained its pre-pandemic levels.
He/she added that if the fiscal consolidation process contemplated for 2025 is not achieved, given the challenges that this implies, the consequences for inflationary dynamics could be even greater for that year.
He/she considered that with the referred reduction of 25 basis points, the space for monetary easing has probably been exhausted, which will allow for inducing the trajectory of inflation and its expectations to its 3% target in the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
One member noted that the Mexican peso stood out as the second-best performing currency during the period, only slightly behind the Brazilian real.
He/she pointed out that twelve months later, there are high levels of inflation, unseen in more than 20 years, a generalized inflationary phenomenon which affects a large number of goods and services, and which has shown resistance to decline despite the adjustments in the monetary policy stance, and the most concerning, the beginning of the unanchoring of medium- and long-term expectations.
He/she considered that this situation may change in view of the expected reversal of the current account surplus and the limits of banks' absorption capacity, especially in view of an eventual improvement in credit placement.
Another member stated that headline inflation surprised in November by decreasing 76 basis points, from 4.09% in October to 3.33% in November.
They also noted that unemployment, underemployment and labor participation rates, as well as continued to show progress.
Some members highlighted the contraction in construction and mining, although one member noted that both have exhibited a slight upward trend after having deteriorated for several years.
Likewise, one member pointed out the weakness of the electricity sector.
As for investment, most members underlined that it continued increasing in March, mainly driven by spending on highlighted that construction remains weak.
He/she mentioned that this could be the result of lower tax collection as a consequence of lower economic growth than forecast in the 2019 Economic Package, or from a greater-than-expected decline in the oil production platform.
However, just as the central bank had warned at the time, it was not clear that such downward trend could be sustained in the short term, as proven by the recent increase in inflation.
In addition, one member mentioned that the risk of surprises or unwanted effects of monetary policy actions in advanced economies cannot be ruled out.
Another member mentioned that economic activity in China seems to be responding favorably to the implemented stimuli and stressed that the Chinese authorities have expressed their intention to use the policy tools at their disposal to attain an orderly adjustment of their economy.
To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance and the time frame in which monetary policy operates as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of risks for such factors.
In view of the described environment, most members highlighted that central banks in advanced and emerging economies have eased their monetary policy stances.
He/she stated that a 600-basispoint interest rate spread has been maintained between Mexico and the United States, due to the synchronization of the inflationary cycles, and not due to a mechanical relationship.
significant progress has been made in the disinflationary process, an environment of high uncertainty and risks still prevails.
One member added the possibility of lower inflationary pressures at a global level and a new outbreak of the virus lowering the demand for goods and services.
In this context, most members highlighted the recent downgrade of the sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating by three agencies.
Such member underscored that, in a situation as the one described, the risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations exists and, thus, a forceful response from the central bank is needed.
He/she noted that the inflationary outlook has deteriorated during the year to levels not seen in two decades, while the response has remained gradual, cautious and data-dependent.
One member highlighted the possible contagion of the crisis to the financial system and to the sustainability of public finances, in view of the maximum historical levels of sovereign and corporate debts.
In particular, they noted the weak performance of construction.
However, one member added that in view of the deterioration of growth expectations, the prices of commodities, particularly of crude oil, suffered declines, although most recently there was a moderation of these declines.
All members agreed that the balance of risks to growth is significantly biased to the downside.
In particular, one of the members pointed out that interest rates of U.S. 2year Treasury bonds have hit levels above 2.5% and also registered an increase of over 120 basis points since September, while 10- to 30-year Treasury bonds have yields of 2.9% and 3.0%, corresponding to increases of over 80 and 35 basis points, respectively, during the same period.
He/she mentioned that some of the actions of the new package aim at expanding the collateral eligible for accessing liquidity facilities and for widening the coverage to development banks.
He/she noted that, for now, the further tightening of the restrictive stance will continue through passive monetary policy management.
He/she pointed out that, on the contrary, monetary easing so far implemented by Banco de México has had a favorable effect on financial markets, given that the exchange rate has recovered lost ground and remained relatively stable over the last quarter.
Most members mentioned that the European Central Bank adopted diverse measures of monetary policy easing by reducing its key deposit facility rate by 10 basis points and by announcing the implementation of a new asset purchase program for an indefinite period.
Another member highlighted that non-oil imports of intermediate goods and consumer goods are above the levels registered in late 2019, while capital imports are at lower levels.
Some members highlighted that wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering double-digit annual variations.
Some members added the possibility of an exchange rate depreciation.
He/she stated that under the current circumstances, it is difficult to assume that an additional monetary policy easing would result in a significant boost to economic activity.
One member stated that episodes of volatility in US Treasury and mortgage-backed securities’ markets cannot be ruled out, with possible contagion effects on the rest of the financial system.
One member underlined that the unemployment rate increased to 4.65% in April, which represents 2.7 million people.
He/she highlighted that in 2021 fiscal support and transfers to households increased considerably in the United States, generating an increase in the demand for consumer durables worldwide, thus exerting pressure on their prices and generating bottlenecks.
He/she pointed out that these have contributed to raise inflation expectations of business and consumers, as well as expectations implicit in fixed-income markets.
He/she also considered that the observed increase in wages rather obeys a recovery of real wages, which are barely 1.8% above what was registered in the last quarter of 2019.
One member noted that some upward risks to inflation have materialized in recent months, in an adverse external environment with significant factors of domestic uncertainty.
Some members pointed out that data confirms that the subindexes that are more labor intensive and more related to wages, have had the highest increases.
Similarly, one member pointed out that specialists surveyed by the central bank once again revised their growth expectations downwards for the current and following years.
Among upward risks, the majority mentioned the persistence of core inflation, specifically its services component.
Most members stated that the recent moderation in some of the abovementioned risks to the global economy, along with signs of stabilization in certain leading indicators have led to a greater risk appetite in international financial markets.
Most members agreed that the stagnation of economic activity has implied that the negative slack conditions have widened with respect to those observed in the previous quarter.
Finally, one member also mentioned the potential impact of the increase to the tax on flavored drinks and on cigarettes projected on the 2020 budget.
One of the members stated that, given the expectations of more gradual and smaller increases in interest rates in advanced economies, Banco de México would have a slightly wider margin as to its monetary policy decisions.
Most members highlighted that the flash estimate of GDP suggests that the Mexican economy continued growing during the fourth quarter of 2022.
However, one member stated that they remain at relatively high levels.
Among risks to the upside for headline inflation, most members highlighted the possibility that the peso exchange rate comes under pressure stemming from external or domestic factors.
Another member mentioned that inflation pressures are contained in most countries, and underlined that inflation expectations implied by market instruments for the main economies remain below those registered at the beginning of the year.
One member noted that this has been due to the fact that, in an uncertain environment, they have been highly sensitive to economic data.
With respect to financing in the economy, another member stated that in July financing to the nonfinancial private sector continued increasing, albeit at a slower pace than in recent months.
He/she indicated that a more rapid monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve could affect the exchange rate and impose challenges for monetary policy.
Some members pointed out that the underemployment rate is 14%, a figure twice the level normally observed.
One member expressed that service prices have continued with a reversal-to-trend process, which responds to a decline in the number of infections.
One member added that this has deepened the inversion of this curve to historical levels.
Most members noted that external demand exhibited sluggishness.
In the case of the United States, another member considered that the fading of factors that once supported the resilience of its economy, such as the financial position of households, which is already weakening, suggests that some downward risks have gained relevance.
One member noted that the uncertainty is associated to: i) possible changes in consumption patterns and their effects on price formation; ii) the magnitude and duration of shocks; iii) the persistence of adverse conditions in the financial markets; iv) the effects of disruptions in global value chains and a possible shortage of certain goods, and v) possible second round effects in case the exchange rate depreciation is perceived to be permanent.
One member pointed out that with an inflation gap of three percentage points, if the reference rate is not increased, there would be no convergence in the foreseen horizon.
They indicated that this occurred in a context of increased demand from firms and in spite of the tighter monetary conditions.
Based on the above, and taking into consideration the monetary policy stance already attained and the persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all its members, the Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
The majority added that the expected economic slowdown could mitigate the risk of the exchange rate pass-through.
Among the elements of uncertainty that the Mexican economy will continue to face, one of the members underlined the adverse sociopolitical environment that prevails in the country.
He/she pointed out that, within the scope of Banco de México’s attributions, this implies pursuing low and stable inflation and safeguarding the strength of the financial system.
He/she stated that, due to the above, monetary policy must be even more cautious in the following months and, if available information suggests that there is still room for an additional easing, the adjustments should be expected to be more gradual than those observed in recent months.
Some members noted that the projected short-term trajectories for inflation are slightly higher than those published in the Quarterly Report October-December 2020.
Nevertheless, indicators, consumption growth is expected to moderate somewhat towards the second half of the year.
Some members stated that this was due to the expectation of lower fiscal and monetary stimuli, especially in the United States.
He/she stressed that otherwise it will be necessary to reflect more deeply on the scope and speed of the current downward cycle.
Some members highlighted that formal employment showed a slight recovery in August.
In this regard, he/she considered that pressures at the margin on general and core inflation decreased between August and September, while in October some pressure was registered once more due to the decrease in the number of infections and the reactivation of spending.
On the demand side, he/she considered that households’ and firms’ spending and income are being very affected.
Some members mentioned that emerging economies also continued raising their reference rates.
He/she argued that, considering the described disjunctive, although the hiking cycle has to continue, it is necessary to reduce the pace of adjustment, calibrate adequately the next policy decisions, and lower the probability of the described risks materializing.
One member argued that measures of economic slack will gain even more relevance in the coming months.
Some members underlined that exports started to increase in June.
The Board highlighted that, with this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its The Governing Board stated that for the next monetary policy decisions, it will monitor inflationary pressures thoroughly as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
He/she stated that the trajectory of has been better than forecasted in previous months both by the Central Bank and by analysts.
One member stated that, if the deterioration in medium-term expectations is not addressed, these could contaminate long-term expectations.
In this context, some members considered that the uncertainty over the balance of risks for inflation has intensified.
The majority also indicated that during the same period, core inflation expectations for the end of 2019 were adjusted from 3.45% to 3.50%, while those for the end of 2020 increased from 3.33% to long-term headline inflation expectations are still above the permanent 3% target, at levels around expectations (up to four years) were adjusted upwards and that the dispersion of long-term expectations has increased.
He/she warned about the risk that non-food merchandise inflation, as it converges to its mean, may no longer offset the persistence of services inflation, initiating an upward trend in core inflation.
Most members underlined the gains of the the behavior of this market has been in line with that observed across other emerging economies.
In order to consolidate a low and stable inflation, in an environment in which price formation and slack conditions in the economy are subject to risks, the Governing Board will continue to follow closely all factors and elements of uncertainty that have an impact on inflation and its outlook, and will take the required actions based on incoming information so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
Some members mentioned that due to the observed shocks and the levels reached by inflation, there is the risk of second-round effects on the price formation process.
Some members added that their annual measures are expected to converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon.
One member added that it is important to increase productivity by adopting new technologies and investing in human capital.
Another member mentioned that in the case of the U.S., considerable downward adjustments have been observed in the yield curve of Treasury bonds in all maturities.
He/she pointed out that, on the one hand, not all measurements of medium-term expectations have been affected, while long-term expectations are stable, which is consistent with the transitory nature of inflationary pressures.
One member stated that this occurs even despite an environment of economic slowdown and of accumulated increases in the reference rate.
Most members pointed out that the global economy continued growing during the second quarter.
He/she added that this will place the Central Bank in a better position to ensure that the expected trajectory for inflation materializes.
Meanwhile the trimmed mean indicator continues showing the same trend than the official figure, which has increased for 10 consecutive months, and already stands nearly at 5%.
He/she specified that across different regions of Mexico, the weakening of employment is more evident in the Northern border free zone, where the larger wage adjustments have been observed, and that the lessons derived from this experience should be taken into consideration.
The same member emphasized that both types of risks are operating in the same direction and reinforcing each other.
Another member estimated that the persistence of inflation stems from domestic pressures.
The majority of members noted that private unfavorably, and mentioned the fall in lending to firms.
Some members pointed out that the contribution of energy prices to the increase in headline inflation was significant during the first half of September and larger than that exhibited in January 2017.
One member stated that leading indicators suggest a moderation of the growth rate.
In this regard, he/she highlighted technological change and the integration of regions with abundant labor force into globalization, which have allowed for the fragmentation of productive processes according to comparative advantages and to the cost structure of different countries and regions.
The majority of members mentioned that it is expected that, in its annual measurement, they will decrease to a larger extent after one year and that they will converge to the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon.
The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and the factors that determine it, along contaminated, and the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of monetary and financial considerations, on this occasion, the majority of the Board decided to increase the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%.
He/she added that, although slack measures are unobservable factors and their estimation is subject to uncertainty, it cannot be ignored that timely data indicate that the economy has had three consecutive quarters of marked weakness.
He/she also pointed out that business sector expectations are still at high levels.
He/she added that information from surveys in advanced economies suggests an increase in short-term expectations, while expectations drawn from longer-term financial instruments show moderate increases.
He/she added that the rebound in inflation prompted some central banks in emerging economies to conclude their monetary easing cycle and begin increasing their reference rates.
Most members stated that, looking ahead, inflationary pressures are expected to continue decreasing.
Another member considered that the expected trajectory of this component remains highly uncertain.
He/she added that gasoline prices have stabilized in line with the federal government's pricing policy and that, therefore, looking ahead, their contribution to inflation will be more limited.
The majority mentioned that the Mexican peso appreciated slightly and its trading conditions improved.
They emphasized its orderly behavior in an uncertain and volatile international aversion.
Some members stated that it has been heterogeneous, with differences in the recovery rates of domestic demand as compared to those of external demand.
Some members stated that in the main advanced economies, headline inflation continues converging to their central banks’ targets, albeit one of them added that core inflation has remained below such targets.
One member pointed out that this derives from the fact that the reduction in services prices have offset the rebound in energy prices.
However, some members highlighted that, according to Banco de México estimates, a wage-price spiral is not being observed.
Some members underlined that analysts’ inflation expectations for all terms remain above those projected by Banco de México.
One member argued that, although formal employment has already recovered and total employment is close to its prepandemic level, public policy should strive to attain the employment levels that would have been observed if the pandemic had not taken place.
Most members underlined that the Mexican peso has traded within a broad range.
All members mentioned that the described external environment has consolidated expectations that the main central banks will not tighten monetary conditions in the foreseeable future.
Some members indicated that in most economies inflation is expected to converge to their corresponding central banks’ targets by 2025.
The same member argued that the natural outcome of this combination of trends has been a fall in formal employment, an increase in informal labor, and a rise in the unemployment rate, which has probably been softened by the higher levels of employment in the informal sector.
With this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation to converge The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
Regarding the latter, he/she emphasized that greater weight should be given to climate-related factors in the balance of risks to inflation.
In view of the deteriorating environment, it is necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance and confirm the commitment that the necessary actions will be taken so that inflation expectations remain anchored and a deterioration of the price formation process is avoided.
Finally, some members pointed out that the uncertainty related to elections in both advanced and emerging countries as well as to the terms and conditions of Brexit, may also have a negative effect on confidence levels and, in turn, on global investment and growth.
One member stated that the pandemic led to the early exit of older generations from the labor force and a lower participation of women and young people.
Nevertheless, the majority warned about Pemex’s business plan continuing to be a cause of concern for the rating agencies.
He/she considered that the factors that exert pressure on inflation cannot operate indefinitely and stand in contrast with structural inflation determinants, such as globalization and technological change.
The same member emphasized that the Federal Reserve raised its projections for economic growth for 2018, for inflation for 2018 and 2019, and lowered those for unemployment for 2018, 2019, and 2020.
Most members stated that global economic activity weakened during the second quarter.
In the case of the Chinese economy, some members stated that, as a consequence of the trade tensions with the U.S., several policies have been adopted to revamp economic growth and continue an orderly rebalancing of this economy.
Some members mentioned that the fall observed in the stock market was due to lower economic activity and to local uncertainty factors.
One member highlighted several factors to consider for this decision before beginning any cycle of reference rate cuts: i) that the balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the upside and is uncertain; ii) that services inflation does not show a downward trend or signs of an imminent decline soon; iii) that analysts' inflation expectations for the end of 2024 are above the central bank's forecasts, and thus they do not anticipate that the intermediate inflation target will be attained; iv) that the output gap is positive and certain indicators suggest demandrelated pressures; v) that the labor market continues showing strength; and vi) that credit growth is not slowing down, while the monetary base is growing above 14%.
However, they added that, in lower than those registered during the previous quarter.
Another member stated that, in his/her opinion, although it is convenient to modify the objective for the reference rate, currently a single 25 basis point increase is far from being sufficient to realign the expected trajectory of inflation to its target of 3% in general, not only within the forecast horizon.
He/she stated that the central bank’s reaction function must be communicated with a clear and explicit forward guidance.
He/she considered that risks to economic activity remain balanced.
One member highlighted that the recovery of the labor market continues to be uneven in terms of gender.
Actions will be implemented in such a way that the reference rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period.
Some members noted that economic activity in advanced economies is expected to grow at a lower rate overall in 2024.
Another member mentioned that remittances, which are a determinant of consumption, continue increasing, although with heterogeneity among sender and receiver states.
One member considered that, despite the recent reduction of headline inflation and its forecasts, high risks and a considerable degree of uncertainty persist, which makes it difficult to establish the balance of risks.
One member pointed out that the increase in commodity prices and the orderly resolution of the electoral process in the United States also contributed to the improved functioning of financial markets.
Most members mentioned the high levels of non-residential construction, although one member added that it declined marginally in September.
Second, such member indicated that the proposals about using the international reserves to finance public spending, for example in investment or any other type of expenditure, do not take into account the fact that international reserves are not a source of net wealth, since these have to be financed with the issuance of liabilities by the central bank.
He/she added that, given the fragility of the economic recovery, further monetary tightening could affect people's wellbeing.
One member pondered that monetary policy actions implemented by Banco de México have led to an attractive volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States.
One member stated that its evolution has mainly been concentrated in imported goods.
One member stated that, in his/her opinion, it shows a slight improvement.
Most members pointed out the possible consequences on economic activity of an environment of uncertainty related to the electoral process, to institutional weakness, as well as to crime and public insecurity.
One member added that the Bank of Canada is also preparing to do so.
One member added that although the ten-year inflation risk premium apparently is decreasing, it remains at levels similar to those recorded in stress episodes.
One member argued that the downward trajectory of inflation seems to be starting to consolidate, although its decline has been slow and marginal so far.
He/she mentioned the importance of avoiding that the Central Bank actions in one dimension (credit facilities) be limited by its actions in another dimension (interest rates).
One member emphasized that its seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate was 3.53% in July 2024.
Some members mentioned the stabilization of the labor participation rate.
He/she added that regarding economic activity, recent World Bank estimates show that a simultaneous one percentage point deceleration in the growth of the U.S., the euro area and China would generate a negative impact of 1.4 percentage points on growth of emerging economies in the first year alone, followed by a further fall of approximately one percentage point during the second year.
In particular, this members expressed that there has been greater liquidity and depth in this market, as well as an increase in net long derivatives positions on the Mexican peso.
They pointed out that the main stock markets registered gains, some of them reaching historically high levels.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%.
Another member stated that since the previous monetary policy decision, inflation has continued accelerating.
Regarding this last point, one member noted that in the United States, the deflator for durable goods spending increased from -1.54% in February 2020 to that have pressured inflation, the lack of flexibility in production of goods and the unprecedented distortions in the labor market that have led to lower availability of labor, which could be associated with the perception of contagion risk and with the effects of transfers to households.
Some members pointed out that during the first five months of the year around one million IMSS-insured jobs were lost.
Most members argued that economic activity is expected to resume a greater dynamism in the first half of 2024.
He/she added that, in that context, stock market indices increased, which offset the previous decreases.
Most members considered that said institution could slow down its pace of adjustments in the near future.
They stated that although monetary policy might contribute to the recovery, it must do so without jeopardizing price stability.
He/she considered that additional interest rate cuts would be beneficial for several reasons: i) the economy will continue to operate with an ample amount of slack for an extended period; ii) an unfavorable performance is observed in those areas where monetary policy has a direct impact, such as credit to households and firms, consumption and investment; iii) the current account surplus reflects that the monetary policy stance is still restrictive for the current economic conditions; and iv) Mexico's real interest rate continues to be above that observed in most emerging economies.
Another member said that while the effects of the shocks are expected to be predominantly transitory, the risks to price formation at the global level are on the upside, given the wide range of prices impacted and the magnitude of the price increases, and the extended time horizon over which they have affected inflation.
Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external environment, and the conditions of slack in the Mexican economy.
He/she argued that it will be important to monitor that the effects of this stance are fully transmitted to the economy.
One member mentioned that its asset purchase program has concluded.
Some members underlined that fruit and vegetables inflation, which had undergone significant pressures in December 2023 and January 2024, decreased in February.
He/she added that given the prevailing risks, medium and long-term inflation expectations could rebound.
In the case of the main advanced economies, most members mentioned that headline and core inflation remain below their central banks’ targets.
One member underlined the decline in mobility caused by the contagion rate.
The majority clarified that in the U.S., the euro area and Japan, core inflation lies below their central banks’ targets.
They message that reference rates will remain at high levels for an extended period.
He/she said that this reflects the high levels of both energy and agricultural and livestock product prices.
One member highlighted that the US Federal Reserve included corporate debt with a wide range of credit ratings in its asset purchase program.
He/she stated that Banco de Mexico’s communication must be as explicit as possible, avoiding an insufficiently clear forward guidance; for this reason, he/she pointed out that the monetary policy statement should justify the decision clearly, as well as the future intentions, specifying that these do not represent a fixed commitment and that they are subject to incoming data.
Another member indicated that, looking ahead, disinflation is anticipated to continue in advanced economies.
Some members mentioned that the manufacturing export sectors will also be affected.
One member highlighted that it registered a seasonally adjusted quarterly growth rate of 1.1%, expanding for eight consecutive quarters.
One member mentioned that, if the economy remains resilient, its cyclical position will exhibit tighter conditions.
One member added the volatility in financial markets and the negative impact on input supply chains.
The majority noted the upward adjustment in global growth forecasts, which is expected to continue to be supported mainly by the recovery in the United States and China.
One member added that this not only responds to temporary external pressures.
One member mentioned that foreign investment inflows have been observed, in particular, to government securities.
One member highlighted that it is to be expected that over the next months, the path of inflation will be very much influenced by the combined impact of the deceleration of economic activity, supply shocks from several sources, and the persistence of a situation of high uncertainty with potential effects on the exchange rate.
Another member added that the trend-cycle measure of the private consumption index seems to have reached an inflection point at the end of the previous year, without reversing its downward trend since then.
Some members associated said resilience with the support from private consumption.
He/she added that agencies have downgraded the credit ratings of multiple sovereign issuers and firms, exacerbating the financial shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical fashion.
Some members stressed that core inflation’s persistence has even contaminated inflation expectations, one member adding that, in particular, it has had an influence on medium-term expectations.
The majority highlighted that among the main risks those that stand out are: i) an escalation of trade disputes; ii) a disorderly Brexit; and, iii) political and geopolitical risks.
Another member argued that the persistence of services inflation is a widespread phenomenon, even in economies that exhibit some slack, which could be largely explained by a reversal in consumption patterns rather than by demandrelated pressures.
They noted that this was observed in all its categories.
Some members mentioned that it has remained above 5% despite the monetary tightening.
One member noted the importance of promoting the adoption of new technologies, strengthening human capital, reducing opportunity gaps and generating the necessary incentives for growth and development.
He/she added that domestic financing to the private sector exhibited solid growth in April, although it continued decelerating.
However, some members pointed out that in certain cases they reduced their reference rate in view of concerns over the deceleration of economic activity.
He/she added that the complex and uncertain environment requires maintaining a cautious and firm monetary policy.
One member indicated that it is expected to gradually approach zero over the forecast horizon.
One member added that the latter registered historically low prices.
In this regard, such members argued that the effect on inflation of the minimum wage increase is expected to be moderate.
He/she highlighted that in the absence of fiscal discipline, the central bank is obliged to provide such an anchor, but that the current fiscal policy should make room for a more accommodative monetary policy.
Another member added that, according to INEGI’s Telephone Survey of Occupation and Employment, the national unemployment rate is currently at 4.7%.
In this context, some members warned about the negative variation in the holdings of foreign investors in peso-denominated assets.
A strategy based on a careful and coherent communication is being used by other central banks in the present situation and was successfully used by Banco de México in 2012 in the face of similar supply shocks.
He/she mentioned that during this period the monetary policy stance continued strengthening, as the real ex-ante rate continued increasing due to the decline in inflation expectations.
Nevertheless, one member considered that they have left open the possibility of additional increases.
Most members mentioned that services inflation continues reflecting the cost-related pressures that have accumulated as a result of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine.
One member mentioned that in the first quarter of 2023 GDP surprised to the upside.
Looking ahead, the possibility of lower potential growth could make it difficult to observe high growth rates without inflationary pressures being generated.
Some members added that the US Federal Reserve established new liquidity swap lines with other central banks.
Most members also considered the increasing challenges for monetary policy, stemming from the ongoing tightening of global pressures associated with the geopolitical China, as well as the possibility of greater negative effects on inflation.
Another member stated that, although there appears to be additional room to reduce the policy rate, it is to be expected that risks are also increasing and thus any adjustment in such direction should be based on that assumption.
Therefore, if the expected convergence of inflation to its target is confirmed, the same member mentioned that a greater monetary policy easing might be considered.
One member highlighted that in some cases, such as in the United States, convergence is expected to occur in early 2026.
As to the lack of flexibility in production, he/she pointed out that the impact on supply chains, the lack of investment in hydrocarbons due to the energy transition, and the end of the negative effect on manufacturing prices that had been observed with China’s increasing participation in world trade.
He/she mentioned that the Fed is expected to begin the normalization process of its reference rate around mid-2023 and, thus, closing the relative position and bringing the local interest rate into neutral territory prematurely may have an impact on future macroeconomic and financial stability.
He/she added that, given its robust macroeconomic stance, Mexico is in a better position to face the Fed’s restrictive cycle.
Another member expressed his/her concern about services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, maintaining an upward trend for over a year and reaching levels close to 5%.
Another member argued that non-core inflation continues growing above its historical average of around 6%.
All members agreed that some of the shocks that have affected inflation have shown signs of easing and pointed out the lower pressures on supply chains.
He/she indicated that the central bank must be willing to act in case signs of a significant deterioration of economic-financial conditions arise, and that this includes taking actions in unscheduled dates.
Regarding the foreign sector, most members noted the good performance of exports.
One member added that it exhibited healthy trading metrics and a considerable trading volume.
On the other hand, most members mentioned that core inflation exhibited slight reductions, laying at 3.65%, a pattern that one member emphasized has been observed since early 2018.
He/she added that, in the current juncture, core inflation, which reflects the mediumterm trend of inflation, is slightly below 4%.
One member pointed out that it has narrowed for two consecutive quarters.
headline inflation has resumed a downward trend, more certainty is still needed that progress in the inflation outlook is significant before lowering the reference rate.
In particular, they pointed out that on March 9[th], the Foreign Exchange Commission increased the size of its foreign exchange peso hedge program and auctions were carried out on March 12[th] and 18[th].
One member mentioned that the expansion of domestic financing sources continued reflecting the acquisition of longterm instruments, which is consistent with the offered yield given the level of the reference rate.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
Another member mentioned that the fiscal front in emerging economies continues to be a risk factor, since a deterioration both in the balances as well as in the debt to GDP ratio is expected, due to the budgetary pressures arising from the stimulus programs and decreased economic activity.
Most members stated that expectations drawn from market instruments continued adjusting upwards.
One member argued that the monetary policy implemented in recent months has made a significant reduction in the reference rate compatible with an approach based on prudence.
Another member noted that Mexico's economic recovery is still incomplete.
Most members mentioned that in the first half of July 2018 inflation reached 4.85%, after having posted 4.65% in June and 4.51% in May.
He/she added that, in the absence of specific measures in said direction, as well as in general to permanently strengthen government revenues, it would not be convenient to seek greater support from fiscal policy to face the pandemic, taking into account the expected decline in the FEIP balances and the resulting increase in the vulnerability of public finances.
They pointed out that, in line with developments in international financial markets, these adjustments tended to reverse in the last few days.
One member stated that ensuring the conditions for the country to take full advantage of the reconfiguration of global production chains would give a greater boost to domestic production, helping to counteract the anticipated cyclical weakness in external demand.
They argued that several assumptions of the economic package might not materialize, emphasizing those related to the evolution of oil production and economic activity.
However, he/she warned that the outlook is still complex and uncertain.
He/she added that in the current juncture, the availability of credit is crucial to prevent solvent firms from going bankrupt due to liquidity problems, and therefore the central bank measures to facilitate lending to small- and mediumsized firms are appropriate.
He/she added that it will only be possible to decouple from the Federal Reserve when the inflationary dynamics diverge or when there is certainty regarding the Federal Reserve’s final interest rate.
Some members expressed concern about this behavior.
In this context, considering that the lower levels registered by headline inflation, the ample slack in the economy, as well as the recent behavior of external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided by majority to lower the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.50%.
One member argued that in view of an unprecedented recession, an inflation near the lower range of the variability interval, and in the verge of undergoing a massive unemployment crisis, it is important to continue easing monetary policy.
Some members highlighted the risk of exchange rate depreciations in light of international financial volatility events.
All members emphasized that international trade flows are already showing the effects from these protectionist measures.
He/she noted that these measures should aim at promoting investment and consumption, particularly of durable goods.
The same member also added that this has led to the following trends in the adjustment process: i) a high dynamism in exports; ii) a slight moderation in consumption; and, iii) a tendency for weak investment.
He/she considered that the monetary policy statement should convey a cautious tone.
One member expressed that this component declined during the first seven months of the year, although it has exhibited an upward trend in the last four months.
He/she considered that this segment is the one that could best reflect the nearshoring process.
Some members added that government bond interest rates for different terms increased throughout the year, in response to central banks’ tighter monetary policy stances.
They noted that, in the case of the US Federal Reserve, in its September meeting, it cut the target range of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
Another member argued that this scenario is expected to have adverse effects on the economic performance of these countries and, more markedly, on those economies where high levels of both public and private indebtedness, among other vulnerabilities, persist.
He/she pointed out that the monetary adjustment has been transmitted along the entire real yield curve and in market interest rates for the different segments.
One member pointed out that the central banks of Brazil and Chile continued lowering their reference rates, reflecting optimism about their inflation trajectories, while the Central Bank of Colombia has been more moderate about its reference rate cuts.
This, along with idiosyncratic factors, has generated greater uncertainty and volatility in local markets.
He/she noted that the second factor is that there was little monetary stimulus granted in 2020 and it began to be withdrawn in advance in 2021, and, therefore, unlike other countries, Mexico does not have a problem of excess demand.
In addition, most members mentioned the risks of public finances deteriorating or of increases in agricultural, livestock product or energy prices being greater than expected, which could make non-core inflation revert to higher levels.
Some members indicated the possibility of pressures arising from wage adjustments.
He/she considered that it is essential to take firm and forceful actions to restore confidence in the commitment to convergence to the target within the forecast horizon.
They added that inflation is still expected to converge to the target in the second quarter of 2025.
One member pointed out that two thirds of the subsectors that comprise it register negative annual variations.
One member considered that the risk of energy prices being subject to pressures is limited due to the domestic fuel price policy.
Another member noted that the growth outlook for 2019 and 2020 imply negative output gaps in both years similar to those estimated in the latest Quarterly Report.
He/she pointed out that, at the same time, the market foresees inflation levels higher than the central bank's forecasts.
All members mentioned that Mexico's economic activity has continued showing dynamism.
He/she argued that the monetary restriction should also be evaluated in terms of its duration, which is nearing two years and which, he/she considered, will extend throughout the planning horizon.
One member pointed out that this sector has recovered as a result of the reopening of activities and the increase in mobility.
Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary policy stance and, under the current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy stance relative to that of the U.S.-in an external environment that it is still subject to risks- and the behavior of slack conditions and cost-related pressures in the economy.
One member pointed out that markets anticipate the first rate increase to take place in the last quarter of consistent with expectations of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), thus both foresee that the monetary stimulus will continue being significant for a long time.
Most members noted a certain improvement in stock markets.
He/she also noted that the situation of the current monetary policy stance should also be considered, as such stance, despite having faced other shocks and their inflationary effects over the last years, and albeit being already in a downward adjustment process, is still at relatively high levels, in an economy that, in face of the COVID-19 pandemic, will suffer a very sizable impact that will lead it to a significant recession.
He/she warned that messages of such nature, or others that give the impression that monetary policy is focused on goals different from inflation, such as stimulating growth, would generate confusion in the markets and would accentuate the credibility challenges.
Some members mentioned that central banks in some emerging economies have started to reduce their monetary stimulus.
Another member deemed that services prices are responding to pressures on input costs and to an increase in demand due to greater mobility.
Regarding the growth outlook, most members pointed out that it has been revised downwards.
One member noted that the forecast for the reference rate for the end of 2019 is already above the Federal Reserve’s long-run estimate.
Most members noted that long-term interest rates on government bond yields rose as a result of the recent episode of higher risk aversion.
In this regard, one member highlighted that in several countries like Australia, Chile, India and Russia, policy rates have already been cut, given the improved outlook in the balance of risks for inflation, in what appears to be the beginning of a new cycle of rate cuts at the global level.
He/she underlined the recent slowdown in industrial production, especially in the manufacturing sectors that have very extended supply chains, which has propitiated multiple bottlenecks in production and adverse effects on prices.
Among short-term risks, he/she mentioned a possible abrupt termination of the monetary stimuli because of persistent inflation increases and the subsequent tightening in international financial conditions, in addition to credit risks derived from high levels of government and corporate indebtedness.
In this regard, one member emphasized that such indicators are expected to remain below their target levels for a prolonged period.
They mentioned that such performance was due to a favorable environment in international financial markets.
Most members pointed out that credit to the private sector continued to perform poorly and highlighted the fall in financing to firms.
He/she mentioned that the interest rate derivatives market exhibited a similar behavior to that of government bonds, with significant increases and high volatility.
One member warned that in recent months these expectations have already started to be revised upwards.
Some members noted that employment growth has coincided with stagnation in labor participation.
Most members highlighted that the economic recovery is expected to continue for the rest of the year.
Some members pointed to the risk of greater cost-related pressures.
He/she highlighted the possibility that the resilience of economic activity continues through the horizon of monetary policy planning, the cyclical position of the economy in positive and increasing territory, that the labor market remains tight and does not show signs of easing, the persistence of core inflation, inflation expectations that are not declining to the required levels, and the procyclical fiscal policy.
Another member warned that if the current monetary policy is relaxed too soon, significant increases in volatility could be observed in domestic financial markets and this could have an impact on financial stability.
They mentioned that this upward adjustment was due to the rise continued decreasing.
In this context, one member considered that there are signs that some pressures on inflation in Mexico have indeed started to moderate.
Some members attributed the improvement in different activity indicators following an easing of mobility restrictions to a lower number of contagions and to greater advance in the vaccination process.
One member considered that a 25-basis point adjustment to the policy rate is insufficient to acknowledge the progress attained in the macroeconomic realm and in mitigating risks in the last months, and that this would mean remaining behind the curve already anticipated by the market.
Another member highlighted the predominance of domestic sources of financing over external ones and the increase in financing to the public sector.
Some members expressed concerns about Pemex's financial situation.
Another member considered that, looking ahead, the strength of the labor market is expected to further diminish, considering a growth of economic activity lower than expected some months ago.
Most members mentioned that core inflation has been affected by the indirect effects of pressures on energy prices and that, within it, the higher rates of change of food merchandise and services prices are noteworthy.
Given the complex environment, he/she considered it essential that monetary policy is conducted prudently and cautiously, in order to promote an orderly adjustment of financial markets and the sustained convergence of inflation to the 3% target.
All members highlighted the impact of the geopolitical conflict on world inflation.
They also noted that, given the availability of close substitutes, they have a high price elasticity of demand, and thus economic agents that use them as inputs can, to a certain extent, substitute them for other alternatives.
Finally, another member stated that capital inflows from foreign investors have been negative with regard to those channeled to fixed income instruments, although their holdings maintain a balance similar to that observed in previous years, while inflows destined to equity instruments were positive.
Most members mentioned services inflation resistance to decline.
In this regard, one member noted the lower job creation.
Some members underlined that it exceeded the upper limit of the variability interval.
One member added that the risk of potential losses for banks and brokerage firms due to interest rate increases has decreased.
Such member stated that having a sound macroeconomic policy contributes to an orderly adjustment of the economy and to the attainment of the inflation target, and provides the necessary room to adopt the required actions to foster greater certainty and confidence.
Some members noted that domestic financial markets performed favorably, sustaining, and in some cases, extending the gains registered since May 2020.
They particularly highlighted the strength of public construction associated with railway works, and, to a lesser extent, of private construction of industrial, commercial, and service buildings associated with the infrastructure projects in the southern part of Mexico.
Although one member acknowledged that expectations of additional actions by rating agencies have been delayed temporarily, another member argued that one rating agency has stated that significant increases of Pemex’s net debt, an operational performance below forecasts, and a decline of crude oil reserves or of their expected duration, may lead to a downgrading of Pemex’s rating, which would bring about the loss of its investment grade.
One member pointed out that, if monetary normalization in the United States begins earlier than expected, there could be episodes of volatility that could generate exchange rate pressures or wider spreads in the yield curve with respect to external government interest rates.
One member pointed out that the above can be observed in indexes that measure supply-chain pressures, in pending orders, in delivery times, in input prices and freight shipments.
One member added that these conditions have been gradually improving.
He/she expressed that this is feasible since: i) the volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the United States is one of the highest among emerging economies; ii) the Mexican peso stands out for its good performance and low volatility; iii) the Federal Reserve's policy stance is an important factor to consider, but Mexico’s monetary policy stance should rely more on the evolution of domestic variables and on the absolute policy stance; iv) Mexico started the hiking cycle earlier, and with a 75-basis point increase the policy stance would be situated in restrictive territory; v) unlike the United States, Mexico does not seem to face inflationary pressures from demand or the labor market; and vi) inflation in Mexico is closer to its target than the United States and other countries.
He/she stressed that fiscal discipline was maintained throughout the year, a preliminary trade agreement was reached with the US Congress, and Pemex's rating has been maintained.
He/she also pointed out that, in the presence of different adverse shocks, the Mexican economy has had to adjust to a lesser availability of external financial resources.
One member highlighted that although the monetary policy target rate has increased by 100 basis points throughout the year, with the increase of more than practically unchanged between May and November.
One member underlined that, in some economies, core inflation even continues trending upwards.
For the moment, we need a bit more time to confirm the trend the current positive signals seem to suggest as well as to assess if we need to adjust our reaction function given the global cyclical and monetary conditions we will face in the coming months.
He/she added that the reallocation of spending generated an increase in mobile phone and internet services’ prices.
Another member highlighted that, at this monetary policy meeting, it is important to consider that, while core inflation has exhibited a favorable behavior, the risks of a rebound in the non-core component, which would take it to levels closer to its historical average, have started to materialize to such an extent that it more than compensates for the decline that core inflation continues exhibiting.
The majority noted that this behavior is in line with that observed in other emerging markets.
Most members stressed that it is particularly important, in addition to maintaining a prudent and firm monetary policy, to promote the adoption of measures to foster an environment of confidence and certainty for investment and higher productivity, and to consolidate public finances in a sustainable way.
Most members mentioned that the country’s economic performance was a consequence of the slowdown of the world economy, of some weakness in domestic demand, and of some transitory factors, such as the fuel distribution problems and the blocking of railways, which could have affected growth during the first quarter of the year.
He/she pointed out that this implies not only slowing down the pace of monetary policy easing, but also acknowledging that the margins of maneuver for additional easing have probably already been exhausted, which underlines the convenience of beginning a pause after this decision, although he/she recognized that this will depend on the evolution of inflation and its expectations.
He/she added that the short-term ex-ante real interest rate is at a clearly restrictive level.
He/she mentioned that the IMF recommends lowering interest rates to the extent possible and emphasizing forward guidance on the expected pattern of monetary policy.
The majority of members stated that, although the magnitude and duration of the effects of the pandemic are still unknown, these are expected to intensify during the second quarter.
Some members added the lower availability of financing to households and businesses, although one mentioned that remittances have grown, thus supporting domestic spending.
He/she added that services inflation, which better reflects domestic pressures, keeps showing a resistance to decline and remains at high levels.
Most members pointed out that domestic economic activity has shown resilience in a complex external environment.
One member noted that employment has increased at a faster pace than the labor participation rate.
One member argued that, in the environment of uncertainty associated with the disinflationary process, central banks’ actions must seek an orderly adjustment of the economy and financial markets, and that for this reason abrupt adjustments in interest rates or an excessively data-dependent strategy could contribute to generating even greater volatility.
He/she underlined that the headline inflation forecast for said quarter was revised upwards by over 100 basis points.
He/she considered that there are some mixed signals of lower external pressures and increasing domestic pressures.
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%.
One member mentioned that this could lead to higher volatility in domestic financial markets, undo the progress achieved in granting higher real wages and even foster a less favorable macroeconomic environment for sustained economic growth.
Some members mentioned that pressures have continued to intensify both on food and non-food merchandise.
Some members noted that stock markets in emerging economies registered gains, in part, due to the undervaluation they registered during the previous months.
However, another member underlined that said tight conditions are expected to fade gradually, although it will be important to remain vigilant over the implications for the economy’s price formation process.
He/she stated that this was because such decline was attributed to the decrease in non-core inflation, while the core component continued increasing.
Some members emphasized that this component is characterized by its high volatility.
As to the labor market, one member argued that it has presented a lower rate of job creation, thus the unemployment gaps have eased somewhat with respect to the levels reached in 2018.
In this respect, the member added that the recent deterioration of financial markets has resulted in an increase in the cost of financing for the government, reducing even more the scope of action.
In this regard, he/she stated that Mexico is a small and open economy with a high level of financial and commercial integration with the United States and, therefore, it is normal for the Federal Reserve’s actions to have repercussions on the Mexican economy.
With regards to the absolute policy stance, he/she noted that low economic activity and reduced risk aversion open space for further easing, although the temporary increase in inflation could reduce this margin for a few months.
One member added that the vaccination phase will extend for a relatively long period and that it is subject to risks, and that for this reason it is difficult to anticipate a rapid rebound in consumption and investment.
Some members pointed out that such contraction would have its origins in the uncertainty related to domestic factors, such as governance problems and public expenditure below the programmed, and to external factors, such as the USMCA ratification process.
He/she considered that the balance of risks to growth remains biased to the downside.
He/she mentioned that the fundamental role of monetary policy is to stop the inflationary inertia that has developed over the last year, and that it is therefore necessary to act in a timely and decisive manner.
One member indicated that inflation levels above those anticipated contributed to the increase in inflation expectations for this year and the next one.
Another member underlined that private investment has fallen 25% since 2018, while public investment has contracted 54% since Most members highlighted that consumption has been recovering gradually, although still lagging considerably with respect to pre-pandemic levels.
He/she added that the economic recovery would be gradual, while another member specified that it would be heterogeneous across regions.
He/she added that long-term expectations have remained anchored for some time at levels above the target.
Regarding investment, most members highlighted the downward trajectory of both private and public sector investment.
One member added that this confirmed the negative trend that this indicator has been exhibiting.
This member also mentioned that this could suggest that, although the market recognizes some degree of volatility surrounding the country’s elections, it assumes that in the medium-and long terms the peso’s foreign exchange will return to the levels observed at the beginning of 2018, thus implying that the prevailing macroeconomic conditions are expected to continue.
Some members underlined that in its communications the US Federal Reserve made it clear that this adjustment does not imply the beginning of an easing cycle, although the possibility of future adjustments, if required, was not ruled out.
Another member added that this change in trend is a risk to inflation given that the depressed demand so far has contributed to contain price increases in this item.
One member added that other risk factors to inflation persist, including: i) a faster rate of increase of U.S. inflation; ii) a continuation of the upward trend in the prices of commodities; and, iii) problems in some emerging economies that have external or fiscal imbalances.
One member stated that the latter contributes to an orderly adjustment of Mexican financial markets and of the economy as a whole.
First, they highlighted the downward pressures caused by the widening of the negative output gap and, in the short term, by lower energy prices.
Another member emphasized that the re-imposition of sanctions on Iran recently announced by the United States, has contributed to the spike in international oil prices to levels unseen since the end of 2014, and that this could have relevant implications for economic activity and inflation in several developed and emerging economies.
He/she added that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate of this component has decreased after having averaged 8.35% in 2022, so that it averaged Despite its decrease, most members emphasized that core inflation still remains at high levels.
One member pointed out that periods of more severe exchange rate volatility than those observed recently cannot be ruled out, with greater and more lasting effects on the exchange rate, which could particularly affect merchandise prices.
Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%.
He/she explained that this suggests that the pace and scale of possible adjustments in the monetary policy stance should continue to be gradual to ensure the transmission to less sensitive components without causing disorderly deviations in those that are more reactive to different transmission channels.
Thus, he/she pointed out that the convergence of the core component will depend on the absence of additional shocks, which he/she considered is a strong assumption given the high levels of oil, commodities, sea freight and food prices.
One member pointed out that the growth of non-automotive manufacturing exports moderated recently.
Another member said that these effects are largely transmitted through tradable goods, including final goods, intermediate goods, and raw materials.
One member considered that domestic factors, such as the agreement of the federal government with the firms operating gas pipelines, Pemex’s bond repurchase and refinancing, and the presentation of the 2020 Economic Package, contributed to the favorable performance displayed by domestic financial markets in September.
The same member stated that the intention of the authorities to announce shortly a set of measures to face these challenges is highly relevant, given that greater hardships faced by Pemex would significantly affect public finances and, in general, the overall economy.
He/she stated that monetary policy operates with a lag, and thus its effects will be more evident over the following months.
disinflationary process continued advancing at the global level.
Regarding domestic demand, all members mentioned that consumption continued trending upwards during the fourth quarter of 2023.
Some members highlighted the risk of pressures on energy prices due to the escalation of geopolitical conflicts.
Nevertheless, he/she specified that, in the 1224-month forecast horizon, both headline and core inflation are expected to lay around 3%.
He/she warned that this problem could worsen due to the economic slowdown and to lower tax revenues derived from the support measures for Pemex.
Given the limited fiscal space, most members considered that efforts should be directed to a reallocation of the budget according to efficiency reallocation should be directed towards spending with an effect on the labor market in the short term.
In this regard, he/she underlined the importance of pointing out that monetary policy will be implemented in a prudent manner, with pragmatism and flexibility, based on incoming information in each meeting, with the goal of attaining the convergence of inflation to its target within the period of monetary policy influence.
One member pointed out that credit card and debit card expenditure remained stagnant.
He/she estimated that during the upcoming monetary policy decision it will be determined whether the evolution of data allows to confirm the level of 11.25% as the terminal rate or if an additional adjustment is required.
He/she considered that forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for an extended period.
He/she recalled that inflation came to exhibit a marked upward trend due to the shocks of the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine.
Most members noted that there was a reactivation in the services sector albeit with heterogeneity.
They also considered that this could lead to a sharper economic deceleration.
Given the expectation of a fragile, difficult and prolonged economic recovery, it is necessary to adopt, as practically in the rest of the world, a highly accommodative stance, and to point out that it will remain so for a long period.
Most members stated that, in view of greater- than-anticipated inflationary shocks and an outlook for their effects lasting longer than anticipated, forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards for the entire forecast horizon.
Another member pointed out that a certain reversal in said rates has been observed in recent days.
The majority considered that investors' confidence on the domestic economy has deteriorated as a consequence of the abovementioned.
One member considered that, in light of the deterioration in trading conditions, the proper functioning of the foreign exchange market should be monitored, and underlined that this does not imply that there is a specific target level.
Most members noted that short-, medium-, and long-term headline inflation expectations have remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above 3%, while core inflation expectations for the same terms were revised upwards.
Another member added that its annualized monthly rate has followed an upward trend, shifting from 3% in January 2021 to 8.56% in April 2022.
He/she stated that, from the first increase to date, short-term inflation expectations have only increased, so that the intended objective of the supposed reinforcement of monetary policy seems to have had very low effectiveness.
He/she indicated that the international reference has declined by a greater percentage than the exchange rate depreciation, and thus the price of gasoline in Mexican pesos should decrease.
One member highlighted that another problem that Pemex faces is the possibility of observing a lower oil platform than expected due to both the low levels of investment and the cancellation of private participation in new developments that may allow an increase of crude oil production.
One member noted that slack is expected to diminish gradually.
One member pointed out that it will be necessary to assure that the government actions, the multiannual projects considered and the assumptions used mainly on the estimates for economic growth and oil production, are consistent with the soundness of public finances in the medium and long terms.
Such members added that this company has structural problems and that it is essential not only that it submits a credible and functional business plan, which does not jeopardize the federal government’s fragile fiscal balance, but also that it offers a permanent solution.
One of the members stated that given both the current U.S. business cycle and the timing of the fiscal stimulus, the U.S. economy is expected to continue growing at a robust rate, not only for the remainder of 2018, but also during 2019.
Thus, the number of shocks increased during the second half of the year, mainly due to supply effects that are not permanent.
Another member pointed out that inflation has been marginally above the central bank’s point target.
He/she argued that, if it continues, this trend would represent a deterioration of long-term inflation expectations, since it would imply a stronger anchoring of such expectations at levels above the target.
Most pressures on headline inflation have started to diminish.
He/she pointed out that, due to the accumulated increases and considering the clearly restrictive levels of the ex-ante real interest rate, the attained monetary policy is solid and consistent with the disinflationary process.
All members underlined the decline in the international prices of some commodities, volatility.
To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board closely follows the development of inflation vis-a-vis its anticipated trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy stance adopted and the horizon in which monetary policy operates, as well as available information on all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of risks to such factors.
The majority of members mentioned economies have already started to withdraw their monetary stimuli.
Another member attributed this situation to the implementation of fiscal stimuli programs in several countries, while one member emphasized the lack of government guarantees for bank credit.
One member mentioned that, however, real wages in almost all advanced economies have started to register real negative variations, which anticipates future adjustments in private consumption.
In the presence and possible persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to attain the convergence of inflation to its 3% target, and to firmly anchor medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that they attain such target.
Most members United States.
One member added that the inflationary environment could worsen as a result of the lockdown measures adopted in some regions of China.
One member pointed out that this, together with financial stability conditions, minimizes the possible harmful effect of higher interest rates on households and firms.
Fourth, he/she mentioned that the date of inflation’s convergence to the target continues to be postponed, and that both analysts’ inflation expectations and their incompatibility with the adjustments in the reference rate anticipated by many of them highlight the credibility challenges faced by the Central Bank.
He/she pointed out that, instead, it will be important to maintain caution when discussing the desirable timing to initiate a normalization cycle and underlined that the environment is still complex and fragile.
One member added that the latter was mainly observed in short-term interest rates and, hence, the yield curve remained relatively flat.
One member added that capital flows to emerging economies had a divergent behavior by asset class, with outflows in fixed-income assets and historically high inflows in equity assets.
Another member pointed out that, in an environment where slack conditions are widening, the expected rate of return on capital is lower, and, to avoid distortions in the credit market, it is convenient that the rate at which investment projects are financed is adjusted downwards, which calls for easing monetary policy.
He/she argued that, given the increase in the ex-ante real interest rate and the tighter monetary conditions, which are reflected in the real exchange rate and in market instruments, it would be possible to evaluate, later on, whether the observed and anticipated disinflationary process are compatible with lower nominal interest rate levels.
As to fixed income markets, the majority of members mentioned that, after having increased securities have decreased, although they still remain volatile.
One member recalled that, in this episode, both components reached their highest levels since the inflation targeting regime was adopted in Mexico.
One member added that the Fed pointed out that supply-related issues and the reopening of the economy have exerted pressure on prices.
Some members highlighted the flattening of the US yield curve.
In order to avoid such risks, they deemed necessary to reinforce the monetary policy stance by adjusting it to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon.
Most members of Banco de México’s Governing Board pointed out that, due to the variety, magnitude, and the extended horizon over which the shocks have affected inflation, they may pose a risk to the price formation process.
However, he/she indicated that this sector has not shown a clear trend since mid-2023.
Such members also noted that a significant impact on domestic demand is anticipated, in particular, on consumption and investment.
The same member warned that the fact that minimum wages have been below extreme poverty levels makes it more urgent to create an effective policy to promote competition.
All members mentioned that global inflationary continue affecting headline and core inflation.
He/she added that in order to consolidate an orderly adjustment of the national economy and maintain low and stable inflation, the well-functioning of domestic financial markets is required.
He/she pointed out that there are also domestic pressures.
One member argued that, even if the depreciation persists, it would occur in a context of economic contraction.
The majority pointed out that yields on government securities decreased for all terms.
He/she argued that this is supported by the good performance of inflation, the stability of financial markets, and expectations of a long period in which the economy will remain depressed.
One member highlighted the risks associated with the weakening of public finances, Pemex’s fragile situation, uncertainty about domestic policies, and possible non-compliance with the USMCA, as well as the 2021 electoral process.
One member highlighted that the contribution of additional stimuli to address the economic slowdown is increasingly smaller.
He/she added that, given the complexity of the environment, characterized by tighter global financial conditions and high uncertainty, it is the central bank's responsibility to take the necessary measures to comply with its constitutional mandate, which increases the importance of decisively raising the reference rate in the present decision.
All members agreed that the balance of risks for growth remains biased to the downside.
He/she mentioned that, the above, together with changes in the composition of government expenditures, implies substantial challenges for the fiscal consolidation foreseen for 2025.
One member stated that, despite the volatility of the latter, given the world economic deceleration there are likely to be lower pressures on the prices of energy products and, consequently, on non-core inflation.
He/she mentioned that short-term interest rates also moved downwards, although in a differentiated manner, given the varied expectations of the trajectory of each economy’s monetary policy.
He/she pointed out that this new opportunity must now be leveraged to avoid sending the message of complacency as in the past, by prematurely and automatically confirming a ratecutting cycle.
He/she pointed out an increase in inflation, a steepening of the yield curve, a greater depreciation of the Mexican peso, an increase in risk aversion, certain impacts on macrofinancial stability, and the possibility of more external shocks of a financial nature.
Some members highlighted the high labor force participation rate and the fact that the unemployment rate remains at historic lows.
He/she mentioned that domestic demand remains weak, while external demand has recovered rapidly and that this difference is due to the fact that the former is directly affected by domestic monetary policy, which still remains restrictive in relation to the economic conditions, while the latter is benefited by the fiscal and monetary stimuli in other economies.
He/she noted that monetary policy still has room to contribute to improve financing conditions without jeopardizing other aspects of the economy.
Second, monetary policy actions have not achieved the desired effect on the real interest rate.
Another member added that these measures’ intent is for households and firms to be able to face their temporarily lower incomes as a result of the pandemic, as well as to avoid a credit contraction.
Among the medium- and long-term risks to potential growth, another member noted the possible modification of the fiscal policy stance by the incoming administration, as well as the deterioration of Mexico’s conditions of access to international trade.
One member added that at times it exhibits a significant downward trend, improving headline inflation’s performance, but at other times it exerts an upward influence.
In this regard, one member mentioned the imposition of tariffs between these countries, as well as restrictions to trade in technology and to investment, while another member added that other idiosyncratic factors have also contributed to the economic slowdown.
As for growth in the medium and long term, one member argued that: i) strengthening the rule of law; ii) increasing economic productivity; and, iii) promoting actions that improve confidence and investment expectations are essential.
One member highlighted the Brexit, where not only significant delays have materialized, but also that the probability of an agreement on terms reasonable for both the United Kingdom and the European Union has diminished.
One member mentioned that, measured through the foreign trade flows of these economies, their direct ties and the destination of their products, the impact could concentrate mostly in Eastern Europe and euro area countries, as well as in China, although he/she considered that, given the importance of the economies involved, as suppliers of metals and commodities and as producers of fertilizers, global economic activity could be affected.
Such member expressed his/her view that starting out with a persistent environment of caution for investment in addition to the direct and indirect effects originated by the aforementioned developments, a stronger emotional constraint must also be considered.
One member pointed out that their growth is due to an increase in both the price and volume of exports.
He/she pointed out that any eventual adjustments would be implemented in order to maintain the ex-ante real interest rate in a March decision, such rate has increased by 12 basis points, thus laying towards the middle of said range.
Another member argued that supply and demand shocks, and the behavior of the exchange rate, are reflected in both the divergent evolution of merchandise and services’ prices and in the contrasting price increases of different items of the CPI basket.
It will consider the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained and that prevailing in the future on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures.
Another member mentioned that, in recent days, risk appetite increased, driven by the relatively optimistic tone of the Federal Reserve regarding the expected performance of the US economy.
One member noted that recent indicators suggest that the weakening of economic activity during the fourth quarter of 2018 may extend to the beginning of 2019.
He/she warned about the risks of a possible excessive monetary tightening and a global recession for international financial markets.
Some members added that agricultural and livestock product prices registered smaller variations at the margin.
All members highlighted that the Mexican peso appreciated.
He/she considered that the recovery should be taken with caution and added that the IMF announced a Special Drawing Rights (SDR) allocation of USD 650 billion to member states.
Most members highlighted that the disinflation members pointed out that headline inflation has continued decreasing in most advanced economies.
Including the above into the statement would convey a clearer and more credible message, which would be in line with maintaining a restrictive policy stance in absolute and relative terms for as long as necessary, but not as restrictive as the current one.
He/she argued that given Mexico's high degree of financial and trade integration with the rest of the world and its exposure to various types of external shocks, it is necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic stance at all times.
Some members pointed out that growth is expected to run close to potential for the rest of 2018 and for 2019, thus maintaining the output gap close to zero.
Another member noted his/her concern that such cost pressures are being observed in the overall economy and, especially, in the manufacturing sector.
He/she added that in view of the more complex outlook, forward guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will be maintained for a more extended period than the previously foreseen.
As to emerging economies, one member mentioned that their economic growth exhibits significant differences and has weakened.
One member considered that the performance of labor markets could contribute to attain their inflation targets, but he/she also stated that this is still subject to uncertainty, given the moderate increases in labor costs and the risks for global economic activity.
Another member pointed out that the date on which the first downward adjustment is expected to take place has been postponed.
Another member mentioned that in an adverse environment like the one currently faced by the Mexican economy, the optimal macroeconomic response would be to adjust both fiscal and monetary policies.
One member pointed out that this could lead to capital outflows from emerging economies.
One member highlighted that such measures are necessary given the volatility registered by domestic financial markets.
In this regard, he/she indicated that the persistence of food and non-food merchandise increased significantly and that, in the disinflation phase, it has been decreasing, approaching its historical norm.
He/she pointed out that, under these two axes, the monetary policy stance is expected to continue operating through its different channels.
He/she pointed out that, in contrast, both services consumption and consumption of domestic durable goods still show a strong contraction.
Another member pointed out that, although gross fixed investment rebounded in January, it declined again in February.
He/she pointed out that in the 12-to-24 month forecast horizon, headline and core inflation are anticipated to be around 3%.
In this regard, he/she recalled that between basis points to a level of 8.25% and it was at that point when gross private investment reached its peak, while from that time up to now it has contracted policy’s room for maneuver to boost consumption is limited in the absence of fiscal support to avoid the closing of companies, job losses and the consequent decrease in credit to households and firms, especially SMEs, due to the increase in risk perception of financial institutions.
He/she mentioned that there is also an inertia of increases in the prices of non-tradable goods that will not be easy to control.
Most members added that, given the lower demand and a practically nil storage capacity, even negative figures were registered in the futures’ contracts to be settled next month.
One member indicated that, despite the above, upward risks have increased.
One member mentioned that he/she foresees that it will close below target, and be the second lowest annual inflation of the current century.
He/she highlighted that core inflation rates for May, June and July were the highest for similar months since 1999.
Another member added that since the last monetary policy decision, advanced economies’ interest rates increased moderately and the US dollar registered a generalized depreciation.
However, another member considered that the latter have been recovering after the decline observed at the end of 2022.
However, he/she considered that, given the significant adjustment to the forecasts, the proposed increase in the interest rate, and the notably restrictive level attained by the ex-ante real interest rate, the balance of risks for inflation will be compatible with a slower pace of adjustments in future monetary policy decisions.
He/she pointed out that such adjustments have led to increases in core inflation and, in the case of non-core inflation, some comparison base effects are expected on energy prices.
He/she added that the National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its acronym in Spanish) suggests that there has been a reallocation of resources towards lower income deciles, which have a higher marginal propensity to consume, possibly contributing to a higher-than-expected growth in domestic spending.
One member mentioned that non-food merchandise inflation is also highly correlated with that of the United States, which generates a process of imported inflation which would explain the dynamics of higher inflation in the Northern and North-Central regions of Mexico.
One member highlighted the case of the United States.
Some members indicated that expectations implied by market instruments for the end of 2024 point to a greater decline in the federal funds rate than the Federal Reserve's projections.
In this regard, he/she stated that the central bank conducts its monetary policy considering all inflation determinants and its expectations, including the actions taken by the Federal Reserve.
Some members considered that the balance of risks around the projected trajectory of inflation remains uncertain.
Second, he/she added that upwards risks to inflation have intensified and that the most important one stems from the proposed reform to Banco de México’s Law.
Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of maintaining the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.
In relation to the monetary policy decision, considering that the lower levels recorded by headline inflation, as well as the ample slack conditions in the economy and the recent behavior of the external and domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy rate, the majority considered adequate to reduce by 25-basis points the overnight interbank interest rate to a level of 7.50%.
However, he/she noted that its rebound has been lower than expected.
One member indicated that it will be necessary to assess the possible implications of exchange rate adjustments on inflation dynamics.
Another member noted that the currencies of emerging economies appreciated, their stock markets registered gains, their risk premia decreased and their interest rates exhibited mixed, albeit narrow, adjustments.
He/she therefore stated the need for a monetary support such as domestic and external financial conditions allow.
Most members pointed out that, in its latest reading, services inflation decreased.
As for public finance consolidation, most members stressed that the 2019 Economic Package submitted by the Ministry of Finance strengthening required in this matter and that it was prepared considering a macroeconomic scenario based on realistic assumptions.
One member added that said balance has not deteriorated.
Some members commented that those for the next twelve months declined.
However, he/she warned that the effects of such transmission are not symmetrical across inflation components, resulting in differentiated lags in price adjustments between goods and services.
The same member mentioned that the unavoidable government expenditures must be considered, which include transfers to the states, pension payments, and the cost of public debt.
Another member stated that from June onwards, sovereign credit risk indicators registered increases, albeit smaller than in other stress episodes.
Another member mentioned that sovereign credit default swaps (CDS) are at nearly half the level observed at the end of 2018.
He/she expressed that the most effective defense for lower-income groups is to protect their purchasing power and to mitigate the impact on employment.
Most members highlighted that 555,000 formal IMSS-insured jobs were lost in April.
As to economic activity in advanced economies, some members agreed that industrial production showed weakness.
One member recalled how the impossibility of having a sufficiently low real interest rate during the financial crisis of 2008-09 led to a slower-thandesirable recovery of the US economy.
In particular, he/she mentioned that for a relatively small and open emerging economy, the process for determining the monetary policy stance should consider both the economy’s cyclical position and its influence on inflation, as well as the financial conditions that are being faced and its role in macroeconomic stability, including maintaining low and stable inflation.
He/she pointed out that, although there are risks associated with this legislative process, it is key to address said challenges without jeopardizing the Central Bank’s autonomy, which has been a cornerstone of Mexico’s macroeconomic stability and the main strength behind the country’s credit profile.
Regarding construction, most members stressed that its decline intensified during the year.
He/she considered that it is difficult to estimate the output gap in the two-year horizon in which monetary policy has an effect, given the environment of uncertainty and the possibility that the potential growth of the economy is below the estimated figure.
Most members warned about the possibility of greater cost-related pressures of various nature.
He/she pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase would achieve this objective and would reflect the central bank's commitment to its primary mandate, in a context of significant inflationary pressures.
One member mentioned that the anchoring of medium and long run inflation expectations makes it clear that Banco de México’s monetary policy actions have prevented the emergence of second-round effects from the different shocks that have affected prices.
As for the risk related to political and geopolitical factors, some members stated that in the Eurozone some vulnerabilities associated with domestic turmoil and political differences have increased, stating as an example those related to the approval of the budgetary process in Italy, the Brexit, the U.S. midterm elections in November, and Brazil’s presidential elections.
One member highlighted that practically all central banks have emphasized in their statements the need to intensify the monetary stimulus to speed up the economic recovery process.
He/she considered that signaling that the downward cycle will continue in order to support economic activity may be very risky.
Another member pointed out that inflation expectations drawn from market instruments for the 6- to 10-year average remain at Most members stated that, in view of greater- forecasts for headline and core inflation were revised upwards up to the second and the third convergence to the 3% target during the first quarter of 2024 is maintained.
He/she stated that this shows how the signals sent by central banks can be equally or more relevant than the policy decisions regarding the interest rate.
Most members mentioned that inflationary pressures have been generalized and persistent.
The majority of members noted that the economic recovery will take place at a moderate pace.
Most members mentioned that world economic growth moderated during the fourth quarter of 2022.
They noted that, in some cases, inflation reached its highest level in decades.
Some members stressed the Federal Reserve's decision to maintain its range for the federal funds rate at 0-0.25%.
Most members highlighted that, in said context, the Mexican peso exhibited volatility and an appreciation.
On the supply side, most members underlined the heterogeneous recovery across different sectors.
Most members highlighted that in the foreseeable future all factors and elements that have an impact on both inflation and its outlook should be followed, and the necessary actions be taken, so that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
One member stated that the oil revenue target assumes a production of 1.8 million barrels per day, compared to the 1.6 million currently produced.
One member underlined that labor force participation rates are at levels similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
All members agreed that the message of Banco de México should be that of its commitment to reach the inflation target.
Most members pointed out that domestic financial markets have reflected the effects of lower interest rates for all terms in the main advanced economies, as well as episodes of volatility with exchange rate adjustments, although these have diminished over the last weeks.
One member indicated that, despite expectations of headline inflation converging to its target, the trajectory depends on core inflation’s persistence easing and on non-core inflation converging to levels close to the inflation target.
He/she added that when macroeconomic conditions allow for additional adjustments, these would be gradual.
One member pointed out that the implied volatility in exchange rate options exhibited overall increases in all maturities and remains high as compared to the levels observed in other emerging economies’ currencies, particularly for expiration dates close to July 1, when elections in Mexico will take place.
One member highlighted the faster increase in domestic gas prices.
He/she stated that the prevailing level of monetary restriction should be weighed against the evolution of inflation and its components, as well as its outlook, considering that the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained as well as the one prevailing in the future will impact the inflation outlook over the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
For this reason, it is necessary to be more analytic and careful of the current circumstances and of its implications for monetary policy.
This would signal that we are nearing the cycle’s terminal rate and would also be consistent with the current balance of risks.
Another member noted that the negative output gap continues to be above 4% and is not expected to close before 2023.
Some members highlighted the sluggishness in manufacturing.
He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions become less important, until inflation is under control.
One member added that, although this sector had reactivated to some extent in December, it partially reversed such progress in January, and thus, from a medium-term perspective, it seems stagnant.
One member stated that foreign participants showed interest in short-term instruments.
Another member noted that, given the elevated inflation levels and the risk of expectations becoming unanchored, emerging economies central banks’ decision to accelerate monetary tightening reflects their priority to control inflation.
He/she highlighted that, given the complex and uncertain inflationary outlook, this central bank needs to remain vigilant and persevere in its efforts to ensure the stability of the purchasing power of the national currency.
Another member highlighted that none of the inflation determinants have deteriorated significantly to the point of expecting upward pressures on prices given that: i) ample slack conditions persist; ii) the peso exchange rate has withstood episodes of volatility and has depreciated only moderately; and iii) despite the increases in international oil prices, their impact on domestic prices is expected to be partially mitigated by the federal government's pricing policy.
This, considering the unfounded optimism that prevails at the global level, including in Mexico, claiming it is possible to return to the inflation target with lower rates.
He/she indicated that the implied expectations for the trajectory of the reference rate in TIIE swaps discount with a higher probability that the next reference rate cut will occur only until the November policy decision, and that the reference rate will close the year at 10.60%.
He/she added that, when the underemployed are included in the extended unemployment, the concept of labor gap is attained, which registered 40% in June, twice as large as the figure of March, but below the 53% recorded in May, which indicates that it has already bottomed out.
Some members underlined the importance of having more timely data to monitor which scenarios will materialize.
Therefore, he/she stated that, looking ahead, the process of convergence could face significant challenges.
In this context, one member noted that Pemex remains the main domestic risk factor given its dependence on the federal government’s financial support.
However, one member noted that stock markets exhibited a heterogeneous behavior.
One member argued that, while some indicators associated with financial markets seem to anticipate an economic recession, the employment data appears to be more consistent with a slowdown, rather than a long and lasting contraction.
Most members considered that the balance of risks with regards to the expected path of inflation continues to be biased to the upside, in an environment of marked uncertainty.
Some members highlighted that the Mexican peso has a high level of sensitivity due to its use as a hedge currency and, therefore, it should be taken into account that lowering short-term interest rates in Mexico reduces the cost of this type of transactions.
Some members mentioned that this was due to both international and idiosyncratic factors.
Another one added that such forecasts are in line with the adjustments made by international organizations and analysts.
One member considered that the degree of uncertainty regarding the evolution of the main macroeconomic aggregates, of financial markets and the external environment, and thus of inflation, is unusually high.
One member added that, although it is in negative territory, it is not statistically different from zero.
One member expressed that the output gap estimates are generally not statistically different from zero.
One member also underlined the increase in mortgage lending.
One member added that, although a rapid fall in headline and core inflation is projected as of the third quarter of this year, it may not occur, even after the monetary tightening attained, due to the persistence of inflation that has been observed.
This, considering the inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3% target.
Another member noted that this decline is due to the better functioning of global supply chains and to the moderation of price pressures on various inputs.
Another member stated that non-core inflation has almost reached its highest level in twenty years.
He/she added that, in the absence of further shocks, discussions could begin regarding the level of reference rate cuts.
He/she pointed out that growth of formal employment has decelerated since mid2023.
The majority of members pointed out that both headline and core inflation are expected to follow a downward trend in the following months.