At the same time, the trade balance maintained its surplus, as observed throughout the year, reinforcing the adjustment of the external accounts.
Regarding retail commerce, preliminary results for November confirmed the trend of consumption recovery observed since August.
The recovery of the consumption continues to improve, according to recent results of surveys on consumer expectations.
This outcome resulted from the improvement of the two components of the index, current and future consumption intentions, reflecting the positive perception of consumers regarding the consequences of the domestic and external shocks.
In spite of the favorable scenario of the retail trade, default rates increased considerably during last month.
According to ACSP, the main reasons for such behavior were the increase in unemployment and the fall in the real average income.
The investment is another demand component that has performed favorably.
The indicators still registered, in the last months, expansion of the production capacity of all sectors of the economy and the adaptation to the energy crisis.
The composition of the growth rate of the production of capital goods showed the predominance of equipment related to the electric power generation, the civil construction sector and the agricultural activity.
The demand for electric power generators will drop in the coming months, due to the reduction of the rationing targets.
Nevertheless, the expectation of a hike in electricity tariffs will attenuate that reduction, by stimulating the search for energy self-sufficiency by industries.
The production of agricultural equipment in the last few years has improved with the continuous expansion in grain crops, as well as other agricultural products, a _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ trend expected to continue in In relation to the civil construction industry, the gap between the growth of production of equipment used by the sector and its modest performance in the last few years indicates favorable conditions for a future recovery.
Concerning the industrial sector, the analysis of production indicators in recent months shows that the negative effects from the constraints on electricity supply were absorbed.
These effects apart, the variation of the industrial production in October is still negative, but close to zero, compatible with the scenario of leveling off of the industrial activity present since August.
It is worth observing that, in spite of the unfavorable outcome in that month, twelve out of the 21 surveyed industrial sectors increased their production.
The utilization rate of installed capacity, which had declined strongly in the months in which the restraints on energy supply were more intense, reflected the recent leveling off of the industrial production.
The developments in the labor market reflected the lesser impact to the domestic and external shocks on industrial activity, the prospect of the end of economic deceleration, and the beginning of recovery.
In industry, surveys revealed a lower number of dismissals than suggested by economic forecasts at the beginning of the electricity rationing, and October indicators point to the end of this _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ trend.
Data from the Ministry of Labor still indicated growth of the formal employment in October, as observed since the beginning of the year.
The positive result of the trade balance throughout the year is mainly reflecting the reduction of imports, as a consequence of the exchange rate depreciation and the deceleration of domestic economic activity, and the expansion of exports, particularly basic products, as the exports of manufactured products grow at a less accelerated rate due to the contraction of important markets for Brazil such as Argentina and the European Union.
The continuity of the growth of sales to the USA should be highlighted, in spite of the deceleration of that economy, plus the gradual incorporation and expansion of sales to new markets in Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe and the Middle East.
The sustained dynamism of the domestic activity is also worth mentioning, furthermore thanks to the continuity of investments, the increases of agricultural income and the recovery in consumption, contributing to a gradual recovery in the growth trend.
External environment Indicators recently released show that the world macroeconomic scenario is one of deceleration with reduction in inflationary pressure and low confidence of the agents, despite the efforts of the larger economies to adopt expansionist monetary and fiscal policies.
The U.S. economic indicators reinforce the decelerating trend of the expansion of economic activity, although at varying rates depending on the characteristics of each economic sector.
From the supply side, factors of production are migrating from goods production to the services sector.
In the job market, the increase in the unemployment rate observed in the last months is linked to the deterioration of corporate results, whose profits declined significantly in the third quarter.
The job market is expected to remain in decline, as corporations adjust their costs by cutting investment and dismissing employees.
Expectations of manufacturers recovered in November, after the drop in October, but were still below 50 points, for the 16th consecutive month, indicating retraction.
The index that measures consumer confidence contracted 31.8 points from August to November, reflecting the uncertainties about the economic scenario in the short run.
This suggests that the U.S. economy will not bounce back quickly.
The propagation of economic fragility helps to maintain inflation under control.
Inflation is showing signs of deceleration.
Price increases were considered as normal for the period and will not translate into inflationary pressure in the coming months.
The U.S. economic scenario does not show consistent signs of recovery of the level of activity.
Market forecasts indicate sustained growth recovery only after the third quarter of The economies in the Euro area continue to present deceleration in their growth rate of economic activity.
The latter is made worse by the retraction in world demand, which may revert the upward trend of the regional trade balance, as a result of unfavorable forecasts for business.
An expansionist fiscal policy could be limited by the public deficit ceilings imposed by the Maastricht criteria.
In Japan, main demand and supply indicators point to the deepening of recession.
The maintenance of the zero interest rate monetary policy, associated to expansionist fiscal measures, are not producing positive results.
In China and in Korea, domestic demand sustains economic growth, compensating the retraction in external demand.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ challenges due to the deep transformation that will occur in key sectors of the Chinese economy.
In Turkey, the IMF emphasized the good results of the fiscal efforts taken by the government and the advances in the restructuring of the banking sector.
In Argentina, the deepening of the recession is a scenario of difficult solution.
The deterioration of public accounts and the several economic packages in the last months failed to reestablish market confidence and barely contributed to the recovery of economic activity.
The degree of popular dissatisfaction was shown through pillaging in the capital and in the main cities, leading to a decreed state of siege and the resignation of the Minister of Finance.
Prices In November, the inflation rates measured by the main price indices declined.
The smaller monthly variation of the IPCA was mainly due to the lower impacts of cigarette and fuel price increases, both occurred at the beginning of October.
The reduction of the rate was not more intense due to increases of the expenditures with food, mainly cereals and meat, to the adjustments of electricity tariffs in the cities of Rio de Janeiro and Porto Alegre, as well as to the increase in urban bus tariffs, also in Rio.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ For the coming months more favorable forecasts are being made.
Many factors are contributing to this, such as the recent behavior of the exchange rate, the deceleration observed in the agricultural prices, namely cereals and meat, the absence of strong pressures from administered prices and the prospect of reduction in fuel prices.
Thus, even if there are, in the next few months, seasonal pressures from the readjustments of school monthly payments and increase in domestic gas and electricity prices, the aforementioned factors should prevail, allowing for a decrease in the inflation rates.
After the declarations of the Central Bank board confirming that it will firmly pursue the achievement of the 2002 inflation target and also after the announcement of the firm offer of 16-month LTN, the slope of the curve increased, with the spread between the one-year interest rate and the Over-Selic rate rising to 418 basis points on November 29th, the auction date, from 186 basis points on November 21st.
The perception of an improvement in the domestic economy due to the appreciation of the Real against the U.S. dollar, the positive results of the trade balance, and the announcement of the external funding, favored the partial reversion of the trend of the interest rate slope, reducing this spread to 239 basis points on December 14th.
The auctions indicated a stronger demand from the market for the reversion of the positions of shorter-term exchange rate indexed securities than opening positions in longer tenures.
Within the period, there was also the rollover of exchange rate indexed securities maturing on 2 different dates.
The strategy adopted was based on the full rollover of the principal added to the _Information for unrestricted disclosure.
Since November 27th, there have been 7 auctions of LTN.
The National Treasury promoted the lengthening of the issuance tenure, placing 16-month securities.
These LTN were auctioned on three different dates, the first one being through a firm offer.
During a 20 working day period, the Central Bank intervened thirteen times in the open market, aiming at administering the very short-term interest rate.
Assessment of inflation trends The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed in light of newly available information.
For GLP, the hypothesis of elimination of subsidies was incorporated.
It is not intended to bind Banco Central do Brasil in its monetary or foreign_ On the external front, the assumption for the average risk premium using Brazils Global 04 Bonds incorporates a declining path from current levels to a plateau close to 700 b.p. from the first quarter of 2002 on, with stability thereafter.
In 2002, the lower inflation of administered prices is due mainly to the readjustments of oil by-products prices, which will be determined by the market.
Regarding fiscal policy, it was assumed that the primary surplus targets for the consolidated public sector stated in the Economic Program of the Government will be achieved.
The exchange rate appreciated quickly, in response to the positive evolution of the external accounts and the differentiation between the Brazil risk with Argentina's, which resulted in the reduction of the risk premium.
Government forecasts for the readjustment of administered prices in 2002 were revised downward due to lower readjustments of the electricity tariffs, the liberalization of the market of oil derivatives and the changes in the taxation of this sector, which will revert into substantial price reductions.
The reduction in the slope of the yield curve will have positive impacts on economic growth.
The agriculture and livestock activity contributed positively to the GDP growth, offsetting the negative evolution of the industrial sector.
More pronounced increases in investment will be observed in the sectors of capital goods related to agricultural tractors, high tension transformers, railway wagons, and equipment for the civil construction industry.
The Balance of Payment accounts improved.
For the first time since 1994, the trade balance will finish the year with a positive result.
In addition, the external funding, which was hindered by September 11 events, was reactivated by private firms.
This set of favorable factors contributed to the reversal of the depreciating trend of the Real.
Market expectations for inflation, surveyed by the Central Bank, for the next quarters have been declining in the past weeks.
This movement may be partly associated with the recently observed appreciating trajectory of the exchange rate.
In the case of this trend persisting, the prospects for inflation may show additional decline, since the risk of the passthrough of the exchange rate depreciation accumulated this year to next years inflation also declines.
Noteworthy is that a significant part of the difference between Copom's projections and the market ones is explained by a more depreciated trajectory of the exchange rate used by the market.
The world scenario is uncertain.
The deceleration of the world economy, intensified by the recession in the USA and the by the persistence of recession in Japan reinforce the perception that a recovery of the economy of industrialized countries will be postponed to the second half of This set of uncertainties, aggravated by the worsening of the Argentine economy, reflects in unfavorable expectations for the exchange rate and the inflation in November inflation measured by the IPCA, as well as its core, remained at a high level.
The exchange rate passthrough and the decompression of the profit margins seem to be the responsible for the high increases in the consumer price indices and yet the degree of influence of these factors in the next few months is uncertain, mainly in a context of economic recovery.
Nonetheless, the four-week index, measured by the IPC-Fipe, already points to a reversal trend.
In summary, a sum of factors contributes to a scenario of interest rate reduction in the coming years.
The simulation exercises with the various specifications of the structural model points to inflation near the medium range target in However, the uncertainties regarding the recovery of the international economy, the improvement in the inflation indices due to a lower passthrough of the exchange rate depreciation, and the evolution of the Argentine crisis recommend that we wait for a confirmation of the more favorable scenario that starts to materialize.
