Against this backdrop of continuing external and domestic cost pressures, an upward shift of the policy band at this point will help to moderate inflation going forward, while providing support for sustainable growth in the economy.
Although global supply chain frictions are easing, external inflationary impulses have become more broad-based, reflecting underlying constraints in global commodity and labour markets.
The weakness in IT production and its supporting industries will also persist due to sluggish final demand and ongoing reconfigurations in the electronics cluster.
MAS stands ready to intervene if necessary to keep it within the band.
For 2021 as a whole, MAS Core Inflation will come in near the upper end of the 0–1% forecast range, and is expected to increase further to 1–2% in 2022.
Against this backdrop, the Singapore economy is expected to contract in 2020.
Meanwhile, CPI-All Items inflation picked up to −0.5% y-o-y in July–August compared to −0.9% in H1, largely due to the smaller contraction in private road transport cost.
The unemployment rate is likely to remain low.
With the slowdown in demand, growth in the Singapore economy could fall below its potential rate of 3-5%.
Overall, major uncertainty remains.
This will be partially offset by lower imported inflation, if oil prices decline as expected.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER has fluctuated slightly above the mid-point of the policy band.
The sequential slowdown in Q1 was largely driven by the construction sector, where activity continued to be capped by safe distancing measures at worksites.
For 2023 as a whole, the Singapore economy is estimated to have expanded by 1.2%.
Singapore’s GDP growth is projected to come in at 3–4% in 2022.
Imported costs are forecast to be broadly stable next year, reflecting an anticipated unwinding of oil production cuts and favourable weather conditions for food supply.
The Singapore economy should record a second consecutive year of above-trend growth, which will bring output to a level slightly above potential.
The Singapore economy is evolving as envisaged in the January MPS.
MAS will therefore maintain its policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
This policy stance was assessed to be appropriate given the subdued for growth and inflation.
Our assessment at this point is for Singapore’s GDP growth to ease to 4-6% this year, in line with the economy’s growth potential.
Since October last year, prospects for the global economy have improved, reflecting substantial additional fiscal stimulus in some economies and a steady pace of vaccine deployment across several major nations.
Meanwhile, other domestic sources of inflationary pressures, though subdued presently, could be expected to emerge in the coming quarters.
It would also allow MAS to make better use of the forecast and data releases by the Ministry of Trade and Industry and Department of Statistics in assessing the economic and the appropriate stance.
This relatively firm outcome was largely due to continued pass-through of higher wages and other business costs to the prices of consumer services.
In the US, the recovery in the labour market will continue to support consumer spending, which should bring about some pickup in corporate capital expenditure, including in business IT upgrading.
Trends in GDP Growth The growth momentum in the economy, as measured by the seasonally adjusted quarter-on-quarter annualised GDP growth, has remained strong, although it is expected to taper off from Q1 2001 onwards.
Although the Eurozone is still likely to slip into a recession in 2012, tail risks have receded following the ECB’s longer-term refinancing operations programme.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER fluctuated within the upper half of the policy band.
MAS Core Inflation is envisaged to be broadly stable throughout next year.
The for the global economy has improved slightly since the October 2016 MPS, although downside risks remain, alongside significant policy uncertainty.
The S$NEER initially appreciated over October and November on account of the decline in major currencies, which in turn reflected the fiscal impasse in the US and expectations of further quantitative easing in Japan.
This was partially offset by lower electricity & gas price inflation following the decline in global oil prices.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to remain below its historical average in the near and medium term.
Overall, GDP growth is projected to come in at 4.5-6.5% in 2007, down from the nearly 8% recorded in 2006.
The fall in global oil prices resulted in overall import prices declining by an average of 6.5% y-o-y in Oct–Nov 2014, the steepest correction since Q3 2009.
This reflects higher COE premiums and petrol prices.
Taking these developments into account, MAS is revising its inflation forecasts for 2022.
At this pace of growth, the unemployment rate is likely to average around its Q4 2005 level of 2.5%.
In its April 2021 Statement, MAS kept the rate of appreciation of the S$NEER policy band at zero percent, with no change to the width of the policy band or the level at which it was centred.
Imported food inflation was also elevated because of the higher cost of food from the region, which in turn partly reflected the effects of supply disruptions.
Against a more favourable growth for the Singapore economy, and the risk of rising inflationary pressures, MAS is shifting from a zero percent appreciation path to a policy of modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER, starting from the mid-point of the current policy band.
The S$NEER has appreciated modestly, reflecting in part the strengthening of the S$ against most reserve currencies as global risk sentiment improved.
MAS will maintain the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
Real GDP in Q3 expanded by 6.0% (on a year-on-year basis), bringing growth over Jan-Sep 2005 to an average of 4.7%.
Nevertheless, the moderation in US growth has thus far been confined to specific sectors and the economy on the whole is expected to avoid a sharp downturn.
Domestic unit labour costs are also expected to turn positive after declining last year, reflecting the moderation of cyclical productivity gains and continued improvement in the labour market.
MAS Core Inflation and CPI-All Items inflation are expected to ease further before rising towards the end of the year and into 2016, as global oil prices pick up and the effects of the reduction in healthcare costs fade.
The policy stance will help dampen inflation in the near term and ensure medium-term price stability, providing the basis for sustainable economic growth.
In April this year, MAS maintained the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band which has been adopted since April 2004.
Against this external backdrop, activity in Singapore’s trade-related sectors should support overall GDP growth in 2017.
The emergence of slack in domestic factor markets would lead to some disinflationary pressures in the economy.
MAS Core Inflation will rise modestly from around 1% this year to average 1–2% in 2017, amid emerging slack in the labour market and generally subdued consumer sentiment.
MAS has therefore decided to further tighten , in two ways.
The three-month S$ SIBOR declined from 1.01% as at end-April 2016 to 0.87% as at end-September 2016.
In 2011, the domestic economy will continue to expand but at a more sustainable rate in line with its growth potential.
This policy stance was assessed to be appropriate given that the Singapore economy was expected to remain on a steady expansion path, while MAS Core Inflation was projected to rise.
CPI-All Items inflation is projected to be about 0.5% in 2018 before picking up to 1–2% in 2019.
The rise in the price index was mainly on account of higher private road transport costs.
Amid moderate underlying cost pressures, MAS Core Inflation is expected to average around the mid-point of the forecast range of 1.5–2.5% in 2025.
Re-export volumes registered sequential contraction on average over the first two months of 2016.
The economy’s negative output gap is estimated to have closed at end-2021 and should turn modestly positive in 2022.
Domestic cost pressures, particularly stemming from a tight labour market, are likely to remain the primary source of inflation.
Persistently high inflation and tighter financial conditions have begun to dampen private consumption and investment.
At the same time, the Singapore economy remains on track to expand at a creditable pace in 2022, though with slowing momentum.
The pull-back of the S$NEER also reflected heightened domestic growth concerns and a moderation of inflationary pressures.
The sequential pickup in Q3 was largely due to the modern services sector, where activity was underpinned by firm growth in the information & communications industry.
There will be no change to the slope or width of the policy band.
Real domestic three-month interbank rates, which turned positive in December 2004, have remained largely in line with its historical average.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy grew by 1.4% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted annualised basis in Q1 2018, a moderation from the 2.1% recorded in Q4 last year.
Overall wage growth should be well-contained, although there could be stronger pressures in some industries where the demand for labour is particularly robust.
The S$NEER was also supported by encouraging domestic economic data and the favourable for the economy.
It aimed to cap medium-term inflationary pressures, while continuing to be supportive of economic activity as growth came off its cyclical high and moderated to a slower pace.
The next Statement will be released in October 2003, together with the Macroeconomic Review (Vol II, Issue 2).
Overall CPI inflation in 2010 is projected to be between 2.5% and 3.5%, slightly higher than the 2-3% forecast earlier.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last three months, the S$NEER has broadly appreciated within the upper half of the policy band.
Also on administrative measures, water price increases in 2017–18 will add temporarily to inflation.
The underlying inflation measure, which averaged 1.8% in the first eight months of this year, is expected to remain within 1-2% in 2007.
Singapore’s GDP growth rate is expected to come in within its potential of 4-6% next year.
Against this backdrop, the Singapore economy grew more slowly, by 1.6% in Q4 2014 on a quarter-on-quarter, seasonally-adjusted annualised basis, or about half the pace of expansion in Q3.
The easing of the S$ also reflected the rise of the US$ against major currencies.
Even as growth in the trade-related cluster decelerates, pockets within the financial, business and ICT services sectors will continue to benefit from steady domestic demand in the region and increased investments in digitalisation.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER remained in the upper half of the policy band.
Retail interest rates have remained broadly unchanged, although there have been some modest increases in mortgage rates.
The negative output gap in the economy will narrow through the course of 2021.
There are nascent signs that the downturn could spill over into domestic demand in some of Singapore’s major trading partners in the quarters ahead, even as macroeconomic policy conditions in these economies have turned more accommodative.
Core inflation has come in lower than anticipated in recent months, and will remain subdued in the year ahead.
The for the global economy has improved slightly, anchored by a stronger recovery in the G3.
Looking ahead, external inflationary pressures are likely to be sustained, largely due to higher oil prices.
In addition, the S$NEER was supported by strong capital inflows into the region, underpinned by general optimism over the regional economic .
However, global economic prospects remain broadly intact.
In the labour market, overall wage increases have been moderate, although pockets of tightness have recently emerged in some industries.
In October 2012, MAS maintained the modest and gradual appreciation path of the S$NEER policy band, with no change to its slope, width, and the level at which it was centred.
A number of leading indicators have recently picked up slightly, and consumption spending has held up somewhat better than expected, particularly in the US.
Looking ahead, the mixed for the global economy will continue to weigh on the external-oriented sectors while the domestic-oriented sectors should stay broadly resilient.
MAS will maintain its policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
This mainly reflected the increase in global commodity prices in recent months, which passed through to electricity & gas tariffs and non-cooked food inflation.
Thus, core inflation should ease next year, although headline inflation could stay elevated in the near term reflecting the higher imputed rental cost of owner-occupied housing.
Imported inflation was the dominant source of price pressures in 2000, reflecting higher oil prices.
Economic activity will be buttressed by the continued growth in the services industries, including financial and business services as well as the tourism-related cluster.
The global economy should continue to expand, but at an uneven pace across countries.
This will cap underlying wage growth, even as non-labour business costs have eased.
The construction sector has also recovered from a protracted period of weakness.
Against this backdrop, MAS will continue with the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band in the period ahead.
On the expenditure side, the export led growth has broadened to consumer spending and investment in goods and machinery.
Amid the declines in COE premiums since November and the larger COE supply this year compared to 2023, CPI-All Items inflation in 2024 is now forecast to be lower at 2.5–3.5%, down from the previous range of 3–4%.
MAS will continue to guide the S$NEER within this exchange rate band, and stands ready to intervene to dampen excessive volatility should this become necessary.
However, these would be gradual, in line with subdued wage growth as the slack in the labour market will take time to be fully absorbed.
and services sectors, reflecting an improvement in final demand.
At the same time, the transport engineering and selected precision engineering clusters within manufacturing will be hampered further by weak demand for oil exploration and production equipment.
Moderate price increases for some consumer services including healthcare and education are expected, but the subdued growth environment will constrain the extent of cost pass-through.
Inflation for certain services components, including public transport and healthcare, could also stay elevated as less frequently-adjusted prices rise to catch up with higher cost levels.
In its October 2018 Statement, MAS announced a slight increase in the slope of the S$NEER policy band.
At the same time, CPI inflation was expected to pick up, as the labour market tightened and wage pressures increased, and the effects of higher commodity prices filtered through to prices of consumption goods.
Private consumption in the US continues to be hampered by the sluggish labour market and anaemic housing prices, while firms remain cautious in their investment spending.
The global growth remains uncertain.
MAS will therefore reduce slightly the rate of appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
There will be no change in the level, slope or width of the policy band.
Against continuing weakness and uncertainties in the external economic environment, the strength of the recovery in the Singapore economy is expected to be moderate beyond the initial uplift.
All in, Singapore’s GDP growth is projected to step down to 0.5–2.5% in 2023, from 3.6% last year.
Although the one percentage point increase in the GST will result in a one-off step-up in the price level, its effect on inflation should be transitory.
Within manufacturing, the semiconductor segment has continued to expand at a strong pace, but the marine and offshore engineering industry remains subdued.
Domestic monetary conditions have generally tightened over the past six months, in line with the rise in US interest rates.
The policy stance has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures amidst sustained economic growth and rising global commodity prices.
Following a re-centring of the policy band at a lower level in July 2003, MAS has maintained a zero percent appreciation path for the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER).
MAS Core Inflation is envisaged to rise gradually, largely on account of higher global oil prices.
Prices continued to adjust with a lag to the economic downturn last year, and have been held down by the absence of imported inflation and the slack in the domestic economy.
Inflation for food and retail goods moderated, offsetting firmer electricity & gas inflation.
This stance will help support economic growth, particularly in view of the downside risks in the external environment.
The recovery in the manufacturing and financial sectors should be supported by the turnaround in the electronics cycle and anticipated easing in global interest rates, respectively, even as growth in the domestic-oriented sectors further normalises towards pre-pandemic rates.
The outbreak of COVID-19 domestically and abroad has weighed on a broad spectrum of economic activities.
The CPI for airfares has also increased sharply, mostly reflecting the cost of COVID-19 testing requirements for international travel.
In particular, benchmark oil prices fell sharply in March and are expected to stay low for an extended period.
However, the slowdown reflects a decline in demand, not an erosion of competitiveness.
At the same time, world commodity prices have generally weakened, led by a decline in oil prices.
The policy stance is assessed to be appropriate for containing domestic and imported sources of inflation, and ensuring medium-term price stability as a basis for sustainable growth.
This was due to stronger price increases in oil-related, as well as food and retail items.
Since April 2004, MAS has maintained the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band.
Against this backdrop, MAS will be maintaining its policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER.
In the event, the Singapore economy expanded strongly in 2000, particularly in the second half of the year, accompanied by a significant tightening of the labour market and a rise in domestic inflationary pressures.
Core inflation is projected to step down further to between 2.5–3.0% y-o-y by December.
The Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today show that Singapore’s GDP declined by 6.3% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis in Q3 2008.
Imported inflation in Singapore fell to 2.2% in July-November, compared to 2.8% in H1 2001.
The manufacturing sector recorded its fourth consecutive quarter of contraction, with lacklustre performances across most segments except for the biomedical and precision engineering industries.
The three-month S$ SIBOR rose from 1.1% as at end-October 2017 to 1.5% at the end of the year, before falling in January 2018.
Electricity & gas and non-cooked food inflation also rose, reflecting the effects of the step-up in global energy and agricultural input costs compared to a year ago.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER has appreciated towards the upper bound of the policy band over the last six months, reflecting positive risk sentiment arising from policy responses in the US and Europe.
On the domestic front, unit labour costs are projected to rise more gradually, alongside moderating nominal wage growth as well as a recovery in productivity.
A turnaround in the global electronics industry also contributed to a pickup in exports and production among the East Asian economies.
Taking these developments into account, MAS is revising its inflation forecasts for 2015.
This is part of MAS’ continuing efforts to enhance communications.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Since the April 2017 MPS, the S$NEER has fluctuated around a strengthening trend in the upper half of the policy band.
Firms are expected to continue to pass on accumulated costs, which could lead to broad-based price increases across the economy.
Since mid-October 2021, the S$NEER has strengthened by 0.97% and is currently close to the top of the policy band.
This policy stance was assessed to be appropriate given the expectation that MAS Core Inflation would rise modestly in the near term before stabilising at just below 2%.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER has fluctuated near the upper end of the policy band during the past six months.
CPI inflation is likely to be around 0% in 2009, before rising to 1-2% in 2010.
MAS will continue to closely monitor global and domestic economic developments, amid heightened uncertainty on both the inflation and growth fronts.
External conditions have remained weak, even after the US-Iraq war.
MAS will therefore continue with the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
Notwithstanding continued short-term volatility, global oil prices are expected to increase next year from its trough in 2016.
Since then, the S$NEER has strengthened in line with the appreciating policy band.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes private road transport and accommodation costs, picked up to average 2.0% y-o-y between October 2013 and February 2014 from 1.6% in the first nine months of 2013.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy registered marginal growth of 0.1% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis in Q3 2015, following the 2.5% contraction in Q2.
However, significant uncertainties remain, including the possibility of further virus mutations and premature relaxation of social restrictions by governments, which could derail the global and domestic recovery.
Businesses also remain cautious in their investment decisions.
Against this backdrop, prospects for Singapore’s manufacturing sector and some trade-related services have dimmed.
The external inflation environment is likely to remain benign, while the slack labour market and excess capacity in the economy should help restrain domestic cost pressures, particularly in consumer services.
On a year-ago basis, GDP grew by 4.8% in Q2 2022.
Of the 1.3% increase in the average level of CPI in 2000, we estimated that 0.7% points could be attributed to the oil price shock (via increases in petrol prices and electricity tariffs) and 0.3% points to increases in administrative charges This estimate was obtained by holding the inflation of these components constant at a historical average..
MAS will continue to maintain the current policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band as announced in our Statement of 12 April 2005.
The appreciation of the S$NEER, coupled with the rise in domestic interest rates, has led to a significant tightening in domestic liquidity conditions since late 2005.
Consumer-facing sectors have been severely affected by social distancing measures and heightened uncertainty.
However, they have picked up in the latest readings and may continue to rise in the next few quarters, as accumulated business costs pass through to consumer prices alongside the cyclical uplift in economic activity.
Most other Asian economies have thus far withstood the recent bouts of financial market volatility and the tightening of financial conditions, and are taking policy measures to sustain growth.
CPI-All Items inflation will rise in the coming months due to the low base a year ago when COE premiums fell, but it should ease in the second half of 2014.
Singapore’s GDP growth is projected to be below trend this year.
As growth moderates this year, the positive output gap should level off at about 0.7% of potential GDP, before picking up again towards the end of 2001.
This policy stance, which has been in place since April 2012, was assessed to be appropriate, taking into account the balance of risks between external demand uncertainties and rising domestic inflationary pressures.
MAS Core Inflation will stay subdued in 2015, but should pick up gradually over 2016, largely due to the dissipation of the disinflationary effects of lower oil prices, and budgetary and other one-off measures.
Notwithstanding the slowdown in the US economy and the turbulence in financial markets, economic activity in Singapore has continued to stay firm.
The Singapore economy is expected to grow at a moderate pace in 2014, supported by the cyclical uplift in the industrialised economies.
There are potential downside risks to growth and MAS will closely monitor external economic and financial developments.
The three-month S$ SIBOR was stable at around 0.40%, while the three-month US$ LIBOR averaged 0.24%.
Growth in the trade-related industries will be weighed down by the decline in external demand and supply chain disruptions, while modern services such as finance & insurance and information & communications will be affected by the general slowdown in business activity and investment.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of private road transport and accommodation, rose to 1.0% y-o-y in July–August 2016 from 0.7% in H1, as the temporary disinflationary effects from lower oil prices and Budgetary and other one-off measures dissipated.
Going forward, while the economy is expected to moderate to a more sustainable pace, inflationary pressures stemming from external sources, as well as domestic conditions including a tight labour market and rising rental costs, will persist.
Notwithstanding some upside risks to global price pressures, inflation in Singapore is projected to rise at a more gradual pace in H2 2021.
In the US, business sentiments have improved, and the incipient recovery of the labour market is supporting private consumption.
Looking ahead, imported inflationary pressures are expected to remain low, reflecting the excess capacity that remains even as the global economy gradually recovers.
Singapore Dollar Bilateral Exchange Rate Domestic interest rates continued to trend lower in the first half of 2002, with the three-month interbank rate easing from 1.25% at end-2001 to 1.06% at end-Q1 2002 and 0.88% at end-Q2.
In the G3 and most regional economies, improving labour markets will also underpin rising private consumption.
Global final demand is projected to stay firm in 2018, but the pace of expansion could slow slightly as the cyclical upturn matures.
Overall, MAS Core Inflation is projected to come in at around 1.5% in 2017 and average 1–2% next year.
This was mainly due to a smaller increase in the price of electricity & gas, in light of lower global oil prices and higher adoption of cheaper electricity plans by consumers.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of accommodation and private road transport, fell to 1.6% year-on-year in January–February 2019, from 1.8% in Q4 2018.
This policy stance will help anchor inflation expectations, ensure medium-term price stability, and keep growth on a sustainable path.
In the April 2024 Statement , MAS maintained the rate of appreciation of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band, with no change to the width of the band or level at which it was centred.
MAS Core Inflation should edge up further to around 2% in the months ahead.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Economic activity in Singapore’s major trading partners was resilient in the last quarter of 2023.
With imported inflation turning more negative and core inflation expected to ease materially by end-2023, MAS has assessed that the current appreciating path of the S$NEER policy band is sufficiently tight and appropriate for securing medium-term price stability.
If there is stronger-than-anticipated demand for labour due to upsides in GDP growth, it may take longer for unit labour cost growth to moderate and consequently for services price inflation to normalise.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, Singapore’s GDP growth came in at 1.1% in Q1 2015 on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis, following the 4.9% recorded in Q4 2014.
With final demand in the advanced economies softening, growth in Asia will slow, notwithstanding some support from domestic demand.
MAS has maintained a zero percent appreciation path for the S$NEER policy band since October 2008.
MAS will closely monitor global and domestic economic developments, amid uncertainty on both inflation and growth.
MTI’s Advance Estimates show that growth in the Singapore economy picked up to 1.7% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in the last quarter of 2023, from 1.3% in Q3 and an average of −0.1% in the first half of the year.
Global economic growth is expected to slow discernibly in 2019 compared to the previous two years, and should stabilise in 2020 barring further shocks.
Although petrol prices will likely be lower, car prices could see some increase given an anticipated tapering in the supply of COEs.
With the deterioration in macroeconomic conditions and expectations of a weaker , the S$NEER has depreciated to a level slightly below the mid-point of the policy band.
On a year-ago basis, MAS Core Inflation is projected to pick up gradually into early next year, before easing in the second half of 2015.
Given the slack in the labour market and rebound in productivity growth, a strong uptick in domestic price pressures is unlikely at this stage of the business cycle.
MAS stands ready to intervene to dampen excessive volatility in the S$NEER should this become necessary.
The depreciation of the S$ against the broad-based strength of the US dollar was partly offset by the appreciation of the S$ against the Malaysian ringgit, euro, and Japanese yen.
Externally, the recent sharp decline in commodity prices has helped to dampen global inflation.
The Singapore economy should benefit from the strengthening external environment for the rest of the year and into 2004.
The three-month S$ Singapore Interbank Offered Rate rose to 0.8% in March while the three-month compounded Singapore Overnight Rate Average edged up slightly to 0.3%.
For the year as a whole, CPI-All Items inflation is expected to come in at 3-4%, down from 3.5-4.5% projected previously.
The S$NEER started the year in the upper half of the policy band.
All in, CPI-All Items inflation has troughed and is expected to come in at 0.5–1.5% in 2017, from around −0.5% this year.
The Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today indicated that the Singapore economy expanded by 0.8% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in Q3 2021, following a 1.4% contraction in the second quarter.
However, MAS is reducing its forecasts for CPI-All Items inflation and MAS Core Inflation for 2015.
Recovery in 2002 will depend on an upturn in external demand, particularly of the global electronics industry.
The S$ bilateral exchange rates fluctuated significantly against individual major currencies in the year.
However, the increases are unlikely to be sustained at the same pace.
Against this backdrop, Singapore’s trade-related and modern services sectors should expand more slowly this year compared to 2021.
This is because of the decline in the cost of private road transport, as COE premiums fell and the impact of the upward revision in parking fees in December 2016 faded.
However, global IT output growth is expected to ease to a more sustainable pace as the ramp-up in production linked to inventory re-stocking runs its course.
In the following months, as the economy softened, the S$NEER trended downwards, especially in the aftermath of the Bali bombing.
However, core inflation will stay elevated over the next few quarters, as imported inflation remains significant and a tight labour market supports strong wage increases.
The for the Singapore economy has become less favourable since mid-2002, as the external environment deteriorated.
The accumulating business costs will pass through to consumer price inflation as the domestic economy reopens and private consumption recovers.
As part of its ongoing economic surveillance, MAS has assessed that it is appropriate to adjust the prevailing stance.
Since then, the S$NEER has continued to strengthen in the upper half of the appreciating policy band.
For the full year, it is expected to come in at around 5% in 2011 and 2.5-3.5% in 2012.
Against this backdrop, and taking into account the Q1 performance, GDP growth for 2005 is projected to come in at the lower half of the forecast range of 3-5%.
Meanwhile, CPI-All Items inflation moderated, averaging 1.6% since October 2013 compared to 2.5% in January–September 2013, as car prices declined and imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation rose at a slower pace.
Meanwhile, activity in the services sectors stayed firm, supported mainly by financial and business services, as well as information & communications services.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Global economic growth remained resilient at the turn of the year.
Finally, water charges were also raised in July as part of a 4-year (1997-2000) plan to promote water conservation, while tobacco saw a hike in excise duty in March.. As we are a price taker importing all our oil, we cannot shield ourselves from price fluctuations in world markets.
Further, we will shift the policy band from that of a zero percent appreciation to one of modest and gradual appreciation.
MAS has assessed that, on balance, a further tightening of is needed to help ensure that price pressures are dampened over the next few quarters.
However, an acceleration in inflationary pressures is unlikely against the backdrop of slower GDP growth, uncertainties in the global economy, as well as the continuing restraining effects of MAS’ tightening in 2018.
Domestic interbank rates have risen in tandem with the increase in the US federal funds rate, with the three-month domestic interbank rate rising from 0.75% at end-May 2004 to 1.44% by end-Sep 2004.
However, a significant downturn in the global economy would induce an abrupt easing in cost and price pressures, causing domestic inflation to come in materially lower than expected.
The Singapore economy is projected to grow at a slower pace in 2016 than envisaged in the April policy review.
This mainly reflected higher COE premiums and the imputed rental cost of owner-occupied housing, which is the largest component of accommodation costs in the CPI.
The prevailing rate of appreciation of the policy band is needed to keep a restraining effect on imported inflation as well as domestic cost pressures, and is sufficient to ensure medium-term price stability.
At the same time, enhanced medical subsidies, including those under the Pioneer Generation Package, have led to a one-off reduction in the prices of healthcare services.
The slowdown was largely anticipated and driven by weaker activity in the manufacturing and modern services sectors, which had posted strong outturns in the preceding quarter.
Nevertheless, the price declines have begun to level off, and on a seasonally adjusted basis, the index rose by 0.4% in the first five months of this year, since hitting a trough in January.
In 2023, the economy is forecast to grow at a pace that is below trend, which could cause the current mildly positive output gap to reverse.
In our assessment, the current level of the S$NEER is appropriate for maintaining domestic price stability over the medium term, taking into account the prospects for growth in the Singapore economy.
Growth was broad-based, with the manufacturing, construction, financial services and transport hub services sectors contributing to sustained economic activity.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes costs of accommodation and private road transport, fell significantly to an average of 0.8% year-on-year in July–August 2019, from 1.4% in H1.
The domestic labour market is expected to see slightly reduced tightness, with wage growth projected to slow further over the course of 2016 amid softer employment conditions.
MAS has assessed that, on balance, it would be prudent to take a further calibrated step to tighten so as to lean against price pressures becoming more persistent.
US economic growth has lost some momentum, led by the correction in its housing sector, and the problems in the subprime mortgage market may yet lead to some retraction in consumer spending.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of private road transport and accommodation, has been subdued.
The relative stability of the S$NEER has reflected the strengthening of the S$ against the US$, offset by its weakening against a number of regional currencies.
Consequently, core inflation is forecast to turn mildly positive in 2021.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Global economic activity has moderated reflecting weaker growth in the Eurozone and China, even as the US economy has thus far been resilient.
Core inflation better reflects underlying price pressures in the economy and is the most relevant among the range of indicators that MAS monitors for .
GDP growth is estimated to have fallen to 1.8% (year-on-year) in H1 2001, from 10.7% in H2 2000, led by a sharp slowdown in manufacturing and weakening domestic demand.
MTI’s Advance Estimates show that the Singapore economy expanded by 1.0% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in Q3 2023, up from 0.1% in Q2.
The Advance GDP Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry on 10 July 2002 show that the recovery momentum has been maintained, with real GDP growth estimated at 10.3% (quarter-on-quarter, seasonally adjusted annualised rate or SAAR) in Q2 2002, higher than the revised growth rate of 8.4% in Q1.
However, we will increase slightly the slope of the S$NEER policy band.
At the same time, the global IT industry continues to experience excess supply and could see further correction in output in the coming quarters.
In comparison, the manufacturing sector reverted to positive growth on the back of a rebound in pharmaceutical output.
Within manufacturing, the transport engineering and some precision engineering clusters will be hampered by the cutback in oil exploration activities, while the weakness in IT production and its supporting industries will also persist due to tepid final demand and ongoing corporate restructuring.
Consequently, the S$NEER moved down to the lower half of the policy band.
Overall unit labour costs are set to increase by an average of 2.5-3.0% in 2005 and 2006, compared to a 4.0% decline in 2004.
The unemployment rate is expected to ease through the year and average around 3.5%, compared to 4.0% in 2004.
Consequently, MAS Core Inflation is expected to stay elevated.
It initially strengthened over the first two months of the year, as the improved economic led to portfolio inflows into the local and regional equity markets.
Global economic activity slowed in Q3 2022.
Reflecting in part the robust expansion in Q1, GDP growth for the year as a whole is likely to be at the upper end of the 4-6% forecast range.
In our assessment, the recovery in the industrial countries, while likely to continue for the rest of the year, may proceed at a somewhat slower pace than in previous upturns.
Meanwhile, imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation are set to decline at a slower pace this year, compared to 2018.
At the same time, inflationary pressures continue to be a concern over the medium term, with the economy at close to its potential output level and with upside risks to external inflation.
With economic activity turning out somewhat stronger than anticipated in Q1 2012 and resource markets tightening further, core inflationary pressures have persisted.
From about 0.5% in Q4 1999, CPI inflation (year-on-year) rose steadily to 1.5% in Q3 2000, and further to 2.0% in Q4, with the inflation rate in Dec 2000 coming in at 2.1%.
The recent weakness of the Singapore dollar, especially against the US dollar, has prompted speculation that MAS has shifted its policy stance on the exchange rate.
In the quarters ahead, imported inflation is likely to rise mildly, as global demand strengthens amid ample supply conditions in key commodity markets.
Excluding the impact of the GST hikes, core inflation is estimated to have edged below 2.0% in Jul–Aug.
The modern services cluster is expected to expand at a slightly faster pace in 2017, led by a pickup in the financial sector and firm demand for ICT services.
In the near term, global final demand is expected to soften amid elevated interest rates.
COE premiums could continue to rise in the short term as the market adjusts to the pending re-categorisation of COEs.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy expanded by 1.3% on a year-ago basis in Q1 2019, following the 1.9% growth in Q4 2018.
The growth was broad-based, with strong performance recorded in the manufacturing and services sectors.
Increases in the cost of consumer services and cyclical-sensitive items caused the MAS underlying CPI, which excludes private road transport and accommodation, to also trend up slightly.
In the meantime, CPI inflation has slowed significantly to 2.4% year-on-year in Jan-Feb 2009, from 5.4% in Q4 last year.
CPI-All Items inflation will come in around 2% in 2021 and average 1.5–2.5% next year.
MAS underlying inflation is also expected to hold steady at 1-2% in 2007.
Retail interest rates experienced a similar decline, with the average prime lending rate sliding to 5.35% in November, after remaining at 5.80% for the first eight months of the year.
Overall GDP growth is projected at 2.5-3.5% in 2013, and is unlikely to be significantly different in 2014.
GDP growth in 2010 is expected to be slower than in previous post-recession periods.
MAS Core Inflation has stepped down but is anticipated to decline further to around 2% by the end of 2024.
Wage inflation is likely to remain relatively firm, and businesses in food-related and some services sectors could further pass on cost increases.
Overall CPI inflation for 2003 is projected at 0.5-1.5%.
Both the trade-related cluster and the modern services sectors contracted.
In October last year, MAS increased slightly the slope of the S$NEER policy band, with no change to the level at which the band was centred.
This was predominantly due to a more significant pass-through of wages and other business costs.
While healthcare and education services will be underpinned by resilient demand, spending on discretionary retail items and other services is expected to be dampened by the still-subdued labour market and weak consumer sentiment.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a severe contraction in economic activity both in Singapore and globally, due to the combination of supply chain disruptions, travel restrictions imposed in many countries and a sudden decline in demand.
In the October 2017 Statement, MAS kept the slope of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band at zero percent, with no change to the width of the policy band or the level at which it was centred.
The decline was concentrated in the manufacturing sector, reflecting sluggish external conditions.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of private road transport and accommodation, eased to 1.2% y-o-y in January-February 2015 from 1.6% in Q4 2014.
This off-cycle move was assessed to be necessary in view of the upward revision to the MAS Core Inflation forecast amid rapidly accumulating external and domestic cost pressures.
The rebound in economic growth in 2000 was broad-based across the major sectors of the economy.
MAS had adopted a modest and gradual appreciation path for the S$NEER policy band since April 2010.
In comparison, activity in the services sectors continued to expand, supported mainly by finance & insurance and business services.
Following the de-pegging of the Chinese and Malaysian currencies from the US$ on 21 July, the S$NEER appreciated to the upper half of the policy band.
The Singapore economy is forecast to contract by 5–7% this year, and record above-trend growth for 2021 due to the effects of the low base in 2020.
Although MAS Core Inflation is projected to rise from around 1% in 2016 to 1–2% in 2017, the ascent will be gradual.
In the January 2022 Statement , MAS increased slightly the slope of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band.
The Singapore economy is expected to strengthen over 2024, with growth becoming more broad-based.
The biomedical sector however provided support to GDP growth during the quarter.
However, the fall in oil prices, if sustained, would take some pressure off headline CPI inflation.
The trade and tourism-related services industries also showed healthy rates of expansion, supported by favourable external demand conditions, which are expected to be maintained in the year ahead.
Despite the continuing risks to external demand conditions, the for the Singapore economy remains generally positive at this stage.
In April this year, MAS shifted from a zero percent appreciation path to a policy of modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER, against a more favourable growth for the Singapore economy and the risk of rising inflationary pressures.
Inflation edged up due to the step-up in the GST rate, higher electricity & gas tariffs from the carbon tax hike, as well as increases in essential services fees amid higher input and labour costs.
Prospects for the Singapore economy should continue to improve in 2024, with GDP growth projected to come in between 1–3%.
Together, these factors imply a slightly higher CPI inflation rate this year compared to 2000, although still within the 1.0-2.0% range.
However, a number of risk factors have recently emerged.
Against the backdrop of a weaker external economic environment and a more protracted global electronics downturn, near term growth prospects for the Singapore economy have turned significantly weaker.
This helped to offset rising private transport inflation amid higher petrol prices.
At the same time, inflationary pressures are likely to pick up, driven by rising global commodity prices as well as some domestic cost factors.
Geo-political events and the slowdown in China’s growth also added to the downward pressure on the S$NEER.
Domestic inter-bank rates have risen in tandem with the 75 basis point increase in the US federal funds rate since June.
Against this backdrop and in view of the sharp fall in domestic economic output over the past two quarters, Singapore’s GDP growth forecast for 2009 has been lowered to between -9% and -6%.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER strengthened through much of July and August, as negative sentiments towards the regional SARS-hit countries lifted.
Reflecting the decline in core inflation, CPI-All Items inflation eased to 0.4% from 0.5% over the same period.
Singapore’s GDP was unchanged on a quarter-on-quarter, seasonally-adjusted basis in Q2 2022, compared to the 0.9% expansion in Q1, according to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today.
Although manufacturing will remain an important driver of GDP growth, its contribution will moderate.
In all, the pace of growth will be slightly below potential this year, following two years when it was above trend.
A sustained appreciation of the policy band is necessary to dampen imported inflation and curb domestic cost pressures, thus ensuring medium-term price stability.
However, we remain cautious about whether this is the start of a sustainable improvement, or merely a year-end seasonal pick-up in demand.
Industrial production data for the first two months of the year showed that the contraction in the manufacturing sector was mainly confined to the biomedical and transport engineering clusters.
Against this backdrop, it is necessary for to remain supportive of the recovery in the domestic economy, while keeping inflation low.
Abstracting from the electronics-related segments, growth rates in a broad range of industries are projected to be stable or slightly improving in 2018 compared to 2017.
Nevertheless, domestic costs continued to rise amid a tight labour market.
As a result, CPI inflation is now projected to come in at 1.5-2% for 2007, from the 0.5-1.5% range expected at the time of the last policy review.
However, further shocks, including from geopolitical tensions, could drive inflation higher and cause full-year recessions in some key economies.
At the same time, the finance & insurance and information & communications services sectors should continue to expand, underpinned by domestic demand in the region and ongoing digitalisation-related investments.
The Eurozone economy, faced with an ongoing sovereign debt crisis, will be constrained by fiscal austerity and tightening credit conditions.
On balance, real GDP growth could come in at the upper half of the official forecast range of 2-4% in 2002.
Barring major dislocations to the global economy, the Singapore economy should grow at an above-trend pace for the second consecutive year in 2022.
Global capital expenditure should gain further traction amid positive business sentiment and an investment catch-up cycle.
China’s growth momentum is likely to moderate, as its services sector expansion is unlikely to be sufficiently strong to offset faltering industrial activity, amid supply gluts and weak global demand.
The January Statement date will be announced in the Advance Release Calendar of the MAS website on 2 January 2024.
Since mid-March, the S$NEER has trended downwards, as the US$ rebounded following the interest rate hike by the US Federal Reserve amidst signs in the US of rising inflationary pressures and continuing firmness in the economic data.
In the last six months, the drag on GDP growth exerted by the manufacturing sector has intensified, reflecting the ongoing downturn in the global electronics cycle as well as the pullback in investment spending, caused in part by the uncertainty in US-China relations.
On the domestic front, the decline in manufacturing exports and production appears to be levelling off.
On the whole, Singapore’s GDP growth is projected to come in at around the mid-point of the 0–1% forecast range in 2019 and improve modestly in 2020.
Externally, food commodity prices have risen, in part due to the recent supply disruptions.
Following the announcement, the S$NEER trended downwards, largely reflecting a general strengthening of the US dollar against major currencies and concerns over the implications for the region of a marked slowdown in the Chinese economy.
Given the significant slack in the labour market, nominal earnings growth is likely to moderate further, while weak consumer sentiment should limit demand-induced increases in product prices.
The decline largely reflected fluctuations in biomedical manufacturing, which are not expected to have significant spillover effects on the broader economy or on overall employment conditions.
This was largely due to stronger price increases in services and retail items, which more than offset lower food price inflation.
The slack in the labour market should continue to be absorbed and the negative output gap close in 2022.
The disbursement of additional rebates for Service & Conservancy Charges in January 2018 also temporarily dampened headline inflation.
Against this backdrop, the Singapore economy is expected to grow at a modest pace in 2012.
All in, both MAS Core Inflation and CPI-All Items inflation are forecast to come in between −0.5 and 0% in 2020.
Visitor arrivals, air passengers passing through Changi Airport, and hotel occupancy rates are almost back to their pre-SARS levels.
Significant uncertainty remains over the short-term .
The global investment cycle has yet to show signs of an upswing, and this will continue to weigh on the region’s exports into 2017.
The administrative measures are the expiry of the one-year road tax rebates and the upward revision in parking fees in August and December 2016, respectively.However, accommodation costs will fall by a lesser extent than in 2017.
Even as base effects dissipate, the build-up in sequential price increases will cause the headline CPI inflation rate to rise to around 4% by the end of 2010 and stay high in the first half of 2011 before moderating.
The Singapore economy is expected to grow at a more moderate pace this year following several years of robust expansion.
The mid-point of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band was re-centred up to the then-prevailing level of the S$NEER near the top of the band.
We expect the Singapore economy to remain sluggish in H1 2003, before staging a more balanced and firmly-grounded recovery in the second half of this year, as the external environment improves and the global electronics industry strengthens.
Economic activity in other sectors of the economy also showed signs of improvement, albeit with some unevenness.
The external environment has also turned more favourable, with clearer indications of an upturn in the G3 economies, while the global IT indicators have continued to improve.
While prospects for the external economies have improved, final demand in Singapore’s key export markets, including for IT products, has yet to recover decisively.
However, even excluding the one-off effects of the GST increase, core inflation would remain above trend at 2.5–3.5% and headline inflation at 4.5–5.5%.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Between October 2019 and late January this year, the S$NEER hovered near the upper bound of the policy band amid broad-based US$ weakness.
This policy stance will continue to reduce imported inflation and help curb domestic cost pressures.
It is forecast to be around 1.5-2% in 2012, compared to about 2.1% in 2011.
Since the last Statement in October, developments in the global and domestic inflation environment have led to a significant shift in Singapore’s CPI inflation for 2015.
However, there is significant uncertainty around the economic , reflecting continuing risks in the external environment.
The rise in the headline CPI figure was largely due to the effects of the oil shock and increases in several administrative charges during the year.
It depreciated over February to mid-March amid the broad-based strength of the US$.
Private transport costs should rise modestly amid a continued reduction in the supply of COEs.
MAS is thus lowering the 2020 forecast range for both MAS Core Inflation and CPI-All Items inflation to −1 to 0%.
Reflecting these factors, and further declines in imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation and car prices, CPI-All Items inflation fell to -0.6% y-o-y in July-August 2015 from -0.4% in Q2.
The Singapore economy rebounded strongly in H2 2003, following the rapid containment of the SARS outbreak.
The boost to demand in most of the regional economies from their reopening last year will also fade over 2023.
The labour market is also expected to strengthen this year, with the unemployment rate improving gradually.
MAS re-centred the S$NEER policy band upwards in April this year, with no change to the slope and width of the band, amidst tight factor markets and strong pressures on domestic costs and prices.
Amid still cautious external demand and continued restrictions on cross-border travel, sequential growth in the Singapore economy is expected to slow in Q4 this year and remain modest in 2021.
The MAS underlying inflation measure, which excludes accommodation and private road transport costs, is projected at 1.5-2.5% in 2008.
While some slowdown is expected, overall economic conditions in the region should stay firm.
This policy stance was deemed appropriate for containing inflationary pressures amid the ongoing economic restructuring.
Given the openness of the Singapore economy and its dependence on external demand, it is not surprising that we have been hit hard by the external downturn.
With intensifying risks to global growth, the domestic economic slowdown could be deeper than anticipated.
The Singapore economy continues to be anchored by sound fundamentals and a resilient financial system.
The MAS will therefore maintain a zero percent appreciation path for the policy band, centred on the current level of the S$NEER.
Imported price pressures have generally been muted in recent quarters, in line with the weaker external environment and the appreciating Singapore dollar.
MAS has not changed its policy of allowing a gradual, modest appreciation of the trade-weighted Singapore dollar within a policy band, as stated in the MAS Statement of Feb 2001.
The slightly negative output gap is projected to narrow further in H2 2024, even as underlying inflationary pressures gradually dissipate.
Singapore’s GDP picked up in Q3 2020 after its sharp contraction in the previous quarter.
The risk remains that underlying cost pressures in the economy could mount, leading to a stronger pass-through to consumer prices over the medium term.
Since then, the S$NEER has largely fluctuated within the upper half of the policy band in H1 2002.
Significant challenges remain in the transition to private sector-driven growth as governments prepare to exit from their expansionary policies.
For 2024 as a whole, MAS Core Inflation is expected to average 2.5–3.5%.
This policy stance will remain supportive of economic growth, while ensuring low and stable inflation over the medium term.
On a year-ago basis, overall GDP grew by 2.5% in Q1 2017.
Domestic-driven sectors, such as construction and related financing and real estate activities, will remain resilient.
Furthermore, as the economic uncertainty arising from the September 11 incident had diminished and financial markets had stabilised, the exchange rate policy band was narrowed.
The exchange rate policy band will be re-centred below the prevailing level of the S$NEER.
In the October 2023 Statement , MAS maintained the rate of appreciation of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band, with no change to the width of the band or level at which it was centred.
This is subject to uncertainties, including around the pace and timing of easing and the intensity of ongoing geopolitical conflicts.
Economic activity is likely to be sustained at a high level for the rest of the year, even as the underlying growth momentum moderates.
All in, beyond the near-term pickup, MAS Core Inflation is forecast to rise only gradually for the rest of the year and come in at 0–1% in 2021.
The upward pressures on the S$ in April, which reflected markets' anticipation of a renminbi revaluation, moderated in June.
The GDP growth figures released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry this morning indicate that the Singapore economy has slowed down much faster than expected in recent months, and is now expected to contract by about 3% for the year as a whole.
this year will also contribute to a temporary increase in CPI inflation.
MAS Core Inflation is now projected to be between 3.0–4.0% this year, up from the earlier forecast of 2.5–3.5%.
There will be no change to the slope and width of the band.
In our assessment, this policy stance will remain supportive of economic growth while capping inflationary pressures and ensuring price stability over the medium term.
With factor markets tight, domestic cost and price pressures will remain firm.
At the same time, CPI inflation has increased and is expected to remain elevated in the first half of this year.
Growth in Asia is expected to be anchored by the major economies of China, India and Japan.
The domestic three-month interbank rate rose to 0.50% in November, before falling to 0.38% in December, where it has remained since.
However, with the release of economic data in October showing the continued sharp deterioration in the Singapore economy, there was a downward revision in the short-term for the year, and the S$NEER depreciated before stabilising at around the levels prevailing 18 months ago .
Car prices could also rise further in response to the tight COE supply, especially if car de-registrations remain at current low levels.
After a brief rebound in Q2 2008, economic conditions in the US have worsened as the effects of the fiscal stimulus package dissipated.
Meanwhile, non-labour costs such as retail rents should stay subdued.
On the domestic front, a degree of labour market slack could emerge as firms pull back on their hiring plans, even as the scale of retrenchments is mitigated by the Jobs Support Scheme.
Supported by a gradual improvement in the labour market and accommodative fiscal measures, the US economy should continue on its recovery path.
Domestically, more components of the core CPI basket are likely to see price increases as labour market conditions improve and private consumption recovers.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy grew by 0.1% year-on-year in Q3 2019, similar to the preceding quarter.
The gradual appreciation of the S$ exchange rate over the past few years has helped to mitigate inflationary pressures.
Domestically, the effects of past tightening measures and the slowing economy have alleviated price pressures and eased resource constraints.
Nevertheless, overall growth will be capped by supply-side constraints, particularly in the labour market.
CPI Inflation Forecast for 2002 The domestic economy is expected to continue on its recovery path, although some uncertainty remains over its strength for the rest of the year.
At the same time, growth in Singapore’s major trading partners will slow to below trend but stay positive in 2023.
The Singapore economy will continue to expand at a modest pace in 2017.
Commercial property rents should also remain low.
MAS will review its policy stance in July, and will be making a statement on then.
However, wage pressures have been building up amidst a tightening labour market.
The policy band will at the same time be widened slightly in view of the volatility across international financial markets.
In Q2 2003, the Singapore economy shrank by 4.3% year-on-year, following growth of 1.6% in Q1.
Core inflation is likely to come in near the mid-point of the revised forecast range.
The Advance GDP Estimates for Q1 2004, released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry , show that the economy expanded by a robust 11% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis, or 7.3% compared to the same period last year.
While there has been some retraction in the momentum, the underlying pace of activity in the manufacturing sector remains firm, with sustained growth in electronics output and strength in transport engineering.
Given these factors, both MAS Core Inflation and CPI-All Items inflation are expected to average between −1 and 0% in 2020.
MAS will continue to be vigilant over developments in the external environment and their impact on the domestic economy, and stands ready to curb excessive volatility in the S$NEER.
The subdued global growth will exert a drag on the external-oriented sectors in Singapore in the quarters ahead.
In Q3, Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry pointed to a moderation in economic momentum, largely on account of a pullback in some asset market-related activities.
The slowdown in the US economy and weakening global electronics demand will affect our manufacturing sector.
The Singapore economy will enter a recession this year, with GDP growth projected at −4 to −1%.
Financial conditions are mostly favourable with inflation well-contained.
MAS will continue to be vigilant over developments in the external environment and their impact on the domestic economy, and stands ready to curb sharp movements in the S$NEER.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes private road transport and accommodation costs, receded to 1.5% y-o-y in January-February 2013, from 2.0% and 2.4% in Q4 and Q3 2012, respectively.
Inflation rose to an average of 2.8% in July-August, with about half the increase attributed to the one-off impact of the GST hike.
Core inflation should end the year around 2%, and average between 2.5%–3.0% for 2024 as a whole, down from 4.2% in 2023.
The actual outcome of S$NEER movements over the six months since October 2015 has in fact been a zero percent appreciation compared to the preceding six-month period.
Domestic CPI inflation rose significantly from 0.9% in Q1 2010 to 3.1% in Q2, and edged up further to 3.2% in July-August.
CPI Inflation Forecast for 2002 Despite recent tentative signs of a bottoming out, downside risks remain in the external environment.
The S$NEER subsequently strengthened in July and August, boosted by encouraging GDP numbers and strong export performance.
As inflation typically lags GDP growth, a turnaround in economic activity in H2 2002 is unlikely to lead to an immediate uptick in inflation.
The three-month S$ SIBOR fell from 1.8% in October 2019 to around 1.0% as at late March, following the decline in the US$ LIBOR during this period.
In October 2014, MAS maintained a modest and gradual appreciation path of the S$NEER (Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate) policy band, with no change to its slope, width, and the level at which it was centred.
In the manufacturing sector, output in the electronics and precision engineering industries expanded in July–August compared to Q2, while other industry clusters contracted.
Excluding the impact of the GST, CPI-All Items inflation should come in at 1.5–2.5%.
From 0.8% in the first half of last year, it rose to 3.4% in H2 before accelerating further to 6.6% in Jan-Feb 2008.
Even as some Asian economies benefit from the US recovery and the mild upturn in the global IT industry, other regional economies face weaker commodity exports.
Wage and rental increases have strengthened, and the unemployment rate has fallen to a six-year low of 2.3% in June.
However, a sharper-than-expected downturn in the global economy could induce a general easing of cost and price pressures.
In comparison, growth in the services sectors stayed firm, mainly driven by financial and business services, as well as wholesale & retail trade.
CPI inflation will continue to fall in the coming months, reflecting a combination of lower commodity prices and increased slack in the domestic economy.
Global GDP growth is likely to have eased in Q2 2022 reflecting tighter financial conditions, persistently high inflation and geopolitical uncertainty.
In H1 2003, the Singapore economy has performed poorer than expected at the start of the year.
This policy stance is assessed to be appropriate for containing inflationary pressures, anchoring inflation expectations, and facilitating the restructuring of the economy towards sustainable growth.
MAS’ money market operations will at the same time provide sufficient liquidity to the financial system.
Activity will remain subdued in the travel-related and consumer-facing sectors until the pandemic is contained globally and in the region.
As car and accommodation cost increases are also likely to remain firm, CPI-All Items inflation is expected to come in at 5.0–6.0%, higher than the earlier forecast range of 4.5–5.5%.
The three-month S$ Singapore Interbank Offered Rate was unchanged at 0.4%, while the three-month compounded Singapore Overnight Rate Average edged up slightly to 0.2% in January this year.
This strengthening in momentum was mainly attributable to the external-facing sectors.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to remain elevated in the earlier part of the year, but should decline gradually and step down by Q4, before falling further next year.
The ongoing external supply constraints should ease in the second half of 2022, leading to some moderation in imported inflation, although there is risk of further supply shocks.
MAS will therefore re-centre the exchange rate policy band at the prevailing level of the S$NEER.
Barring any further global shocks, the Singapore economy is expected to strengthen in 2024, with growth becoming more broad-based.
The 2016 forecast for CPI-All Items inflation was revised down to −1.0–0% in February, taking into account the step-down in global oil prices in late 2015 and the sharp decline in COE premiums at the beginning of this year.
Importantly, structural changes to the economy including a more competitive environment and diversified sources of imports have helped to cap price increases.
Core inflation is expected to step up in the months ahead, reflecting in part the low base from the fall in prices in Q2 last year and the turnaround in producer price inflation in a number of major economies.
It was generally on a downward trend during the first few months of 2003.
These developments have delayed the recovery in the Singapore economy.
It rose further to 2.13% as at end-March 2005.
Barring fresh disruptions, the 2022 GDP growth forecast remains unchanged at 3–5%.
For 2015 as a whole, global oil prices are unlikely to show a significant rebound and should remain much lower than the US$93 average recorded last year.
Meanwhile, CPI-All Items inflation declined to an average of 1.0% y-o-y in July–August 2014 from 2.4% in Q2, on account of weaker car prices and imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation.
However, activity in travel-related services will still be short of pre-pandemic levels.
continued to decline in year-on-year terms in Q4 2023, though by less than expected.
Over the same period, CPI-All Items inflation rose slightly to 0.6%, reflecting a larger increase in private road transport costs and a turnaround in imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation.
MAS is revising the forecast range for CPI-All Items inflation in 2021 to 0.5–1.5%, from −0.5 to 0.5% previously.
The Singapore economy saw a step-up in the level of economic activity in Q1 this year following a slowdown in H2 2010.