Global growth has been relatively resilient thus far.
Against this backdrop, and in view of the surge in growth seen in Q1, Singapore’s GDP growth forecast for 2010 has been revised upwards to between 7% and 9%, from 4.5% and 6.5%.
The S$NEER peaked in early August, and has more recently depreciated towards the mid-point of the policy band.
In comparison, the construction sector expanded strongly in Q1 2015, bolstered by the residential building segment.
As the negative output gap narrows, core inflation should rise gradually from its current subdued levels but remain below its historical average.
The strength of the domestic currency was also boosted by positive news, including the containment of the SARS outbreak in Singapore, and the signing of the US-Singapore FTA.
For the first half of 2008, headline CPI inflation is projected to rise to about 3.5% on a year-on-year basis on account of the GST hike, as well as the base effects of lower energy and car prices in H1 2007.
The pass-through of higher import and labour costs to consumer prices could increase as domestic demand strengthens further.
MAS will therefore maintain the current policy stance of a zero percent appreciation of the S$NEER policy path.
In the coming year, costs pressures which have been accumulating along domestic and global supply chains will continue to pass through to consumer prices.
The higher inflation also reflected stronger economic conditions and the pass-through of rising business costs to retail prices.
However, MAS Core Inflation is likely to remain firm, given cost pressures from the tight labour market and higher prices of food imports from the region.
Against conditions of abundant liquidity globally, the domestic three-month interbank rate has eased further to 0.50% as at end-September this year.
External inflationary pressures are likely to stay muted for the rest of 2003.
The increase from 3.3% in Q4 2023 was lower than expected.
Following a bout of depreciation pressures in January 2016 amid heightened global risk aversion, the S$NEER strengthened on broad-based US$ weakness, as financial markets revised downwards their expectations of the US Federal Reserve’s pace of interest rate normalisation.
The recovery in the manufacturing and financial sectors should resume, supported by the upturn in the electronics cycle and anticipated easing in global interest rates.
The recent volatility in international financial markets, particularly the weakness in global equity markets, has cast some uncertainty on the for the global economy.
Since then, however, it has fallen to 0.81% as at end-December 2002.
After initially strengthening in January and February, the S$NEER eased somewhat, fluctuating within a relatively narrow range in the second quarter of the year.
CPI inflation is estimated to average around 0.5% for 2002 as a whole, largely reflecting the slack in domestic factor and product markets.
MAS Core Inflation is now projected to be 2.0–3.0% this year, from the 1.0–2.0% expected in October.
The trade-weighted S$NEER trended up initially in H2 2001, reflecting in part a marked weakening of the US$ as data showed a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the US economy.
In particular, the marine and offshore engineering and private residential construction industries remained weak, while segments within financial services picked up in tandem with regional demand.
Domestic inflationary pressures have been rising over the past year, reflecting a tightening of the labour market and the recovery in domestic demand.
The West Texas Intermediate benchmark has declined by around 50% from US$91 per barrel at end-September 2014 to below US$50 per barrel in late January 2015.
Going into 2007, tighter labour market conditions and the lagged effects of commodity price increases would continue to underpin domestic price pressures.
In the near term, the pass-through of cost increases from both external and domestic sources will continue, albeit at a more moderate pace.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy contracted by 4.1% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis in Q3 2016, following the marginal 0.2% expansion in Q2.
While core inflation was expected to rise and gradually turn positive this year, it would stay well below its long-term average.
will complement these efforts and ensure price stability over the medium term.
The for China has stabilised on the back of firming corporate profitability and accommodative fiscal policy.
Growth in manufacturing and trade-related activities eased, as inclement weather in the US dampened demand for Singapore’s exports.
After a strong rebound last year, the three-month domestic interbank rate rose further to 3.56% in June 2006, before declining to 3.44% as at end-September.
Growth in financial services was weaker amid the slowdown in lending to the region.
FOR 2009 AND 2010 Following the sharp contractions in Q4 2008 and Q1 2009, the Singapore economy rebounded strongly by 22% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised (q-o-q SAAR) basis in Q2 2009.
GDP growth is therefore on track to come in at the upper end of the 7-8% forecast range this year, up from the 4.5-6.5% forecast during the April review.
There is therefore no reason for any undue weakening of the Singapore dollar.
These two factors will continue to drive headline inflation rates up for the rest of 2010.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Since the Statement in January, the S$NEER has fluctuated within the lower half of the policy band.
On a point-to-point basis, the trade-weighted index weakened as the S$ depreciated against some of the regional currencies and the US$.
In comparison, year-on-year, GDP rose by an estimated 4.3% in Q1 2018, following growth of 3.6% for 2017 as a whole.
Over the last six months, the global economy has picked up and should continue to support Singapore’s trade-related sectors.
GDP growth in the Singapore economy is expected to come in at 6–7% this year and register a slower but still-above trend pace in 2022.
Along with the modest recovery of manufacturing in 2002, the trade-related segments of the services sector are expected to benefit most from the improvement in the external environment.
External sources of inflation are likely to weaken in the near term amid the global downturn.
On balance, we expect CPI inflation to be higher this year than in 2000, but to remain below 2% for the year as a whole.
Nevertheless, barring a renewed worsening of the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Singapore economy is expected to expand in 2021, following the recession this year.
MAS Core Inflation has slowed and is projected to broadly decline over the course of 2024.
Domestic-oriented activities are expected to stay resilient, supported by construction of transportation, housing and social infrastructure.
The Singapore economy will contract this year.
In January 2022, MAS added slightly to the rate of appreciation of the band.
The slight uptick in core inflation to 0.4% y-o-y in January–February 2016 from 0.2% in Q4 2015 was largely due to the smaller decline in the prices of oil-related items on a year-ago basis, as well as the dissipation of temporary disinflationary effects from Budgetary and other one-off measures, such as the enhanced medication subsidies introduced at the beginning of 2015.
This policy maintains the current level of the policy band, and there will be no re-centring of the band or change to its width.
Growth in Q2 was weighed down by the external-facing sectors such as wholesale trade and manufacturing, while the sectors that bore the brunt of the pandemic generally benefited from the substantial easing of border and domestic mobility restrictions.
CPI-All Items inflation eased by a smaller extent over the same period, from 0.6% to 0.4%, as higher private road transport costs and a slower decline in imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation partially offset the moderation in core inflation.
MAS Core Inflation is forecast to average 2–2.5% in 2014 and 2–3% in 2015.
For the whole of 2001, CPI inflation is expected to average around 1%.
The trade-related cluster is expected to contract further, while activity in the modern services sectors remains subdued.
This, coupled with the fall in domestic production, excess capacity in the economy, and lacklustre consumer sentiments, caused CPI inflation to trend down to 0.8% in Q3 and further to 0% in October-November, from an average of 1.7% in H1 2001.
For 2004 as a whole, the forecast for CPI inflation has been revised upwards to the 1.5-2.0% range.
The Resilience Budget announced on 26 March, and the earlier Unity Budget, will help to preserve jobs, skills and firms’ know-how and capabilities.
CPI-All Items inflation averaged 4.8% in 2023, down from 6.1% in the preceding year.
Accordingly, global GDP is still forecast to expand at an above-trend pace for a second consecutive year in 2022, even as uncertainties remain.
With the Q1 expansion, the Singapore economy has now fully recovered the output lost during the recession, and economic activity in a broad range of industries has exceeded its pre-crisis peak.
For 2013, CPI-All Items inflation is projected to come in at the upper half of the 2-3% forecast range.
In the near term, growth in Singapore’s major trading partners is expected to be tempered by the impact of past tightening and withdrawal of previous expansionary fiscal policies.
Barring a resurgence of the virus globally or a setback in the pace of economic reopening, output should return to around its potential in 2022.
Nevertheless, output will still be below potential in 2021.
In particular, the electronics industry will show a sharp slowdown, although this will be somewhat offset by stronger growth in the chemical cluster, with several major petrochemical and pharmaceutical plants coming on-stream in 2001.
CPI-All Items inflation is expected to come in at 3-4%.
The travel-related sector will face prolonged headwinds.
This policy will ensure price stability in the medium term while keeping growth on a sustainable path.
Going forward, external price developments are expected to stay generally benign, given ample supply buffers in the major commodity markets.
This is not a policy to depreciate the domestic currency, and only removes the modest and gradual appreciation path of the S$NEER policy band that was in place.
Looking ahead, imported inflation, while broadly benign, will be susceptible to temporary spikes in food prices due to weather-related disruptions.
In comparison, domestic inflationary pressures have picked up as businesses pass on more of accumulated cost increases to consumer prices, following the relatively weak pass-through in earlier quarters.
Both upside and downside risks to the inflation remain.
Thus, the balance of risks is weighted towards inflation going forward.
CPI inflation is expected to trend down for the rest of the year, coming in within the 1-1.5% range for 2001 as a whole.
Meanwhile, the domestic-oriented sectors remained weak, with many affected by the tighter measures imposed in response to the increase in COVID-19 infections.
Indeed, the factors that underpinned the growth of the Singapore economy last year remain intact and will continue to support the expansion this year.
Excluding the impact of the increase in the GST rate in January, headline inflation is forecast at 2.5–3.5%.
There will be no re-centring of the policy band, nor any change to its slope or width.
Despite the turbulence in global financial markets arising from the US subprime mortgage problems, financial markets in Singapore, in particular the money markets, have continued to function in an orderly manner.
MAS intervened in early May, to prevent this exceptional demand for US dollars from pushing the exchange rate beyond the policy band.
Domestic wage growth should also ease as labour demand moderates, especially in sectors more exposed to international trade and finance.
In July 2001, MAS shifted to a neutral exchange rate policy stance, with the policy band reflecting a zero percent appreciation of the trade-weighted nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER).
MAS Core Inflation stepped up to an average of 3.4% year-on-year in April and May from 2.5% in Q1, reflecting stronger price increases in a broad range of goods and services.
While there could be some upward pressures on consumer prices emanating from higher global oil and food prices, underlying domestic cost pressures will be contained.
In Europe too growth has weakened more than expected.
For 2015, it is projected at 0.5–1.5%, reflecting also the impact of muted housing rentals.
The 2019 forecast for CPI-All Items inflation was revised down to 0.5–1.5% from 1–2% in February, taking into account the decline in global oil prices in late 2018.
Inflation for discretionary goods and services was the major contributor, amid robust demand conditions that supported the pass-through of higher imported and domestic costs.
The CPI accommodation series also includes the costs of actual rented accommodation and minor repairs.
Meanwhile, growth in the domestic-oriented sectors is projected to normalise to pre-pandemic rates.
The domestic labour market should continue to tighten and lead to strengthened wage pressures.
Growth momentum was stronger than expected, and was largely underpinned by a step-up in manufacturing output, particularly in the electronics industry.
On a year-ago basis, GDP rose marginally by 0.2% in Q1, after three consecutive quarters of decline.
External sources of inflation will stay benign given ample supply buffers in the commodity markets and weak global demand conditions.
Overall, we expect the manufacturing sector to register a more moderate 6-7% growth in 2001, compared with 15% in 2000.
However, there remain upside risks to inflation from fresh shocks to global commodity prices and domestic wage pressures.
The financial services sector also recorded varying outturns across its segments, with both domestic and offshore lending outperforming.
The three-month S$ SIBOR fell from 1.01% as at end-March 2015 to 0.82% by the end of June, before rising to 1.14% as at end-September 2015.
In comparison, modern services, such as information & communications, and selected domestic-oriented sectors should continue to provide support to the economy, underpinned by government spending and robust demand for healthcare and education services.
Overall inflation is expected to come in lower this year, between 1.0% to 0%.
CPI-All Items inflation is now projected to come in at -0.5–0.5%, from the 0.5–1.5% expected in October.
MAS assessed this stance to be appropriately accommodative of the recovery in the domestic economy, in a low inflation environment.
Amid a pullback in hiring, conditions in the labour market have slackened.
In October last year, MAS maintained the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
Sea transport services will remain affected by the slowdown in trade within Asia.
It should then moderate in late 2022, reflecting in part some stabilisation of commodity prices and possible easing of supply constraints.
China’s growth momentum is easing on a sharp deceleration in investment growth.
The three-month domestic interbank interest rate fell from 3.5% at end-February to 2.5% in June.
MAS has assessed that it is appropriate to further tighten its stance so as to lean against price pressures becoming more persistent.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER broadly fluctuated within the upper half of the policy band, reflecting in part shifting sentiments around Singapore’s macroeconomic as the pandemic evolved.
Over the medium term, core inflation is expected to average slightly below 2%.
For 2001 as a whole, the Singapore economy is forecast to grow at a slower rate of 5-7%.
The appreciation from late February 2017 reflected, in part, broad-based US dollar weakness.
Even as the downside risks to economic growth have increased, global inflationary pressures remain high.
MAS is also restoring a narrower policy band.
While inflation is still elevated, MAS’ five successive tightening moves since October 2021 have tempered the momentum of price increases.
Amidst the cuts in US interest rates by the Federal Reserve, the domestic three-month interbank interest rate fell from 2.75% as at end-August 2007 to 1.31% at the end of March 2008.
The major industrialised economies as a whole are projected to expand at a sub-par pace in 2013, given ongoing deleveraging in both the private and public sectors.
In contrast, manufacturing output and financial services weakened in Q3 amid a softening in external demand.
However, towards the end of the year, the US$ began to weaken against the Euro and S$ regained some of its earlier losses against the US$.
The US economy will lead the recovery, with private consumption supported by sustained improvement in the labour market and corporate investment gaining traction amid rising capacity utilisation rates.
Thus, CPI inflation is expected to remain high until the middle of the year, before easing in the second half.
This reflected the fall in global energy prices, strong consumption demand in the advanced economies, and the lifting of pandemic restrictions in China.
Unit labour costs are expected to show a moderate rise of 3-5%.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of accommodation and private road transport, stayed low, averaging −0.3% year-on-year in July–August 2020, slightly more pronounced than the −0.2% recorded in Q2.
However, the global economic remains uncertain and the domestic recovery could be weaker than expected.
Domestic sources of inflation will also be more muted with a softer labour market going forward, significantly slower growth in nominal earnings, and more cautious consumer sentiments.
Growth in Singapore’s major trading partners should gradually pick up later in 2024 as inflation continues to ease and the electronics cycle turns up modestly, although the timing and extent of the recovery is subject to significant uncertainty.
CPI inflation is expected to remain subdued for this year and the next, with the external inflationary environment and domestic cost pressures remaining benign.
While inflation should moderate, it will remain high for some time.
Singapore's three-month S$ interbank rate eased from 1.25% at end-2001 to reach a low of 0.75% at end-July, before firming to 1.38% at end-September.
Reflecting the recovery in COE premiums, CPI-All Items inflation rose to 1.9% in July-August, from 1.6% in Q2 2013.
We do not expect the oil price shock to lead to further increases in consumer prices beyond their one-off impact.
Inflation for discretionary goods and services also stepped up, as household spending firmed and businesses passed on cost increases to consumers.
The Singapore economy has evolved as envisaged since the October 2017 policy review, and should continue on a steady expansion path in 2018.
While global oil prices would be capped by elevated inventories as well as rising US crude oil production, average prices for the year will still be higher than in 2016.
The Singapore economy has largely evolved as envisaged in the April 2018 policy review, and is likely to expand at a slower but steady pace for the rest of this year and in 2019.
MAS Core Inflation is expected to rise in the current quarter due in part to the one-off impact of the 1%-point hike in the GST from January this year, as well as the increase in the carbon tax.
With fiscal consolidation underway, the pace of transition to private demand-led growth in the G3 economies is expected to be gradual.
The sequential pace of price change, which better captures the most recent inflation in the economy, is expected to be lower in the second half of 2024 compared to H1.
The finance & insurance sector likely registered some pullback in activity, after an exceptionally strong performance in the preceding quarter.
This policy stance will be supportive of economic growth, while ensuring low and stable inflation over the medium term.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the past six months, the S$NEER appreciated from the lower half to the upper half of the policy band.
This measured adjustment follows the move to reduce the rate of appreciation of the policy band in January this year, and is supportive of economic growth into 2016, while ensuring price stability over the medium term.
Travel-related industries, such as aviation and tourism, have been hardest hit.
The Singapore economy has expanded at a rapid pace in 2007, underpinned by robust growth in non-IT manufacturing and asset market-related activities in the first half of the year.
Over the same period, CPI-All Items inflation averaged around 4%.
For 2024, growth is projected to come in closer to its potential rate, with the output gap remaining slightly negative.
However, retail interest rates have remained stable.
Based on the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry on 2 January 2015.
In year-on-year terms (y-o-y), GDP growth was 1.0% in Q3 compared to -4.1% in Q2.
MAS will continue to be vigilant over developments in the economy and financial markets, and stands ready to curb excessive volatility in the S$NEER.
The output gap is expected to turn slightly positive.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to stay around 5% for the rest of 2022, and into early 2023.
There was no change to the width of the policy band.
The Singapore economy should experience a modest pace of expansion in 2013.
However, other business costs including rentals have risen in the past year.
Imported food inflation also eased, dampening non-cooked food inflation, which has declined from its peak in Q2.
The negative output gap will narrow as most sectors recoup their pre-COVID levels by the end of next year.
On a quarter-on-quarter, seasonally adjusted annualised basis, GDP contracted by 9.9% in Q3 and grew by just 0.1% in Q4.
Car prices are likely to be largely unchanged as households hold back on expenditure that require large financial outlays.
With global monetary conditions still accommodative, the domestic three-month interbank rate has remained low, averaging 0.40% from April through September 2013.
Inflationary pressures have since picked up amidst the buoyant domestic economic conditions and the recent rise in global oil and food prices.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER has continued to fluctuate in the upper half of the policy band over the last six months.
Current indications suggest that a hard landing in the US will be avoided, with growth decelerating from 5% in 2000 to 2.0-2.5% in 2001.
Excluding the impact of the GST increase in January this year, however, core inflation will be lower compared to 2022.
Finally, water charges were also raised in July as part of a 4-year (1997-2000) plan to promote water conservation, while tobacco saw a hike in excise duty in March.
The Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today show that the Singapore economy contracted by 0.7% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in Q1 2023, following the marginal 0.1% expansion in Q4.
Import prices in domestic currency terms also increased slightly in recent months, notwithstanding subdued external price pressures.
Barring any unexpected shocks in the external environment, the Singapore economy is forecast to expand at between 4-6% this year.
MAS assesses that a neutral policy stance will be needed for an extended period to ensure medium-term price stability.
Growth momentum in the Singapore economy should improve in the second half of 2024.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER generally eased towards the mid-point of the policy band.
Overall, GDP growth is projected to come in at the lower half of the 3–5% forecast range for 2022 as a whole.
The average level of the S$NEER over the last six months has been higher than that in the six months prior to April, notwithstanding the 0% slope in the S$NEER policy band.
The three-month domestic interbank rate fell to 0.75% at the end of 2003, from 0.81% at end-September, and stayed unchanged until end-March this year.
The manufacturing and transport-hub services sectors grew more strongly in Q3, after a pull-back in the preceding quarter, while growth of the domestic-oriented, tourism, and financial services sectors continued to hold firm.
In the domestic economy, softening economic sentiment and emerging slack in the labour market will weigh on the retail trade and real estate segments.
In the January 2024 Statement , MAS maintained the rate of appreciation of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band, with no change to the width of the band or level at which it was centred.
At the same time, trade-related services also posted healthy growth, reflecting sustained economic activity across the region.
The unemployment rate is expected to average 4.5-5.0% for the year as a whole.
In services, retail and food services saw some pullback in activity after the pickup in Q4 last year, while business services posted further growth.
However, economic activity in Asia is expected to remain fairly resilient in the near term, reflecting strong domestic demand and regional trade flows.
Meat prices were affected by the compulsory installation of meat-chillers, which raised prices of meat processed locally.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, Singapore’s GDP rose by a modest 0.1% in Q1 2014 on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis, following the 6.1% expansion in Q4.
There will be no re-centring of the policy band, or any change in its width.
The upturn in external demand will sustain an above-trend pace of growth in the Singapore economy for the rest of 2021.
This reflected in part sharper depreciations in a number of regional currencies against the US dollar, relative to the S$.
The global IT industry is expected to grow at about the same rate as in 2005, providing support not only to the domestic electronics industry, but also the entrepot trade and the hub-related transport services industries.
Domestically, the labour market remains tight.
Against this global backdrop, the weakness in electronics production and its supporting industries in Singapore is likely to persist over the near term.
Food inflation eased amid continued declines in imported food costs, while services inflation moderated as unit labour cost growth slowed.
This reflected the broad-based weakness in the US$ since the end of the first quarter, as well as strong capital inflows to the region.
In comparison, growth in the domestic-oriented sectors, including construction, remained firm.
MAS will therefore re-centre the mid-point of the S$NEER policy band up to its prevailing level.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, Singapore’s GDP expanded by a further 14.9% q-o-q SAAR in Q3 2009, with a broad range of industries across both the manufacturing and services sectors registering positive growth.
MAS Core Inflation will rise gradually and turn positive in 2021, but remain well below its long-term average.
MAS has maintained a neutral policy stance in 2002.
In April 2013, MAS maintained the modest and gradual appreciation path of the S$NEER policy band, with no change to its slope, width, and the level at which it was centred.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last six months, the S$NEER has fluctuated within the upper half of the policy band, reflecting shifts in global risk sentiment and capital inflows into Singapore.
The three-month domestic interbank rate edged up to 0.81% at end-September, compared to 0.63% at end-June, on the back of a sharp rise in long-term bond yields.
Consequently, inflationary pressures should be muted.
Further, the global IT industry remains weak on a build-up of inventories and strong competitive price pressures.
MAS will therefore raise slightly the slope of the S$NEER policy band, from zero percent previously.
Notwithstanding some increases in shipping rates, global producer prices have only risen modestly thus far.
On the domestic front, the improving labour market should underpin a faster pace of wage growth in 2018 and 2019 compared to last year.
However, the pace of expansion is expected to moderate in the quarters ahead.
On the domestic front, labour market conditions remain firm and will support moderate wage increases, such that unit labour costs should continue to rise.
Growth in Europe and Japan has remained sluggish.
Resilient business investment in the US supported the pick-up in global electronics manufacturing and trade, with regional economies benefitting from this recovery.
Singapore’s economic growth is likely to ease in the next few quarters.
Imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation and car prices will account for slightly over half of CPI-All Items inflation in both years.
The for the global economy has not changed materially since the April review, with only modest growth expected on the back of resilient domestic demand in the G3 and the region.
This was in view of a fresh impulse to inflation arising from shocks to global commodity prices and supply chains in the wake of the Russia-Ukraine war.
Shocks to global food and energy prices, or stronger-than-expected demand for labour in the domestic economy, could bring about additional inflationary pressures.
According to MTI’s Advance Estimates, the Singapore economy expanded by 2.1% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in Q3, accelerating from the average of 0.4% in the first half of the year.
Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today indicated that the Singapore economy expanded by 2.0% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis in Q1 2021, moderating from the 3.8% growth in Q4 2020.
At this stage, our assessment is that the Singapore economy is likely to expand at a slower rate in 2008 than in the recent past, reflecting weaker global economic growth.
The contribution of the manufacturing sector to Singapore’s GDP growth has waned following several quarters of above-trend expansions.
The three-month S$ SIBOR was broadly unchanged at 0.4%.
are likely to average significantly below the US$93 recorded in 2014, while domestic food inflation should also be lower.
Following the rapid economic growth in H2 2000 and significant tightening in the labour market, the economy's output gap has narrowed and is estimated to have turned slightly positive by the end of last year.
However, economy-wide cost pressures should remain relatively restrained.
Excluding the impact of the increases in the GST rate, core and headline inflation are forecast at 1.5–2.5%.
However, demand-driven inflationary pressures will likely be restrained.
For the rest of 2009 and into 2010, CPI inflation will continue to be driven by external factors, especially higher oil and food commodity prices in world markets.
The policy band was re-centred downwards in April last year, and kept at that level during the last policy announcement in October.
CPI-All Items inflation will remain elevated in Q4 2012 and Q1 2013, reflecting significant contributions from imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation and car prices, before moderating gradually over the rest of 2013.
The resident unemployment rate is expected to rise and wage growth ease.
Nonetheless, financial markets have rebounded recently and underlying economic conditions remain supportive.
For 2005 as a whole, headline CPI inflation is expected to come in at 0-1%, before rising to 1-2% in 2006.
Reflecting these factors, as well as weaker imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation, CPI-All Items inflation fell to -0.3% y-o-y in January-February 2015 from 0% in Q4 2014.
The 2015 growth forecast for the Singapore economy remains at 2–4%.
GDP growth is likely to come in closer to its potential rate of 2–3% for the full year.
Consequently, unit labour costs will increase at a significantly slower pace compared to the preceding two years.
Meanwhile, the manufacturing sector remained lacklustre, reflecting the weakness in the electronics, precision engineering and transport engineering clusters.
While the growth momentum is expected to moderate, the economy should grow at close to its potential in 2007.
This was mainly due to the smaller increase in COE premiums relative to a year ago.
Private road transport costs may also remain firm in response to the tight COE supply.
This will dampen underlying wage pressures, even as commercial and retail rents have eased further.
However, it has since appreciated to around the mid-point of the policy band as investor sentiment picked up following improved macroeconomic data from the US and indications of some stabilisation in the Eurozone.
For the year as a whole, MAS Core Inflation is projected to average 0.5–1.5% in 2016, compared to around 0.5% in 2015.
MAS will therefore maintain the current policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.There will be no change in the slope or the width of the policy band.
The latest surge in energy and agricultural commodity prices will raise domestic inflation for electricity & gas, fuel and non-cooked food over the year.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Over the last three months, the S$NEER has broadly appreciated and is now close to the top of the policy band.
On a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis, GDP contracted by 5.8% in Q1 2005.
At the same time, domestic cost pressures are rising, given the high level of resource utilisation in the economy and tight labour market in particular, as well as the diminishing boost from the cyclical uplift in productivity seen earlier this year.
The domestic 3-month interbank rate eased from 2.81% in December 2000 to 2.25% in June 2001.
Both upside and downside risks to the remain.
The growth momentum of the global economy has moderated by more than expected at the turn of the year alongside sluggish trade.
The MAS will therefore re-centre the exchange rate policy band at the current level of the S$NEER, while maintaining a zero percent appreciation path.
The Singapore economy is likely to remain on its steady expansion path in 2018.
While downside risks to the remain, on balance, the upturn in the global economy and IT markets is likely to be sustained.
The economy had rebounded strongly from the Asian financial crisis, and growth momentum was likely to be sustained by a favourable external environment.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, Singapore’s GDP declined by 1.5% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis in Q3 2012, following marginal growth of 0.2% in the revised Q2 data.
FOR 2005 AND 2006 The Advance GDP Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry showed that the Singapore economy continued on a firm growth path in the third quarter of 2005, following broad-based expansion in H1.
Food inflation moderated while prices of most retail goods continued to fall.
Oil prices have fluctuated within a fairly narrow range over the first nine months of this year, and are expected to increase only slightly in 2018 compared to 2017.
This policy stance is consistent with a modest and gradual appreciation path of the S$NEER policy band that will ensure medium-term price stability.
Meanwhile, the domestic economy is likely to remain below potential till a decisive recovery is seen in Singapore’s export markets.
MAS will be shifting the schedule of its semi-annual cycle from January/July to April/October.
CPI-All Items inflation will remain elevated for some time.
The continued improvement in global demand should provide some support to the external-oriented sectors of the Singapore economy, such as manufacturing and trade-related services.
The strength and sustainability of the recovery in external demand- especially in the IT sector- is still uncertain, and the World Health Organisation has warned of the possibility of a second wave of SARS infections in the latter part of the year.
The S$ continued to appreciate against the US$ in September but it was outpaced by the Yen and the Euro, and as a result, the S$NEER eased back towards the centre of the policy band.
Growth in Asia will likely remain firm, supported in part by robust domestic demand.
The sequential turnaround in Q3 largely reflected a resumption in domestic economic activity as circuit breaker measures were eased and policy stimulus took effect.
The sequential rise in consumer prices during the first few months of this year can be largely traced to modest, one-off, supply-side cost increases, including the GST rate hike.
In our view, this policy will help to cap incipient inflationary pressures while remaining supportive of economic activity, as the economy comes off its cyclical high and GDP growth moderates to a more sustainable rate.
Growth will be supported by domestic-oriented activities such as construction, and some pickup in tourism and financial services.
Amidst the global downturn and continuing stresses in world financial markets, external and domestic inflationary pressures are dissipating.
Slowing external growth momentum will weigh on Singapore’s trade-related sectors in the second half of the year.
CPI & MAS Underlying Inflation Measures of Core Inflation The higher CPI inflation in 2000 largely reflected the oil price shock and hikes in several administrative charges.
A sharp escalation in geopolitical and trade conflicts could exert sizeable drags on global and domestic investment and trade.
These movements in the S$NEER largely reflected shifting market expectations of the path of tightening in the advanced economies, as well as a brief episode of risk-off sentiment associated with recent international financial stresses.
For 2018, core inflation should come in within the upper half of the 1–2% forecast range.
Foreign inflationary pressures are expected to be benign this year, especially with the softening in oil prices.
Barring fresh shocks to global supply, Singapore’s imported inflation, which is already negative, should fall further alongside lower commodity prices and the stronger S$NEER.
MAS Core Inflation is expected to step down more discernibly in Q4 this year and into 2025.
This reflected market expectations of prospective interest rate hikes in the US and of a strengthening of the US$ against the S$ at a time of general appreciation of the US$ against the major currencies.
With the positive output gap expected to narrow, inflationary pressures will be kept in check.
The surge in oil prices had resulted in petrol prices being raised on five occasions, and electricity tariffs on three occasions in 2000, while the prices of meat, water and tobacco rose because of administrative decisions Meat prices were affected by the compulsory installation of meat-chillers, which raised prices of meat processed locally.
continued to moderate to 3.0% y-o-y in Q2, from 3.3% in Q1.
This trend continued after the G7 communiqué on 20 September.
Notwithstanding the weak growth outturn in Q1, the level of economic activity should stay on a broad upward trajectory for the rest of the year.
The factors that drove global and regional inflation higher in late 2021 are likely to remain in play for a period.
Domestic cost pressures are moderating, as evidenced by the fall in rentals and more subdued wage increases.
A firmer recovery is likely to take hold only in H2 2003.
Overall inflation was 1.3% for 2000, up from 0% in the 1999, while the MAS underlying inflation, which excludes private road transport and accommodation costs from the headline CPI figure, came in at 1.5% compared to 0.5% the year before MAS underlying inflation was slightly higher than overall CPI inflation in 2000 due to the exclusion of accommodation costs, which have been on a decline throughout most of the year.. Other measures of core inflation, which exclude components that exhibit excessive price volatility from the CPI basket, also showed increases ranging from 0.4-0.9% in 2000.
In comparison, segments of the wholesale trade and transportation sectors were boosted by an upturn in oil-related activities in early Q3.
For the whole of 2016, it should come in within the lower half of the 0.5–1.5% forecast range, barring upside surprises to global oil prices.
Looking ahead, economic activity in the major industrial economies is likely to expand at a slower pace, following a fairly brisk recovery from the recession.
However, retail and services inflation came in lower than expected.
The 2009 GDP growth forecast was revised to -6% to -4% during the release of Advance Estimates for Q2 2009 GDP on 14 Jul 2009.
MAS will remain vigilant to developments in the external environment and their impact on the Singapore economy.
In 2019, external sources of inflation are likely to be benign, as global oil prices are expected to come in lower for the year as a whole than in 2018, while food prices should only pick up slightly on average.
The sustained appreciation of the policy band will continue to dampen imported inflation and curb domestic cost pressures, thus ensuring medium-term price stability.
These cannot be reliably predicted now, as the US economy is at a turning point.
The increase in tourist arrivals provided support to the retail and hospitality industries.
CPI-All Items inflation is projected to average between 3.0–4.0% in 2024.
The overall for the global economy has softened compared to the review in April.
The Singapore economy is projected to expand at a modest pace for the rest of 2015 and in 2016, with the uplift from the firmer US economy tempered by weaker growth prospects in the region.
However, global final demand should pick up later this year, as lower inflation sustains private consumption expenditure, and settings in the major economies turn more supportive.
Overall services growth was muted, as the weakness in global commodity demand weighed on re-export and trade financing activities.
The government’s decision to freeze all its fees and charges for a year will further restrain inflation.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to remain below its historical average over the next few quarters before rising gradually over the medium term.
Our forecast for CPI inflation for 2003 has thus been lowered to 0.5-1.0%, from 0.5-1.5% at the beginning of the year.
With a steady pick up in global IT demand through the year, the domestic electronics sector could pick up by the middle of 2002.
At the same time, non-labour costs such as retail rents should stay subdued.
In particular, output trends in the electronics industry suggest that the slowdown in the global IT sector will be shallower and shorter this time round compared to the downturn in 2001, reflecting improvements in inventory management.
Reflecting in part the catch-up to prior increases in US interest rates, the three-month domestic interbank rate rose from 2.38% at end-September 2005 to 3.44% as at end-March this year, pulling up mortgage and deposit rates as well.
A similar process will precede the July Statement, while the timings of the April and October editions remain unchanged, coinciding with the Ministry of Trade & Industry’s release of the .
On a year-on-year basis, the economy expanded by 7.7% in the third quarter, bringing growth in the first three quarters of the year to a strong 9.2% compared to the same period last year.
The forecasts for many regional economies have also been revised downwards following weak first quarter exports and GDP growth rates.
At the same time, the pass-through of business costs to consumer prices will be constrained by the subdued growth environment.
Barring a setback in global trade, growth in the Singapore economy should continue at a broadly steady pace in the quarters ahead.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes private road transport and accommodation costs, averaged 2.3% in July-August 2012, compared to a high of 3.1% in Q1 this year.
More recently, the S$NEER has strengthened.
The trade-weighted S$ has generally been appreciating over the past year in line with the policy stance, and is now within the upper-half of the policy band.
MAS will continue to monitor global and domestic economic developments, amid heightened uncertainty on both the inflation and growth fronts.
The resulting unit labour cost increases will be a key source of underlying inflation.
Since then, the S$NEER has depreciated in line with declining inflation and sharply weakening economic growth.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) At the time of the release of the Statement in April, the S$NEER had appreciated to the upper end of the policy band.
This policy stance was assessed to be appropriate in light of the modest for growth and inflation.
The strengthening in the global economy was led by the US, reflecting robustness in consumer spending and a reduced pace of inventory liquidation.
Against this backdrop, the Singapore economy is likely to settle at a more gradual pace of expansion.
However, there were partial offsets from other growing areas in the economy, including tourism-related activities and public infrastructure construction.
Although MAS Core Inflation is forecast at 1.5-2.5% for the year as a whole, it is expected to rise moderately in the latter half, reflecting persistent tightness in the labour market.
The tail risks in the key industrialised economies have receded, but global growth is likely to remain below trend in the near term.
However, it subsequently resumed a mild appreciation trajectory.
However, the performance in the rest of the manufacturing sector will remain patchy.
The underlying growth support for the Singapore economy remains intact, despite the weaker GDP growth outcome in Q1 2005.
Slower growth in Asia will restrain activity in a range of services industries in Singapore such as transport-hub and tourism.
After some initial strengthening, the S$ depreciated against the US$ through mid-November.
Overall inflationary pressures will remain elevated in the months ahead.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to be stable in the near term.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, Singapore’s GDP expanded by 1.2% in Q3 2014 on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised basis, following the 0.1% contraction in Q2.
CPI-All Items inflation is now projected to average 2.0–3.0% this year, down from the previous forecast of 2.5–3.5%, mainly reflecting lower-than-anticipated private transport inflation in recent months.
This reflected the strong investor interest in Asian markets, on the back of optimistic economic prospects in the region.
The MAS underlying inflation measure, which excludes accommodation and private road transport costs, will average around 2%.
Singapore’s manufacturing sector and export-oriented services industries should improve gradually over the course of the year.
Concomitantly, external and domestic inflationary pressures are likely to ease.
Looking ahead, domestic economic activity is likely to be sustained at a relatively high level, even as the growth momentum slows in the coming quarters.
This was underpinned by a turnaround in IT-related activities as electronics manufacturing and trade recovered from the supply disruptions late last year.
The S$NEER has now eased back towards the centre of the policy band.
In comparison, the domestic-oriented sectors should continue to provide some support to the economy, underpinned by sustained demand for healthcare and education services, as well as public infrastructure spending.
We therefore expect the Singapore economy to remain subdued in the near term, and to start picking up only in the second half of 2002.
The recovery in the global economy will depend on the epidemiological course of the pandemic and the efficacy of policy responses.
Based on the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry on 26 March, the Singapore economy contracted by 2.2% year-on-year in Q1 2020, following the 1.0% expansion in the preceding quarter.
While the global economy is expected to continue on its recovery path in 2022, it will do so at a more moderate pace than earlier projected.
In its July 2022 Statement, MAS re-centred the mid-point of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band up to the then-prevailing level of the S$NEER.
CPI-All Items inflation is now forecast to be 1–1.5% in 2014, given the recent weakness in car prices.
Lower imported costs and a slower pace of domestic cost increases should underpin the moderating trend in inflation.
While settings globally remained highly accommodative, MAS had assessed that a shift in its policy stance was necessary to ensure price stability in light of accumulating external and domestic cost pressures, even as the strength of the economic recovery remained uncertain.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER has appreciated in the upper half of the policy band since October 2018.
In April 2015, MAS maintained the modest and gradual appreciation path of the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band, with no change to its slope, width and the level at which it was centred.
Conditions in the IT industry are likely to remain sluggish till later in the year, although the non-electronics clusters are expected to maintain healthy growth.
Global capital expenditure has begun to turn up amid some strengthening in business sentiment, while improving labour market conditions should sustain final demand in the developed economies.
These developments have underpinned a marked strengthening in business and consumer confidence, which has started to feed through to a more rapid expansion in production and spending.
The S$NEER has therefore weakened over the period, from the top of the policy band at the start of the year to the lower half of the band at end June.
Singapore's three-month S$ interbank rate eased from 0.81% at end-2002 to 0.75% at end-Mar and 0.63% at end-Jun, in line with the decline in global interest rates and slack liquidity conditions in the domestic money market.
The level of output in the economy will further converge to its underlying potential, while the labour market remains at full employment, in part reflecting supply-side constraints.
CPI-All Items inflation fell to 0.5% from 0.8% over the same period.
The for the G3 is underpinned by the gradual revival in labour and housing markets in the US, expansionary macroeconomic policies in Japan, and improvements in business sentiment in the Eurozone.
GDP growth is expected to be sustained in 2007, although at a slower rate compared to 2006.
In the April 2022 Statement, MAS re-centred upwards the S$NEER policy band and further increased its rate of appreciation.
Against this backdrop, Singapore’s GDP growth is expected to come in slightly below the mid-point of the 1.5–3.5% forecast range in 2019.
In China, growth was underpinned by strong exports, even as private consumption slowed.
This policy stance, which has been in place since January 2015, was assessed to be appropriate in view of the moderate growth and inflation prospects.
Should economic conditions evolve as expected, MAS Core Inflation will rise gradually over the course of this year.
Meanwhile, accommodation costs are expected to fall, in part due to the decline in foreign employment.
In April 2012, MAS increased the slope of the S$NEER policy band slightly.
The unemployment rate should stay below its historical average, alongside slowing labour force growth.
This stable stance also reflects the primary role of fiscal policy in mitigating the economic impact of COVID-19.
The growth trajectory of the Singapore economy has evolved largely according to our expectations.
The Singapore economy has rebounded from the downturn and is expected to continue on its firm recovery path given the more favourable global economic .
MAS Core Inflation is projected to slow to an average of 2.5–3.5% for the year as a whole.
The global electronics sector remains in a prolonged adjustment phase, characterised by inventory adjustment and weak demand, though some tentative positive signs have emerged in recent weeks.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to remain elevated in the earlier part of the year but should stay on its broadly moderating path and step down in Q4, before falling further into 2025.
Travel-related services inflation, which is largely determined by conditions in tourism markets abroad, was stronger as hotel room rates and package tour prices saw steep increases.
MAS will maintain its current policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band which has been adopted since April 2004.
Private transport and accommodation costs have risen by more than expected in the first two months of the year, reflecting in part the effects of higher petrol prices and firm demand for cars and rental accommodation.
The broad-based decline in the Japanese yen led to upward pressure on the S$NEER, although a strengthening in the US dollar, due to speculation of an early exit from quantitative easing in the US and renewed uncertainty over the European debt crisis, resulted in bouts of domestic currency weakness.
There was no change to the width of the policy band or the level at which it was centred.
Unemployment remains elevated and credit growth subdued.
This policy stance, which has been in place since April 2004, has contributed to the low and stable inflation environment amidst the robust economic growth of the past few years.
As existing vaccines have been effective in limiting severe illness from the dominant COVID-19 variant, and as inoculation rates rise globally, consumption activity should pick up while supply constraints ease.
Services such as healthcare and education will continue to see moderate price increases.
While there remains considerable uncertainty over the evolving fiscal situation in the US and Eurozone, recent central bank policy initiatives worldwide have reduced the risk of a severe global recession.
Likewise, activity in Singapore’s major trading partners saw a significant recovery in Q3 2020 as economies reopened.
As a result, the economy’s output gap turned positive in Q1 2010.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Following the Statement in April, the S$NEER appreciated amid a broad-based retraction in US$ strength.
MAS Core Inflation is expected to average around 2.5% in 2012 and 2-3% next year.
At the same time, CPI-All Items inflation and MAS Core Inflation are expected to pick up in the coming months after easing recently.
But for the year as a whole, CPI-All Items inflation should average around 5%, down from 6.1% the year before.
Since October 2021, MAS has been progressively tightening as the economic recovery consolidated and inflationary pressures picked up.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Since October 2017, the S$NEER has appreciated in the upper half of the policy band, apart from a brief period of decline in early 2018.
The pace of domestic labour cost increases may reaccelerate if aggregate demand turns out stronger than expected, causing renewed inflationary pressures.
Wage pressures are thus unlikely to accelerate in the near term, while the gradual improvement in underlying productivity growth continues.
Against this less favourable environment, Singapore’s GDP growth forecast for 2008 has been revised from 4-5% to around 3%.
However, a sharper-than-expected downturn in the advanced economies could induce a general easing of inflationary pressures.
Meanwhile, the disinflationary effects of lower global oil prices, Budget measures and SG50 price promotions will begin to fade from the end of this year.
The resident unemployment rate rose to 4.5% in August and is likely to remain elevated.
Excluding the impact of the GST increases, underlying inflation is estimated to have been unchanged in Jan–Feb from Q4 last year.
For the whole of 2009, the CPI inflation forecast is unchanged at -1% to 0%.
Growth picked up on the back of an improvement in the manufacturing sector, while activity in some of the domestic-oriented sectors eased.
The financial and business services sectors should continue to benefit from the broader pickup in income growth, including in the region.
Nevertheless, the risk of a sharp global downturn, precipitated by financial vulnerabilities, has receded compared to earlier in the year.
This policy stance was appropriate as core inflation was projected to rise only gradually from subdued levels and keep below its historical average.
Interest rates in the retail market have also stayed low.
Shocks to global food and energy prices or domestic labour costs could bring about additional inflationary pressures.
Nonetheless, certain industries, such as transport & storage, information & communications, and bank intermediation, continued to hold up, providing some support to GDP growth.
MAS intervened significantly in Q4 2004 and into early 2005 to moderate excessive upward pressure on the S$.
The next statement will be released in late January 2024.
At the beginning of 2003, MAS announced that it would maintain the neutral policy stance of a zero percent appreciation for the trade-weighted Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy path, with no change in the level at which the policy band is centred, or in the width of the band.
Going forward, the for the Singapore economy has improved.
This reflected the broad-based weakness in the US$ and investor interest in higher-growth economies.
Despite some pickup in labour costs, inflationary pressures are mild and should remain contained.
Upward pressures on MAS Core Inflation are expected to persist over the course of this year and beyond, underpinned by an improving labour market.
Amid moderate imported inflation and easing domestic cost pressures, the seasonally adjusted q-o-q rate of core inflation has declined to an annualised rate of 2.1% in Q2.
In particular, persistent tightness in the labour market will support slightly stronger wage increases in 2013, which will continue to be passed through to consumer prices.
Excluding the effects of the GST increase, core inflation is projected to average 2.5–3.5%, and headline inflation 4.5–5.5%.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, GDP contracted by a further 19.7% q-o-q SAAR in Q1 2009, with the decline accentuated by a reduction in pharmaceutical output.
As core inflation is expected to stay low this year, MAS assesses that an accommodative policy stance remains appropriate.
Economic activity slowed much more in the first half of 2001 than was expected.
The manufacturing sector turned around, reflecting a pickup in the electronics and precision engineering industries.
GDP growth in the Singapore economy has eased, bringing the level of output closer to its underlying potential.
Most goods and services recorded lower inflation which more than offset the rise in water prices.
For instance, the costs of accommodation and domestic-oriented services accounted for more than half of CPI inflation on a sequential basis in July-August.
At the same time, CPI inflation will be contained in 2006 and 2007 under the current policy stance.
Against these developments, the Singapore economy will experience modest growth of 1-3% in 2012.
Global oil and food prices are likely to remain elevated over the medium term, while domestic cost pressures will persist due to short-term capacity constraints in certain segments of the economy.
This reflected a number of factors, including the broad-based weakness of the US$, a resurgence of capital inflows into the region, as well as a relatively buoyant Singapore economy.
The Singapore economy has performed slightly better than envisaged since the April 2017 policy review, while inflation has kept well within expectations.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Since the last policy review, the S$NEER has fluctuated in the upper half of the policy band.
In October 2008, MAS shifted its policy stance to a zero percent appreciation of the S$NEER policy band.
Car prices and imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation will continue to dampen inflationary pressures, amid the expected increase in the supply of COEs and newly-completed housing units.
Growth in the Singapore economy has slowed over the first three quarters of the year.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) The S$NEER had fallen sharply in Q1 2020.
For the rest of 2022, the confluence of demand and supply factors that drove the price increases in July–August is expected to persist.
This policy stance, which has been in place since April 2004, was assessed to be appropriate for containing any rise in inflationary pressures amidst higher global inflation and domestic costs.
The construction sector also remained on a recovery path, and grew for the third consecutive quarter in Q3.
Growth in the Singapore economy is expected to be slower this year after the rapid pace in 2006, reflecting the moderation in the global economy and IT industry.
The rise in inflation next year reflects an anticipated increase in oil-related price pressures and a modest pick up in domestic costs.
With the S$NEER currently close to the mid-point of the policy band, there is scope for exchange rate flexibility in line with developments in external conditions in the period ahead.
With the labour market remaining tight and higher global inflation passing through to domestic costs, core inflation will see a broad-based step up in 2022 and risks remaining elevated over the medium term.
It is expected to pick up modestly in 2020, although this projection is subject to considerable uncertainty in the external environment.
The Singapore economy grew by 9.9% in 2000, driven by robust demand for exports as well as strengthening domestic demand.
MAS Core Inflation will rise only gradually next year.
In addition, sentiments for the S$ were boosted by the relatively smooth political succession in Indonesia.
MAS Core Inflation, which excludes the costs of private road transport and accommodation, remained subdued at 0.3% y-o-y in July-August 2015, following the 0.2% registered in Q2.
MAS will continue to closely monitor the impact of external developments and domestic restructuring on the growth and inflation prospects for Singapore.
It experienced some volatility, mainly reflecting market reactions to the prospective tapering of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve.
FOR 2008 AND 2009 The Singapore economy has weakened over the course of 2008, alongside an escalation in the turmoil in financial markets and a more severe deceleration in global economic activity.
Meanwhile, domestic cost pressures such as rentals and wages have come down significantly in response to the economic downturn.
Although the trade-weighted S$ has weakened since then, it has remained within the policy band.
With persistently low interest rates worldwide, the domestic three-month interbank rate has remained generally stable at 0.38% since December 2011.
S$ Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (S$NEER) Apart from brief periods of decline, the S$NEER has appreciated in the upper half of the policy band since April 2018.
The slowdown was generally broad based as external shocks were transmitted to the domestic economy via both the financial and trade channels.
MAS will continue to closely monitor economic developments.
GDP growth this year should come in at the upper half of the official forecast range of 6.5-7.5%.
These developments should also provide a modest lift to the global IT industry, following a contraction in 2012.
This below-trend pace of growth will cause the positive output gap at end-2022 to turn slightly negative this year.
MAS Core Inflation is likely to rise gradually over the course of 2018 and into 2019.
In the region, economies that are lifting mobility and travel restrictions will spur a short-term recovery in demand and easing of supply chain frictions.
In recent weeks, as economic prospects have declined, the trade-weighted nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) has gradually weakened, and is now in the lower half of the policy band.
While Singapore’s growth momentum was expected to slow, MAS had assessed that it was prudent to tighten further and lean against price pressures becoming more persistent.
Nevertheless, it will take time for the expansion to gather momentum and become more broad-based, before a significant improvement in the labour market can be seen.
The Singapore economy should expand at a moderate pace in the quarters ahead.
China and India are likely to continue growing apace, lending support to the regional economies.
The strong upward pressures on the S$ reflected broad-based US$ weakness amidst renewed concerns over the current account deficit in the US.
Headline and Core CPI Inflation The ongoing slowdown in domestic economic activity will reduce tightness in the labour market and alleviate price pressures.
In conjunction with a gradual domestic reopening, the Singapore economy should also continue on its recovery path and aggregate output should return to potential in 2022.
Energy prices have risen further while imported food inflation remains elevated due to regional supply disruptions.
As indicated in the October 2016 MPS, a neutral policy stance is appropriate for an extended period and should ensure medium-term price stability.
The escalation in global oil, food and other commodity prices has contributed, directly and indirectly, to the increase in consumer prices.
At the beginning of 2002, MAS announced that it would maintain a zero per cent appreciation path for the exchange rate policy band, centred on the level of the trade-weighted Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) prevailing at that time.
The retail and real estate segments, however, are likely to soften as economic sentiment weakens.
In October 2015, MAS kept the Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$NEER) policy band on a modest and gradual appreciation path, but reduced its rate of appreciation slightly.
The Singapore economy is expected to strengthen over the rest of 2024, with the slightly negative output gap closing by year-end.
Real GDP growth is expected to slow sharply to 0.5-1.5% this year.
MAS had indicated in the October 2016 MPS that the neutral policy stance would be appropriate for an extended period.
Since late October, the S$NEER has strengthened again, reflecting in part the generalised weakening of the US$.
Meanwhile, CPI-All Items inflation fell to 3.1% y-o-y over Jan–Feb, from 4.0% in the preceding quarter, underpinned by the further reduction in private transport and accommodation inflation.
The slope will be increased slightly, and there will be no change to the level at which the band is centred.
In April this year, MAS reaffirmed the policy of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy band which has been in place since April 2004.
Similarly, all core inflation measures have moderated, with the MAS underlying inflation falling below 1% in October.
Despite the pullback in the first quarter, the underlying momentum in the economy remains intact, with output of electronics and its related services segments still at healthy levels.
In comparison, the domestic-oriented sectors should expand at a moderate pace, underpinned by sustained demand for healthcare and education services, as well as public infrastructure spending.
Against this backdrop, the level of economic activity in Singapore is projected to remain high across a broad range of industries although growth could further ease in the near term.
According to the Advance Estimates released by the Ministry of Trade and Industry today, the Singapore economy grew by 6.3% on a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted annualised basis in Q3 2017, following the 2.4% recorded in Q2.
The expansions this year and next will be driven by productivity gains.
These developments have presented new uncertainties for the Singapore economy.
The policy has been appropriate in creating conditions conducive for growth while keeping inflationary pressures in check.