The members of the Copom analyzed the recent performance and the prospects for the Brazilian economy and for the international economy, under the monetary policy framework, which is designed to comply with the inflation targets established by the government.
In short, available information suggests some persistence of inflation, which partially reflects the dynamics of prices in the services sector and, in the short run, the realignment process of regulated prices.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The result was negative in the four use categories and in 23 out of the 26 surveyed activities.
The figure represents increases of 0.2 p.p. month-onmonth and of 1.5 p.p. year-over-year.
In short, the set of available data confirm a distension process in the labor market.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal, in the horizon relevant for monetary policy, growth prospects in line with the trend in important advanced and emerging economies.
Particularly about Europe, despite recent monetary policy actions, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
Regarding the monetary policy, in general, accommodative stances prevail in advanced and emerging economies.
The inflation rates remain at low levels in the advanced economies; and, in the emerging ones, they stand at relatively high levels.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some global demand and supply components.
The structural primary surplus is considered as the fiscal indicator.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
As a consequence, high inflation rates reduce the potential of economic growth, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex, with possible episodes of higher volatility.
However, for the Committee, a more intense global activity trend prevails throughout the monetary policy relevant horizon.
In this respect, the prospects indicate activity recovery in some advanced economies and acceleration in the pace of growth in others, although, in general, the room to use monetary policy in these economies remains limited and a fiscal restraint scenario prevails.
Important emerging economies experience a transition period, and therefore, of moderation in the activity pace, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
Still regarding international financial markets, the Copom highlights evidence of volatility sources in the currency and fixed income markets and moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices.
Regarding oil, the Committee highlights that, regardless of the behavior of the domestic prices of gasoline, the evolution of international prices tends to be transmitted to the domestic economy both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, and through inflation expectations.
The Copom reaffirms that the available indicators regarding domestic absorption and GDP growth rates have converged and that the domestic activity expansion pace this year will be lower than the potential.
In particular, the investment has retreated, mainly influenced by the occurrence of non-economic events, and private consumption shows moderation signals.
However, for the Committee, after a necessary period of adjustments, the activity expansion pace tends to intensify, as companies and households confidence strengthen.
Moreover, the Committee evaluates that, in the medium term, important changes should take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
The consumption tends to grow at a moderate pace and the investments tend to gain momentum.
These changes, together with other currently underway, anticipate a composition for aggregate demand growth more favorable to potential growth in the mediumterm.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of higher global growth, combined with the depreciation of the BRL, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economy growth.
Regarding the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in longer horizons, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture have emerged.
The services sector, on its turn, tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force and with the program of public services concession - will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
The Committee considers that, during the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, the balance of the public sector tends to shift to the neutral zone, and does not rule out the hypothesis of migration to the fiscal restraint area.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered in the inflation projections will contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It also highlights that this primary surpluses path will strengthen the perception of sustainability of the public sector balance.
Thus, it contributes to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, stimulating private investment in the medium and long run.
Specifically regarding inflation control, the Committee highlights that the literature and the best international practices recommend a consistent and sustainable fiscal policy, in order to allow monetary policy actions to be fully transmitted to prices.
The Copom highlights that the main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion, which is already being observed.
Its important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong expansion, the consumer credit has moderated, so that, over the last quarters, it was possible to observe, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks, and, on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, as illustrated by the recently implemented actions, the Committee considers as necessary the initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
Regarding the factors market, as anticipated by previous Minutes, the Copom highlights that the narrow idleness margin in the labor market has eased, with some data confirming the start of a process of distension in this market.
However, the Copom notices that it is necessary to broaden the horizon of observations, and that a significant risk still prevails related, particularly, to the possibility of concession of wage increases incompatible with productivity growth, with negative impacts over inflation.
In spite of not so significant adjustments for the minimum wage, and the occurrence of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
For the Copom, the fact that inflation currently stands at high levels reflects, in large part, the occurrence of two important relative prices adjustment processes underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices relative to market prices.
In this context, and as anticipated in previous Minutes, due to these price adjustments inflation rises in the short term and tend to remain high in 2015, requiring determination and perseverance to prevent its transmission to longer horizons.
The Copom evaluates that the aggregate demand tends to be moderate in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to stabilize, due to factors such as employment, income and credit; on the other hand, the real state financing, the concession of public services and the expansion of agricultural income, among other factors, tend to benefit investments.
On its turn, exports tend to be benefited by the scenario of higher growth of major trading partners and by the depreciation of the real.
For the Committee, however, the progress made in the fight against inflation - like benign signals stemming from the medium and long term expectations indicators has not been sufficient yet.
In this context, the Copom reaffirms that the monetary policy should remain vigilant.
