The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
In short, the set of available data confirm a process of distension in the labor market.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal, in the horizon relevant for monetary policy, growth prospects in line with the trend in important advanced and emerging economies.
For most advanced economies, the signs are of moderate growth.
Particularly about Europe, despite recent monetary policy actions, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements restraining investments and growth.
In the United States, the view of sustainability of the economic recovery consolidates.
In the emerging economies, the activity pace has been revised downwards, with highlight for the loss of strenght in China.
Regarding the monetary policy, in general, accommodative stances prevail in advanced and emerging economies, despite the ongoing advances in the debate on the normalization of monetary conditions.
The inflation rates remain at low levels in the advanced economies; and, in the emerging ones, they stand at relatively high levels.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some global demand and supply components.
The structural primary surplus is considered as the fiscal indicator.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over the households confidence and consumption.
As a consequence, high inflation rates reduce the potential of economic growth, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect, in a more long-lasting manner, the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
The Committee considers that the external environment remains complex, with episodes of higher volatility affecting important emerging economies, despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets.
For the Committee, the trend for global activity shows more moderation throughout the monetary policy relevant horizon.
The prospects continue to indicate activity recovery in some advanced economies and acceleration in the pace of growth in others, although, in general, the room to use monetary policy in these economies remains limited and a fiscal restraint scenario prevails.
Important emerging economies experience a transition period and, therefore, of more moderation in the activity pace, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
Still regarding international financial markets, the Copom highlights evidence of new sources of volatility in the currency and fixed income markets, as well as moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices.
Regarding oil, the Committee highlights that, regardless of the behavior of the domestic prices of gasoline, the evolution of international prices tends to be transmitted to the domestic economy both through productive chains, such as the petrochemical, and through inflation expectations.
The Copom reaffirms that, in accordance to the macroeconomic adjustment process underway, the available indicators show that the domestic absorption and GDP growth rates have continued to adjust and confirm that the domestic activity expansion pace this year will be lower than the potential.
This process is being intensified by the uncertainties arising from the effect of non-economic events.
In particular, investment has retreated, mainly influenced by the occurrence of these events, and private consumption also shows contraction signals, in line with recent data regarding credit, employment and income.
However, for the Committee, after a necessary period of adjustments, which has been more intense and may be longer than the anticipated, the activity expansion pace tends to intensify, as companies and households confidence strengthen.
Moreover, the Committee evaluates that, in the medium term, important changes should take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
Consumption tends to grow at a moderate pace and investments tend to gain momentum.
These changes, coupled with other ones currently underway, anticipate a composition for aggregate demand growth in the medium term more favorable to potential growth.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of higher global growth, combined with the depreciation of the BRL, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economic growth.
Regarding the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in longer horizons, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry, agriculture and livestock have emerged.
The services sector, on its turn, tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force and with the program of public services concession - will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
However, the speed of materialization of these changes and of the gains resulting from them depends fundamentally on a path of primary surpluses that strengthens the perception of the public sector balance sustainability, in addition to reducing uncertainties surrounding the domestic environment.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
Relative to the structural fiscal result and depending on the economic cycle, the Committee considers that, during the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, the balance of the public sector tends to shift to the neutral zone, and does not rule out the hypothesis of migration to the fiscal restraint area, even if more slowly and with lower intensity than previously antecipated.
However, the Committee notes that the lack of definition, the significant changes in the trajectory of primary surpluses, as well as in its composition, impact the working hypotheses considered for inflation projections and contribute to create a negative perception regarding of the macroeconomic environment.
Regarding inflation control, the Committee highlights that the literature and the best international practices recommend a consistent and sustainable fiscal policy framework, in order to allow monetary policy actions to be fully transmitted to prices.
The Copom highlights that the main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion, which had already been observed and tends to persist.
Regarding this issue, it is important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong expansion, consumer credit has moderated, so that, over the last quarters, there was, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks, and, on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, as illustrated by actions that were implemented, the Committee considers as opportune the initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
In the factors market, as anticipated by previous Minutes, the Copom observes that the idleness margin in the labor market has increased at a faster pace, with data confirming the acceleration in the process of distension in this market.
However, a significant risk still prevails related, particularly, to the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth, with negative impacts over inflation.
In spite of the occurrence of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimates for the labor productivity, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
For the Copom, the fact that inflation stands at high levels reflects, in large part, the occurrence of two important relative prices adjustment processes underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices relative to market prices.
The Committee also considers that, over 2015, these relative prices ajustments in the economy, among other factors, have 5 made the balance of risks to inflation unfavorable.
In this context, as anticipated in previous Minutes, these price adjustments cause inflation to rise in the short term and to tend to remain high in 2015, requiring determination and perseverance to prevent its transmission to longer horizons.
While recognizing that these relative prices adjustments have direct impacts over inflation, the Committee reaffirms its view that the monetary policy can, should and is containing the second order effects stemming from them.
The Committee understands that the maintainence of this basic interest rate at this level, for a sufficiently long period, is necessary for the convergence of inflation to the target in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
The Copom emphasizes that monetary policy will remain vigilant to achieve this goal.
The Copom reaffirms that the aggregate demand will continue to be moderate in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to be influenced by factors such as employment, income and credit; on the other hand, the concession of public services and the expansion of agricultural income, among other factors, tend to benefit investments.
On its turn, the net exports show better results, either by increasing exports, benefited by the scenario of higher growth of major trading partners and the depreciation of the BRL, or by the ongoing import substitution process.
The Committee emphasizes that there are uncertainties associated with the balance of risks, mainly on the speed of the recovery process of fiscal results and its composition, and that the relative price realignment process has been slower and more intense than the previously anticipated.
