The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The industrial sector maintained the improvement in its productive pace, expressed not only by the second consecutive positive result in the comparison with the immediate previous month, but also by the widespread profile of positive rates, since 19 out of the 27 surveyed activities expanded their production in February.
The PMI of the industrial sector indicates little expansion in February, with increase in the amount of new orders.
In short, the available data indicate narrow idleness margin in the labor market, although there are some signs of moderation at the margin.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal growth prospects in line with advanced and emerging economies.
Specifically about Europe, despite recent improvements, high unemployment rates coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties still constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
In the emerging economies, however, some deceleration in the growth pace is observed.
Regarding the monetary policy, the Federal Reserve continued the process of gradual reduction of the assets purchase program; however, in general, accommodative stances prevail in the advanced economies.
In the emerging economies, the monetary policy is less expansionist, and in some cases, it is contractionist.
Inflation remains at moderate or low levels in the US, in the Euro Zone and in Japan.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary 4 authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
For the Committee, based on positive data recently released, the prospects for more intense global activity throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy have remained.
In fact, there are improvements in advanced economies, including countries from the Euro Area, although, in general, the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights that, despite recently observed localized pressures, the prospects indicate moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as that, in the currency markets, there is evidence of tension and volatility.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic activity expansion pace tends to remain relatively stable this year, compared to 2013, as well that recent information indicate, in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, changes in the composition of aggregate supply an demand.
In this context, the consumption tends to continue growing, albeit at a more moderate pace than the observed over the recent years; and investments would gain momentum.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of greater global growth, combined with the depreciation of the real, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economy growth.
Focusing on the supply side, the Committee evaluates that more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture are emerging and that, considering the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, the services sector tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
It is plausible to claim that these developments - coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force - will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Committee also highlights that the speed of materialization of the aforementioned changes and of their resulting gains depends on the strengthening of companies and households confidence.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables and the arising of the conditions so that, in the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered in the inflation projections, on the one hand, would contribute to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates; on the other hand, it would contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It should also be emphasized that the generation of primary surpluses at levels close to the average generated over the recent years would contribute to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, which would stimulate private investment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
Regarding the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Although the projected adjustment for the minimum wage this year is not as significant as in the previous years, and considering the occurrence over the recent quarters of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Committee considers that the exchange rate depreciation and volatility observed in the recent semesters enable a natural and expected correction in relative prices.
For the Committee, the movements in the local currency markets, to some extent, reflect prospects for the transition of the international financial markets towards normality, among other dimensions, in terms of liquidity and interest rates.
It is also important to highlight that, for the Committee, the aforementioned exchange rate depreciation, despite the recently observed accomodation, constitutes a source of inflationary pressure in shorter periods.
The localized pressures that manifest, especially, in the fresh food segment should be added, although, in principle, they stem from a temporary shock that tends to revert in the upcoming months.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for inflation to still show resistance, which, by the way, has been slightly above the level that was anticipated.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are also included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, in the Committees view, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it be reverted.
In this context, the Copom considers that it is appropriate to adjust the monetary conditions.
The Copom evaluates that the aggregate demand tends to be relatively robust.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to continue expanding at a moderate pace, due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion; on the other hand, relatively favorable financial conditions, concession of public services, broadening of oil exploration areas, among other factors, suggest expansion of investments.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom, considering the Brazilian experience under the inflation target regime, infers that, in general, the trajectories of important economic indicators during the current adjustment cycle of the Selic rate, as well as the outlook for these trajectories in the upcoming quarters, come in line with what one would anticipate.
Thus, the available information suggest that the monetary impulses introduced in the economy since April 2013 have usually propagated through the main transmission channels and that tend to continue in the upcoming quarters.
In this sense, as the effects of monetary policy actions on inflation are cumulative and manifest themselves with lags, the Committee understands that a significant part of the response of prices to the current monetary tightening cycle will still materialize.
Moreover, it is plausible to claim that, in the presence of relatively modest confidence levels, the effects of monetary policy actions tend to be intensified.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation levels, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
