The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
It bears highlighting that the production grew in 16 out of the 27 surveyed activities, according to the same comparison basis.
The PMI of the industrial sector 2 indicates expansion in December.
In short, the available data indicate narrow idleness margin in the labor market, although there are some signs of moderation at the margin.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
In the global economy, prospects point to more intense activity pace in important advanced economies.
In Europe, despite recent improvements, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
Regarding monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has initiated process of gradual reduction of the assets purchase program; however, in general, accommodative stances prevail in the advanced economies.
Likewise, in the emerging economies, the monetary policy is 3 predominantly expansionist.
Inflation remains at moderate or low levels in the US, in the Euro Zone and in Japan.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
For 2015, the inflation forecast stands above the target in both scenarios.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also 4 understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
For the Committee, supported on positive data recently released, the prospects for more intense global activity throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy have remained.
Indeed, there are improvements in advanced economies, including countries from the Euro Area, although, in general, the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights evidences of accommodation of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as of some tension and volatility episodes in the currencies markets.
The Copom evaluates that the main scenario encompasses relatively stable domestic activity expansion pace in this year, compared to 2013, and that recent information indicate, in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy, changes in the composition of aggregate supply an demand.
For the Committee, however, the outlook that has been taking shape is that consumption would tend to keep growing, but at a more moderate pace than the observed over the recent years, and investments would gain momentum.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of greater global growth, combined with the depreciation of the real, contributes to make this component more favorable to the growth of the Brazilian economy.
Focusing on the supply side, the Committee evaluates that more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture are emerging and, considering the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the services sector tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
It is plausible to claim that these developments - coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force - will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Committee also notes that the speed of materialization of the aforementioned changes and of their expected gains depends on the strengthening of companies and households confidence.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables and the creation of conditions so that, in the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered for the inflation projections, on the one hand, would contribute to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates; on the other hand, it would contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It should also be emphasized that the generation of primary surpluses at levels close to the average generated over the recent years would help to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, which would stimulate private investment in the medium and long term.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
Regarding the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Although the projected adjustment for the minimum wage this year is not as significant as in the previous years, and considering the occurrence over the recent quarters of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Committee considers that the exchange rate depreciation and volatility observed in the recent quarters enable a natural and expected correction in relative prices.
For the Committee, these movements in the local currency market, to some extent, reflect prospects for the transition of international financial markets towards normality, among other dimensions, in terms of liquidity and interest rates.
It is also important to highlight that, for the Committee, the aforementioned exchange rate depreciation is a source of inflationary pressure in shorter periods.
However, the secondary effects stemming from it, and that would tend to materialize over longer periods, can and should be limited by appropriate monetary policy handling.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for inflation to still show resistance, which, by the way, has been slightly above the level which was previously anticipated.
In this context, the formal and informal indexation mechanisms and the economic agents perception regarding the inflation dynamics are also included.
Considering the damage that the persistence of this process would cause to the decision-making process on consumption and investment, in the Committees view, it is necessary that, with the due promptness, it is reverted.
In this context, the Copom considers that it is appropriate to continue the ongoing adjustment pace of the monetary conditions.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic demand tends to be relatively robust.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to continue expanding, due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion; on the other hand, favorable financial conditions, concession of public services, expansion of oil exploration areas, among others, create good prospects for investments.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, in which it is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates subtract the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain especially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation rates, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
At the same time, the Committee considers that the transmission of the effects of monetary policy actions over inflation occurs with lags.
The ICS, carried out by the FGV, considering seasonally adjusted data, reached 118.9 points in December.
The overall average tenure on credit operations reached 94.8 months in November, representing a decrease of 0.8 months, month-on-month, and an increase of 8.1 months, year-over-year.
The average tenure related to individuals reached 137.8 months, increasing 1.6 month, month-on-month, and 17 months, year-over-year.
In the corporate segment, the average tenure reached 61 months, decreasing 2.7 months, month-on-month, and increasing 0.3 month, year-over-year.
The residential properties prices continue increasing, which, combined with the high prices of the stocks, has resulted in an increase in household wealth.
The economic sentiment index increased for the eighth consecutive month, and the composite PMI increased to 52.1 in December, averaging 51.9 in the last quarter of 2013, up from 51.4 in the previous quarter.
Regarding Japan, exports continue to grow, benefited by the growth of global economic activity and by the yen devaluation, which has favored corporative profits and businessmen investments expansion.
In December, the manufacturing PMI grew to 55.2, the highest value since July 2006, when it had recorded 55.In China, economic activity remains sound, with exports growing in a steady way, boosted by the high in the sales destined the to Euro Zone.
The annual 10-year yield for US Treasuries increased in the period between Copom meetings, having recorded an upward trajectory through the end of 2013, and a downward one since then.
US dollar valued against the currencies of South Africa, Canada, Japan, Thailand and Turkey, but fell against the euro and New Zealand dollar.
In the international commodities market, the agricultural ones presented distinct trajectory, with highlights for the increases in the prices of coffee, cotton, corn and beef, and retreats in the prices of wheat and sugar.
Metal commodities prices grew, except for iron ore and tin.
Among the energetic commodities, it bears highlighting the decrease in the price of Brent oil barrel, reflecting the Libya resumption in production.
Monetary authorities of Thailand, Hungary, Sweden and Romania increased the expansionary stance of their policies, reducing their respective basic rates.
The main factors driving the increase in the rates were the release of inflation indices above the expected, the dollar appreciation movement, the concerns with the fiscal policy conduction and, in the external outlook, the decision of the Fed of begging in January the reduction of the monetary stimulus.
The rates for the maturities of one and two years decreased by 0.09 p.p. and 0.08 p.p. respectively, while the rate for the maturity of three years increased 0.08 p.p.
The BCB also carried out leveling operations, at the end of the day, on 33 occasions, as a borrower.
