The members of the Copom analyzed the recent performance and the prospects for the Brazilian economy and for the international economy, under the monetary policy framework, which is designed to comply with the inflation targets established by the government.
In short, available information suggests some persistence of inflation, which partially reflects the dynamics of prices in the services sector.
The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The result was negative in the four economic categories and in 23 out of the 26 surveyed activities, according to the same comparison basis.
In short, the set of available data indicates narrow idleness margin in the labor market, although some data point to an accommodation process.
The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal growth prospects in line with the trend in important advanced and emerging economies.
Particularly about Europe, despite recent improvements, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties, constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
Regarding the monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has confirmed the end of the assets purchase program and, in general, accommodative stances prevail in advanced and emerging economies.
The Bank of Japan expanded its program of monetary stimulus and signaled the possibility of new extensions.
The inflation rates remain at low levels in the advanced economies; and, in the emerging ones, they stand at relatively high levels.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some global demand and supply components.
The structural primary surplus is considered as the fiscal indicator.
Therefore, in a given period, the fiscal impulse corresponds to the variation of the structural surplus in comparison to the observed in the previous period.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
As a consequence, high inflation rates reduce the potential of economic growth, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy 4 actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
For the Committee, despite recently released data have been less positive than anticipated, the prospects for more intense global activity throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy have remained.
There are improvements in advanced economies, with recovery of activity in some countries and acceleration in the pace of growth in others, although, in general, the room to use monetary policy in these economies remains limited and a fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
On the other hand, in important emerging economies, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
The Committee highlights the evidences of tension and volatility focuses in the currencies markets, as well as the prospects of moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices in the international markets.
The Copom considers that the expansion rates of domestic absorption and GDP have converged and that the domestic activity expansion pace will be less intense this year, compared to However, according to the Committees view, the activity tends to enter in a recovery trend in the second semester of next year.
Moreover, the Committee evaluates that, in the medium term, important changes should take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
The consumption tends to grow at a more moderate pace; and the investments tend to gain momentum.
These changes, together with other currently underway, anticipate a composition for medium-term growth more favorable to potential growth.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of higher global growth, combined with the depreciation of the BRL, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economy growth.
Focusing on the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in the longer term, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture have emerged; the services sector, on its turn, tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments - coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force and with the program of public services concession will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Committee also highlights that the speed of materialization of the aforementioned changes and their resulting gains depend on the strengthening of companies and households confidence.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables.
Despite of identifying evidence of fiscal stimuli in the composition of aggregate demand this year, according to the Committees view, the balance of the public sector tends to shift to the neutral zone during the relevant horizon for the monetary policy; moreover, it argues that cannot rule out migration to the fiscal restraint area.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered in the inflation projections will contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It also bears emphasizing that the generation of primary surpluses to strengthen the perception of the public sector balance sheet sustainability will contribute to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, which will stimulate private investment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that the main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Its important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong expansion - cooled with the introduction of macroprudential measures at the end of 2010 - the credit market oriented to consumption has moderated, so that, over the last quarters it was possible to observe, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks, and, on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations; moreover, it attributes high probability that actions in this regard be implemented in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
Regarding the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Although the projected adjustment for the minimum wage, this year, is not as significant as in the previous years, and the occurrence of real wage changes is more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
For the Copom, the fact that inflation currently stands at high levels reflects, in part, the occurrence of two important relative prices adjustments processes underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices relative to market prices.
In this context, the Committee does not rule out the occurrence of scenario which includes increase in inflation in the short term, and anticipates that inflation tends to remain high in 2015, but will enter in a long period of decline already in the next year.
While recognizing that these adjustments in relative prices have direct impacts on inflation, the Committee reaffirms its view that monetary policy can and should contain the second order effects arising from them.
The Copom evaluates that the aggregate demand tends to be relatively robust in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to record a moderate expansion pace, due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion; on the other hand, relatively favorable financial conditions, the concession of public services, the broadening of oil exploration areas, among other factors, tend to benefit the expansion of investments.
On its turn, exports tend to be benefited by the scenario of higher growth of major trading partners and by the depreciation of the real.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the convergence of inflation to the targets path, which, according to the view of the Committee, tends to occur in The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain especially vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation levels, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
However, considering the cumulative and lagged effects of the monetary policy, among other factors, the Committee evaluates that the additional effort of monetary policy tends to be implemented with parsimony.
