The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
The decline in industrial activity from February to March was characterized by negative results, reaching two of the four major economic categories and 14 of the 24 segments surveyed.
The PMI indicator for the industrial sector indicates contraction of the Brazilian production in April.
The average index for the quarter stood at 117.4 points, the lowest for the historical series started in March The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal growth prospects in line with advanced and emerging economies.
Specifically about Europe, despite recent improvements, high unemployment rates coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties still constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
Regarding the monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has continued the process of gradual reduction of the assets purchase program and by and large, accommodative stances prevail in the advanced economies.
In the emerging economies, in general, the monetary policy is less expansionist.
Inflation remains at moderate or low levels in advanced economies and at high levels in emerging economies.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices, which also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the dependency of supply growth on long term risky investment projects.
Therefore, in a given period, the fiscal impulse corresponds to the variation of the structural surplus in comparison to the observed in the previous period.
According to the market scenario, on the other hand, the inflation forecast for 2015 remains relatively stable, above the target.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
For the Committee, despite recently released data have been less positive than anticipated, the prospects for more intense global activity throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy have remained.
In fact, there are improvements in advanced economies, including countries from the Euro Area, although, in general, the space to use monetary policy remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights that, despite recently observed localized pressures, the prospects indicate moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as that, in the currency markets, there is evidence of tension and volatility.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic activity expansion pace tends to be less intense this year, compared to 2013, as well that, in the medium term, important changes must take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
The Copom notes that the expansion rates of domestic absorption have been higher than the GDP rates, but both tend to converge.
In this context, the consumption tends to grow at a more moderate pace than the observed over the recent years; and the investments tend to gain momentum.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of greater global growth, combined with the depreciation of the real, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economy growth.
Focusing on the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in the long term, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture have emerged; and that the services sector tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
It is plausible to claim that these developments - coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force and with the program of public services concession will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Committee also highlights that the speed of materialization of the aforementioned changes and their resulting gains depends on the strengthening of companies and households confidence.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables and the arising of the conditions so that, in the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered in the inflation projections, on the one hand, would contribute to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates; on the other hand, it would contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It also bears emphasizing that the generation of primary surpluses at levels close to the average generated over the recent years would contribute to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, which would stimulate private investment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Still regarding the credit market, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
Regarding the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Although the projected adjustment for the minimum wage this year is not as significant as in the previous years, and considering the occurrence of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity over the recent quarters, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for the resilience of inflation.
This development is underpinned by two important relative prices adjustments processes now underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices in relation to market prices.
The Committee recognizes that these 5 adjustments in relative prices have direct impacts on inflation and reaffirms its view that monetary policy can and should contain the second order effects arising from them.
By the way, in order to fight these and other inflationary pressures, in the last twelve months, the monetary conditions were tightened, but the Committee evaluates that the effects of the Selic rates hikes on inflation are, in part, yet to materialize.
Moreover, it is plausible to claim that, in the presence of relatively low levels of confidence, the effects of monetary policy actions on inflation tend to be potentialized.
The Copom evaluates that the aggregate demand tends to be relatively robust.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to record a moderate expansion pace, due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion; on the other hand, relatively favorable financial conditions, concession of public services, broadening of oil exploration areas, among other factors, tend to support the expansion of investments.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation levels, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
