The Copom considers that the effects of the behavior of wholesale prices on consumer inflation will depend on the current and prospective demand conditions and on the price setters' expectations regarding the future inflation path.
Negative results were observed in three out of the four main economic categories and in 15 out of the 26 surveyed activities.
The PMI of the industrial sector, on its turn, indicates retraction in the Brazilian production in June.
Data referring to Salvador and Porto Alegre are yet to be released.
Month-on-month, the unemployment rate in May remained stable in the four metropolitan areas whose results were released.
Year-over-year, the unemployment rate declined 1.8 p.p. in Rio de Janeiro and 1.2 p.p. in So Paulo.
In Recife and Belo Horizonte, figures were stable.
The average index for the quarter stood at 114.7 points, the lowest for the historical series started in March The Copom evaluates that the retail sales trajectory will continue to be influenced by governmental transfers, by the pace of real payroll growth and by the moderate credit expansion.
Regarding the global economy, leading indicators signal growth prospects in line with the trend in important advanced and emerging economies, with some growth moderation in the latter ones.
Specifically about Europe, despite recent improvements, high unemployment rates, coupled with the fiscal consolidation and political uncertainties constitute elements constraining investments and growth.
Regarding the monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has continued the process of reduction of the assets purchase program and, in general, accommodative stances prevail in the advanced economies.
In the emerging economies, less accommodative monetary policy stances prevail.
Inflation remains at moderate or low levels in the advanced economies; and, in the emerging ones, it stands at higher levels.
It bears highlighting that the geopolitical complexity that involves the oil sector tends to heighten the volatile behavior of prices.
This volatile behavior also reflects the low predictability of some global demand components and the fact that supply growth dependends on long term risky investment projects.
The identified shocks, and their impacts, were reassessed according to the new set of available information.
The items for which there are more available information were projected individually.
Therefore, in a given period, the fiscal impulse corresponds to the variation of the structural surplus in comparison to the observed in the previous period.
Monetary Policy Decision The Copom emphasizes that the international evidence, which is ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates generate distortions that lead to higher risks and depress investments.
These distortions are manifested, for example, in the shortening of the planning horizons of households, companies and governments, as well as in the deterioration of the businessmen confidence.
The Committee also emphasizes that high inflation rates reduce the purchasing power of wages and transfers, with negative repercussions over households confidence and consumption.
Therefore, high inflation rates reduce the growth potential of the economy, as well as of jobs and income generation.
In view of this, the Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.
In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to BCB projected inflation and based on the analysis of alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine prices dynamics.
The Copom also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, as well as help the process of coordination of economic agents expectations, particularly prices setters.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to intensify the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future.
Although the Copom recognizes that other macroeconomic policy actions may influence the prices trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is particularly under the responsibility of the monetary 4 policy to remain especially vigilant, to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons.
Despite identifying low probability of occurrence of extreme events in the international financial markets, the Committee considers that the external environment remains complex.
For the Committee, despite recently released data have been less positive than anticipated, the prospects for more intense global activity throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy have remained.
There are improvements in advanced economies, with recovery of activity in some countries and acceleration in the pace of growth in others, although, in general, the space to use monetary policy in these economies remains limited and the fiscal restraint scenario prevails in this and in the upcoming years.
In important emerging economies, however, the activity pace has not matched the expectations, despite the resilience of the domestic demand.
The Committee also highlights that, despite recently observed localized pressures, the prospects indicate moderation in the dynamics of commodities prices in the international markets, as well as that, in the currencies markets, there are evidences of tension and volatility.
The Copom evaluates that the domestic activity expansion pace tends to be less intense this year, compared to 2013, and that, in the medium term, important changes must take place in the composition of aggregate supply and demand.
The Copom notes that the expansion rates of domestic absorption have been higher than the GDP rates, but evidences suggest convergence.
In this context, the consumption tends to grow at a more moderate pace than the observed over the recent years; and the investments tend to gain momentum.
Regarding the external component of aggregate demand, the scenario of greater global growth, combined with the depreciation of the real, contributes to make this component more favorable to the Brazilian economy growth.
Focusing on the supply side, the Committee evaluates that, in the long term, more favorable prospects for the competitiveness of industry and agriculture have emerged; and that the services sector tends to grow at rates lower than those recorded over the recent years.
For the Committee, it is plausible to claim that these developments - coupled with advances in terms of qualification of the labor force and with the program of public services concession - will be reflected in a more efficient allocation of the production factors of the economy and in productivity gains.
The Committee also highlights that the speed of materialization of the aforementioned changes and their resulting gains depends on the strengthening of companies and households confidence.
The Copom observes that the main inflation scenario considers the materialization of the assumed trajectories regarding fiscal variables and the arising of the conditions so that, in the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the balance of the public sector shifts to the neutral zone.
The Committee also notes that the generation of primary surpluses in line with the working hypotheses considered in the inflation projections, on the one hand, would contribute to reduce the mismatch between supply and demand growth rates; on the other hand, it would contribute to create a positive perception regarding the macroeconomic environment in the medium and long terms.
It also bears emphasizing that the generation of primary surpluses at levels close to the average generated over the recent years would contribute to reduce the public debt financing cost, with favorable impact on the cost of capital in general, which would stimulate private investment in the medium and long terms.
The Copom highlights that its main scenario also considers moderate credit expansion.
Its important to highlight the fact that, after years of strong expansion - cooled with the introduction of macroprudential measures at the end of 2010 - the credit market oriented to consumption underwent a moderation, so that, over the recent quarters it was possible to observe, on the one hand, exposure reduction by banks, and on the other hand, deleveraging of the households.
In the aggregate, therefore, it can be inferred that the risks in the consumer credit segment have been mitigated.
In another dimension, the Committee considers opportune initiatives with the aim of moderating concessions of subsidies through credit operations.
Regarding the factors market, the Copom highlights the narrow idleness margin in the labor market and it considers that, under such circumstances, a significant risk stems from the possibility of concession of wages increases incompatible with productivity growth and their negative impacts over inflation.
Although the 5 projected adjustment for the minimum wage this year is not as significant as in the previous years, and considering the occurrence of real wage changes more consistent with the gains estimated for the labor productivity over the recent quarters, the Committee evaluates that the wages dynamics remains originating inflationary cost pressures.
The Copom evaluates that the high consumer inflation level in the last twelve months contributes for the inflation to still show resistance.
This development is underpinned by two important relative prices adjustments processes now underway in the economy - the realignment of domestic prices relative to international prices and the realignment of regulated prices in relation to market prices.
The Committee recognizes that these adjustments in relative prices have direct impacts on inflation and reaffirms its view that monetary policy can and should contain the second order effects arising from them.
By the way, in order to fight these and other inflationary pressures, in the last twelve months, the monetary conditions were tightened, but the Committee evaluates that the effects of the Selic rates hikes on inflation have, in part, yet to materialize.
Moreover, it is plausible to claim that, in the presence of relatively low levels of confidence, the effects of monetary policy actions on inflation tend to be potentialized.
The Copom evaluates that the aggregate demand tends to be relatively robust in the in the relevant horizon for monetary policy.
On the one hand, household consumption tends to record a moderate expansion pace, due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and moderate credit expansion; on the other hand, relatively favorable financial conditions, concession of public services, broadening of oil exploration areas, among other factors, tend to support the expansion of investments.
These elements and the developments in the quasi fiscal framework and in the assets market are important parts of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure the timely convergence of inflation to the targets path.
The Copom evaluates that ongoing inflationary pressures present at the economy as those stemming from the processes of prices realignments previously mentioned and from wage gains incompatible with productivity gains tend to cool down or, even exhaust throughout the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
In shorter terms, the shift of the output gap to the disinflationary side should be added.
However, the Committee anticipates a scenario that includes resistant inflation in the next quarters, but that, considering the maintenance of the monetary condition that means, the strategy that does not include the reduction of the monetary policy instrument tends to enter a trajectory of convergence to the target in the final quarters of the projection horizon.
In this context, the Copom highlights that, in moments such as the current one, the monetary policy should remain vigilant, in order to minimize risks that high inflation levels, such as the one observed in the last twelve months, persist in the relevant horizon for the monetary policy.
