The Monetary Policy Committee of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) held the first quarterly meeting of 2022 (its 96th meeting) in Beijing recently. The meeting analyzed the economic and financial developments both at home and abroad. It was agreed that since the beginning of 2022, China has coordinated COVID-19 containment and economic and social development, effectively implemented macroeconomic policies, and thus maintained a leading position worldwide in economic development and pandemic containment. By pursuing a sound monetary policy that is flexible and appropriate and maintaining its continuity, stability and sustainability, we have scientifically managed market expectations, made great efforts to serve the real economy and effectively prevented financial risks. While the loan prime rate (LPR) reform continued to unleash its benefits, the monetary policy transmission has become more efficient, and the lending rates have remained stable with a slight decline. Expected to be basically stable, the RMB exchange rate has moved in both directions with enhanced flexibility, playing its role as a stabilizer for the macro economy. It was pointed out at the meeting that the external environment is becoming more complex amid uncertainties as COVID-19 persists overseas and geopolitical conflicts escalate. Domestically, the COVID-19 is recurring more frequently, and the economic development faces triple pressures, namely shrinking demand, supply shocks, and waning expectations. Considering the situation, the PBC will place the utmost priority on stability and pursue progress while ensuring stability. It will strengthen both inter-temporal and counter-cyclical adjustments, step up the implementation of the sound monetary policy and make it more forward-looking, better targeted, and more independent, and give full play to both aggregate and structural monetary policy tools. The PBC will take proactive measures to boost market confidence, enhance support for the real economy, and safeguard the overall stability of the macro economy. It will smooth the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy, keep the liquidity adequate at a reasonable level, and better stabilize the aggregate credit growth, so as to ensure that the growth of money supply and the aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) are generally in line with nominal GDP growth and the macro leverage ratio remain basically stable. The PBC will intensify the effects of structural monetary policy tools to provide targeted support for the economy. It will make good use of the support instruments providing inclusive financial support for micro and small businesses (MSBs), increase central bank lending for rural development and MSBs, and implement the Carbon Emission Reduction Facility (CERF) and the special central bank lending for the clean and efficient use of coals. The PBC will also adopt a mix of policies to support coordinated regional development and guide financial institutions to step up support for MSBs, sci-tech innovation, and green development. It will deepen the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector, by guiding large-sized banks to shift the focus of their services to the communities, encouraging small and medium-sized banks to focus on their main duties and major businesses, and giving more support to banks in capital replenishment. In doing so, banking institutions will work together to safeguard the stability of the financial market, hence contributing to the development of a modern financial system that is highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive. The PBC will improve the market-oriented interest rate formation and transmission mechanism, optimize the central bank policy rate system, reinforce the regulation over deposit rates, stabilize banks’ liability costs, unleash the benefits of the LPR reform, and thus reduce the overall financing costs for businesses. Moreover, it will deepen the market-oriented reform of exchange rates to enhance the flexibility of the RMB exchange rate, guide enterprises and financial institutions to remain risk neutral, strengthen expectation management, and promote the balance between internal and external equilibrium, so as to keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. The PBC will build the system and mechanism needed to provide effective financial support for the real economy, improve the system for providing financial support for innovation, and guide financial institutions to issue more medium and long-term (MLT) loans to the manufacturing sector. It will work to make financial support for private enterprises commensurate with the latter’s contribution to economic and social development, and improve the green finance system for peaking carbon emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. The PBC will protect the legitimate rights and interests of housing consumers, better meet the reasonable demands of homebuyers, and foster a virtuous cycle of the real estate market for its sound development. In addition, the PBC will advance the high-level two-way opening-up of the financial markets, and improve the capacity for economic and financial oversight as well as risk management in an open economy. The meeting stressed that under the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the PBC will fully implement the requirements of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the plenary sessions of the 19th the CPC Central Committee, the Central Economic Work Conference and the Report on the Work of the Government, as well as the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. Staying committed to the central task of economic development, the Two Unwavering Commitments and the underlying principle of pursuing progress while ensuring stability, the PBC will apply the new development philosophy fully, faithfully and comprehensively, and speed up the building of a new development paradigm. It will remain focused on the main task of deepening the supply-side structural reform and implement the strategy of expanding domestic demand. It will make continued efforts to ensure stability on six fronts and maintain security in six areas. While strengthening the coordination of policies across authorities, the PBC will coordinate financial support for the real economy and risk prevention, ensure that China’s economy performs within a reasonable range, and contribute to high-quality development of the economy, thereby standing ready for the convening of the 20th CPC National Congress.